{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3 Stigmas capitate
\par
4 Flowers in a lax, racemose-paniculate inflorescence; some
\par
  pedicels at least as long as flowers; capsule globose to ovoid
\par
5 Corolla-lobes deflexed; calyx-lobes ovate, obtuse; corolla
\par
  detaching from its base at maturity to form a cap to the
\par
  capsule ........................................................................................... {\b 4. gronovii}
\par
5 Corolla-lobes erect; calyx-lobes triangular-ovate,
\par
  subacute; corolla persistent at maturity, surrounding
\par
  the capsule ................................................................................. {\b 3. suaveolens}
\par
4 Flowers forming a ± compact globose inflorescence; pedicels
\par
  usually shorter than flowers; capsule depressed-globose
\par
6 Capsule 2-3 mm in diameter; corolla-lobes triangular,
\par
  acute; scales abundantly fimbriate, not bifid; flowers
\par
  5-merous ..................................................................................... {\b 2. campestris}
\par
6 Capsule 3·5-4 mm in diameter; corolla-lobes ovate,
\par
  obtuse or subacute; scales deeply bifid; flowers 4- to 5-merous ... {\b 1. australis}
\par
3 Stigmas elongate
\par
7 Capsule dehiscing irregularly; stigmas subsessile;
\par
  flowers long-pedicellate, in few-flowered umbel-like
\par
  glomerules ................................................................................... {\b 5. pedicellata}
\par
7 Capsule regularly circumscissile near base; styles
\par
  distinct; flowers mostly sessile or shortly pedicellate,
\par
  in capitate glomerules
\par
8 Calyx-tube golden-yellow, shiny and reticulate when dry;
\par
  calyx-lobes wide and short, abruptly ending in a short 
\par
  fleshy or long swollen, nearly cylindrical appendage ........... {\b 15. approximata}
\par
8 Calyx-tube neither golden-yellow nor shiny and 
\par
  reticulate; calyx-lobes without a cylindrical appendage
\par
9 Styles (including stigmas) shorter than ovary;
\par
  glomerules 10-15 mm in diameter; scales not reaching
\par
  the stamens, or absent
\par
10 Parasitic on{\i  Linum usitatissimum} (rarely on other 
\par
   hosts); calyx-lobes acute; stems nearly simple ............................ {\b 8. epilinum}
\par
10 Parasitic on various species, often on Urtica dioica,
\par
   rarely on {\i Linum usitatissimum}; calyx-lobes obtuse,
\par
   rarely subacute; stems much branched
\par
11 Flowers 3-4 mm; calyx-lobes obtuse, not longer than tube ....... {\b 6. europaea}
\par
11 Flowers 2·5 mm; calyx-lobes acute, longer than tube ............... {\b 7. pellucida}
\par
9 Styles (including stigmas) longer than ovary, or if as 
\par
  long as ovary or shorter, glomerules 4-7 mm in diameter;
\par
  scales often reaching the stamens
\par
12 Styles (including stigmas) much longer than ovary;
\par
   flowers (2·5-)3-4(-5) mm; glomerules 7-10 mm in 
\par
   diameter; calyx-lobes membranous
\par
13 Lobes of calyx and corolla obtuse; pedicels as long as
\par
   or nearly as long as flowers ..................................................... {\b 11. triumvirati}
\par
13 Lobes of calyx and corolla acute to acuminate; flowers
\par
   sessile or shortly pedicellate ................................................... {\b 12. epithymum}
\par
12 Styles (including stigmas) equalling or only slightly
\par
   longer than ovary; flowers 1·5-2·5 mm; glomerules 4-6 
\par
   (-7) mm in diameter; calyx-lobes often ± fleshy
\par
14 Flowers (3-)4-merous; corolla-lobes erect ............................... {\b 9. palaestina}
\par
14 Flowers (4-)5-merous; corolla-lobes patent
\par
15 Plant blackening when dry; flowers dark purple .......................... {\b 10. atrans}
\par
15 Plant not blackening when dry; flowers white or purplish 
\par
16 Calyx-lobes oblong (rarely ovate), longer than tube,
\par
   swollen, nearly semicircular in cross-section ........................... {\b 14. planiflora}
\par
16 Calyx-lobes triangular-ovate, acute, about as long as
\par
   tube, membranous or somewhat fleshy 
\par
17 Styles (including stigmas) shorter than ovary; calyx
\par
   membranous, usually white ....................................................... {\b 13. brenstyla}
\par
17 Styles (including stigmas) as long as or slightly
\par
   longer than ovary; calyx fleshy, reddish ................................ {\b 12. epithymum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Subgen. Grammica (Lour.) Yuncker. Styles 2. stigmas capitate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. australis} R. Br.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Nov. Holl.} 491 (1810). Stems moderately stout, greenish-yellow to orange. Flowers c. 2 mm, 4- to 5-merous, often glandular, shortly pedicellate, in compact glomerules. Calyx campanulate, about as long as corolla-tube; lobes ovate to orbicular, obtuse, not overlapping. Corolla campanulate; lobes obtuse or subacute, erect to patent, slightly shorter than to longer than tube. Stamens exserted. Scales shorter than corolla-tube, bifid, with a few fimbriae or reduced to mere teeth at base of corolla-tube (rarely reaching the stamens and irregularly fimbriate). Styles shorter than the globose ovary. Capsule 3·5-4 mm in diameter, globose to depressed-globose, with the persistent corolla at its base; intrastylar opening large. Seeds 1·5 mm.{\i  S. Europe; naturalized in C. Europe.} Al Bu Co Ga Ge Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, E) Si Tu [?Au Cz He Ho Hu Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    A mainly Asiatic and Australian species, represented in Europe by two subspecies:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tinei}(Insenga) Feinbrun,{\i  Israel Jour. Bot.}{\b  19}: 19 (1970) ({\i C. breviflora} Vis., {\i C. tinei} Insenga): Flowers often 4-merous; scales much reduced, each often in the shape of two short wings near the base of corolla. On Polygonum {\i and other herbs. S. & S.E. Europe, with isolated localities in C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cesattiana}(Bertol.) Feinbrun,{\i  loc. cit.} (1970) ({\i C. cesattiana} Bertol.): Flowers 5-merous; scales well-developed, nearly reaching the stamens.{\i  Mainly on hydrophilous species of Polygonum. • C. France to Romania and N. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. campestris} Yuncker, {\i Mem. Torrey Bot. Club}{\b  18}: 138 (1932) ({\i C. arvensis} auct., non Beyrich ex Engelm.; incl. {\i C. basarabica} Buia). Stems moderately stout, yellowish. Flowers 2-3 mm, 5-merous; pedicels short; glomerules 10-12 mm in diameter, compact, globose. Calyx campanulate, about as long as corolla-tube; lobes ovate or orbicular, obtuse, slightly overlapping. Corolla-lobes acute, triangular, patent (often with inflexed apex), about as long as the shortly campanulate tube. Stamens exserted. Scales long, densely fimbriate, exserted. Styles slender, about as long as the globose ovary. Capsule 2-3 mm in diameter, depressed-globose, pale, with the persistent corolla at its base. Seeds 1-1·2 mm.{\i  Mainly on cultivated species of} Trifolium {\i and} Medicago, {\i but also on other herbs. Widely naturalized in S., C. & W. Europe.} [Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W) ?Sa.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Introduced to Europe about 1900, and spread mainly with agricultural seed; now a weed in some regions.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. suaveolens} Ser., {\i Ann. Sci. Phys. Nat. Agric. Industr.}{\b  3}: 519 (1840) ({\i C. corymbosa} sensu Choisy, non Ruiz & Pavon). Stems slender or of medium thickness. Flowers 3-4 mm, oblong, 5-merous, pedicellate, in lax clusters c. 10 mm in diameter. Calyx not more than 1/2 and usually only 1/3 as long as corolla-tube; lobes triangular-ovate, subacute, not overlapping, the sinuses often with revolute margins. Corolla campanulate or infundibuliform; lobes c. 1/2 as long as tube, erect, mostly ovate-triangular, with acute, inflexed apices. Stamens slightly exserted. Scales scarcely reaching the filaments, oblong-ovate, with rather short fimbriae. Styles slender, as long as or sometimes longer than ovary, often unequal. Capsule globose, with the persistent corolla at its base, not circumscissile. Seeds 1·5-2 mm.{\i  On cultivated species of} Medicago{\i  and }Trifolium{\i  and on other herbs. Naturalized in S. & C. Europe}. [Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Lu Po Rs (C, W).] ({\i Chile.})
\par

\par
75}
\par