{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. gronovii} Willd. in Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  6}: 205 (1820). Stems stout. Flowers 3-4 mm, 5-merous, more or less glandular, in lax or dense clusters. Calyx campanulate, shorter than corolla-tube; lobes ovate, obtuse, overlapping, often with uneven edges. Corolla-lobes mostly shorter than the tubular-campanulate tube, ovate, obtuse, deflexed. Stamens somewhat exserted. Scales about as long as tube, narrow, long-fimbriate. Ovary ovoid-conical, thickened at apex. Styles somewhat shorter than ovary, thickened below. Capsule globose-conical or pyriform, capped by the detached corolla.{\i  Mainly on Salix, Populus and other Trees, especially on river-banks. Naturalized mainly in W. & C. Europe.} [Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Ho It Po Rs (W).] ({\i C. & E. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   In Europe only as var. {\i calyptrata} Engelm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Cuscuta.} Styles 2. Stigmas elongate, cylindrical.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. EPISTIGMA Engelm. Styles very short; capsule irregularly circumscissile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. pedicellata} Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Altaica }{\b 1}: 293 (1829). Stems slender. Flowers 2-3 mm, mostly 4-merous; pedicels usually as long as or longer than flowers; clusters umbellate, few-flowered. Calyx rotate or cupulate, loose about the corolla; lobes triangular, acute or subobtuse, not overlapping. Corolla at first globose-campanulate, later closely investing the capsule; lobes connivent to patent, acute, about as long as tube. Filaments longer than anthers. Scales truncate, dentate, usually about as long as tube. Ovary globose-conical. Styles very short, flattened. Stigmas slender, shorter than the ovary. Seeds 1·25 mm.{\i  S.E. Russia.} Rs (E). ({\i C. & W. Asia, North Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Records of{\i  C. kotschyana }Boiss. for S.E. Russia are probably misidentifications of {\b 5}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CUSCUTA. Styles slender. Capsule regularly circumscissile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsect.{\i  Europaeae} Yuncker. Flowers mostly membranous, often 4-merous. Styles short. Scales mostly small, appressed to the corolla-tube. Corolla-lobes mostly erect.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. europaea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 124 (1753). Stems stout, much branched, often reddish. Flowers 3-4(-5) mm, 4 (5-)merous, on thickish pedicels. Glomerules 10-15 mm in diameter, numerous, each with a bract at its base. Calyx obconical, shorter than or about as long as corolla-tube; lobes ovate, obtuse, as long as or shorter than tube. Corolla campanulate, urceolate in fruit, detached from its base; lobes erect to patent, triangular to ovate, usually obtuse. Scales thin, small, shorter than corolla-tube and appressed to it, usually bifid and sparsely fimbriate, sometimes almost absent. Stamens often included. Styles (including stigmas) shorter than ovary. Capsule globose, conical or pyriform, capped by the detached corolla. Seeds c. 1·5 mm, sometimes united in pairs.{\i  Usually on} Urtica dioica {\i  or} Humulus lupulus{\i  but also on many other hosts. Throughout Europe except the extreme north and some of the islands; only on mountains in the south.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Hb Is Lu Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. pellucida} Butkov,{\i  Not. Syst. Herb. Inst. Bot. Zool. Acad. Sci. Uzbek.}{\b  11}: 53 (1948) ({\i C. indica} (Engelm.) Petrov). Stems moderately stout, much branched, yellowish or slightly reddish. Flowers 2·5 mm, mostly 5-merous, almost sessile. Glomerules rather large, numerous, each with a membranous bract at its base. Calyx 1-1·5 mm, pellucid, divided nearly to its base into narrowly ovate, acute lobes. Corolla urceolate, nearly twice as long as calyx, pellucid; lobes erect, half as long as tube, ovate, subacute. Scales minute, thin, bifid and fimbriate. Styles (including stigmas) shorter than ovary. Capsule circumscissile, almost globose, pellucid. Seeds c. 1 mm.{\i  On herbs and dwarf shrubs} ({\i e.g. Alhagi pseudalhagi}). S.E. Russia ({\i near Volgograd}). Rs (E). ({\i C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. epilinum} Weihe,{\i  Arch. Apothekerver. Nördl. Teutschl.}{\b  8}: 50 (1824). Stems slender or moderately stout, simple or sparingly branched. Flowers c. 3 mm, 5-merous, sessile; glomerules c. 10 mm in diameter, sparse, compact. Calyx as long as corolla-tube and somewhat loose about it; lobes broadly triangular-ovate, acute. Corolla urceolate; lobes ovate-triangular, subobtuse or acute, shorter than tube, mostly erect. Scales shorter than tube, truncate, shortly fimbriate, usually bifid, sometimes reduced to short wings near the base of corolla. Stamens shorter than corolla-lobes, slightly exserted. Styles (including stigmas) shorter than the ovary. Stigmas thickish, short, about as long as styles. Capsule depressed. Seeds c. 1-2 mm, often united in pairs.{\i  Flax-fields; mainly on} Linum usitatissimum{\i  and other species of }Linum {\i and on} Camelina sativa. {\i Much of Europe, but now rare in the west though formerly widespread there.} [Au Bu Co Cz Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Sa Si Su.] ( ?S.W. Asia.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Introduced into Europe probably in prehistoric times.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. palaestina} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 11}): 86 (1849) ({\i C. globularis} Bertol.). Stems very slender, usually reddish, much branched. Flowers 1·5-2 mm, usually 4-merous (rarely 3-merous and single flowers in a glomerule 5-merous), sessile; glomerules 4-6 mm in diameter, globose. Calyx about as long as corolla-tube, usually reddish; lobes triangular, as long as or shorter than wide, acute, somewhat fleshy, keeled. Corolla-lobes usually erect, about as long as the cylindrical tube, acute, often with cucullate apices. Anthers scarcely exserted. Scales usually reaching the filaments. Styles (including stigmas) about as long as ovary. Capsule globose, enveloped by the corolla. Seeds c. 1 mm.{\i  On dwarf shrubs. E. Mediterranean region and Sicilia.} Cr Gr Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. atrans} Feinbrun,{\i  Israel Jour. Bot.}{\i  19}: 22 (1970). Plant blackening when dry. Stems filiform, dark purple. Flowers 2-2·5 mm, 5-merous, sessile; glomerules c. 5 mm in diameter, globose. Calyx c. 2 mm, obconical-campanulate, enclosing the corolla-tube, dark purple, slightly fleshy, densely pustular, divided to the middle or beyond; lobes broadly obovate, shortly mucronate. Corolla purplish, somewhat fleshy, campanulate to infundibuliform; lobes ovate, patent, about as long as tube. Stamens shorter than corolla-lobes. Scales bifid, shortly fimbriate, reaching the stamens. Styles (including stigmas) shorter than the subglobose ovary. Capsule globose. Seeds ovoid. {\i On }Verbascum spinosum. •{\i  High mountains of Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsect. {\i Planiflorae} Yuncker. Scales well-developed, connivent and arched above the ovary. Flowers usually 5-merous, membranous or fleshy and turgid. Styles (including stigmas) about as long as or longer than ovary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. triumvirati} Lange,{\i  Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kjøbenhavn}{\b  1881}: 98 (1882). Stems slender or moderately stout. Flowers 3-4 mm, 5-merous, reddish; pedicels as long as or nearly as long as flowers. Calyx shorter than corolla-tube; lobes ovate, obtuse, not overlapping. Corolla-lobes broadly ovate, obtuse, patent, about as long as the campanulate tube. Stamens exserted. Scales ovate, not reaching the stamens, shallowly fimbriate. Styles (including stigmas) longer than the depressed ovary, slender.{\i  On} Erinacea anthyllis. {\i S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs. ({\i Morocco.})
\par

\par
76}
\par