{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. epithymum} (L.) L.,{\i  Syst. Veg.} ed. 13, 140 (1774). Stems slender, much-branched, often reddish or purplish; flowers (2·5-)3-4(-5) mm, 5-merous, mostly sessile, sometimes shortly pedicellate; glomerules 5-10 mm in diameter, dense, globose, each with a subacute bract at its base. Calyx usually shorter than corolla-tube, sometimes about as long; lobes triangular, acute, sometimes lanceolate and acuminate; corolla-lobes patent triangular, acute, rarely acuminate, mostly shorter than the campanulate tube. Stamens exserted; anthers often purple-tinged. Scales spathulate, shorter than tube, fimbriate, connivent over the ovary. Styles (including stigmas) about as long as to much longer than the subglobose ovary, exserted. Capsule enveloped by the corolla. Seeds c. 1 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Almost throughout Europe, except the extreme north}. All except Az Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b epithymum}(incl. subsp.{\i  trifolii} (Bab.) Hegi, {\i C. trifolii} Bab.,{\i  C. alba }C. Presl): Flowers 3-4(-5) mm (rarely 2·5 mm); glomerules 7-10 mm in diameter. Calyx shorter than corolla-tube, not fleshy; lobes of calyx and corolla triangular to lanceolate, acute or acuminate to subulate. Styles (including stigmas) much longer than ovary. {\i On shrubs and herbs, most frequently on} Calluna vulgaris, Ulex europaeus {\i and} Trifolium spp.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C. stenoloba} Bornm. & O. Schwarz, {\i Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih}.) {\b 26}: 56 (1924), known only from Weimar in Germany, was probably an abnormal variant of {\b 12}({\b a}); it is now extinct.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b kotschyi}(Desmoulins) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} 480 (1882): Flowers c. 2·5 mm; glomerules 5-6 mm in diameter. Calyx as long as corolla-tube or slightly shorter, fleshy, usually red or purple; lobes ovate, keeled. {\i Mainly on dwarf shrubs. S. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. C. brevistyla} A. Braun ex A. Richard, {\i Tent. Fl. Abyss.}{\b  2}: 79 (1851). Stems slender or of medium thickness, much branched. Flowers 2-3 mm, (4-)5-merous, sessile; glomerules 4-7 mm in diameter, globose. Calyx membranous, about as long as corolla-tube; lobes ovate-triangular, subacute, not carinate, about as long as or shorter than tube; apex sometimes slightly fleshy; tube easily splitting to the base. Corolla campanulate; lobes patent, somewhat shorter than tube, triangular-ovate, obtuse or subacute. Stamens exserted. Scales nearly reaching the stamens, mostly truncate, fimbriate at apex. Style shorter than stigma; styles (including stigmas) shorter than or about as long as the globose ovary. Capsule depressed-globose, enveloped by the corolla. Seeds c. 0·5 mm. {\i Mainly on herbs. S. & E. parts of Mediterranean region.} Al Cr Gr Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. C. planiflora} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  3}: 250 (1824-1829). Stems slender, much branched. Flowers 1·5-2·5 mm, 5-merous; glomerules 5-6 mm in diameter, small, compact, globose. Calyx white, rarely pink, as long as corolla-tube, deeply divided; lobes longer than tube, distinctly turgid (swollen, nearly semicircular in cross-section), oblong or more rarely ovate. Corolla white; lobes patent, acute, about as long as the campanulate tube, often cucullate at apex. Stamens exserted. Scales oblong, usually reaching the stamens, shortly fimbriate. Styles (including stigmas) about as long as ovary. Capsule depressed-globose, enveloped by the corolla. Seeds less than 1 mm.{\i  On dwarf shrubs and annuals. S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. C. approximata} Bab.,{\i  Ann. Nat. Hist. }{\b 13}: 253 (1844). Stems moderately stout. Flowers (2·5-)3-4 mm, (4-)5-merous sessile; glomerules (6-)7-12 mm in diameter, compact, globose. Calyx turbinate, about as long as corolla-tube, golden-yellow shiny and finely reticulate when dry, like a fly's wing; lobes short broader than long, overlapping at base, with rounded sides and ending more or less abruptly in a short and obtuse, or long and subacute whitish fleshy apex. Corolla campanulate, becoming globose or urceolate around the capsule; lobes patent, triangular-ovate, about as long as tube. Stamens exserted. Scales shorter than corolla-tube or reaching the stamens, oblong, shallowly fimbriate. Styles (including stigmas) as long as or longer than ovary; stigmas often shorter than styles. Capsule depressed-globose.{\i  Mostly on shrubs. S. Europe and S. half of U.S.S.R. casual further north.} Al Co Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W K, E) Sa Si ?Su [Br Bu Ge Hu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Fleshy apex of the calyx-lobe short, obtuse ............... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b approximata}
\par
1 Fleshy apex of calyx-lobe acute, longer than the lobe itself
\par
2 Flowers 3-4 mm, 5-merous ........................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b macranthera}
\par
2 Flowers 2·5 mm, often 4-merous ................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b episonchum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b approximata}({\i C. cupulata} Engelm.): Flowers 3-4 mm. Fleshy apex of the calyx-lobe short, obtuse. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b macranthera}(Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss.) Feinbrun & W. Greuter, {\i Israel Jour. Bot.}{\b  19}: 27 (1970) ({\i C. macranthera} Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss.): Flowers 3-4 mm, 5-merous. Fleshy apex of calyx-lobe acute, longer than the lobe itself.{\i  S.E. Europe; Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b episonchum}(Webb & Berth.) Feinbrun, {\i Israel Jour. Bot.}{\b  19}: 28 (1970) ({\i C. episonchum} Webb & Berth.): Flowers 2·5 mm, often 4-merous. Fleshy apex of calyx-lobe acute, longer than the lobe itself but shorter than in subsp. ({\b b}). Capsule enveloped by the corolla, but with the upper part usually more exposed than in subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}). {\i Spain, .?Portugal.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Monogyna} (Engelm.) Yuncker. Stems stout. Styles united. stigmas capitate to ovoid. Capsule circumscissile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. C. lupuliformis} Krocker,{\i  Fl. Siles. }{\b 1}: 261 (1787). Stems often reddish. Flowers 3-4 mm, 5-merous, sessile or shortly pedicellate, in spike-like inflorescences. Calyx campanulate 1/3-1/2 as long as corolla-tube; lobes oblong-ovate, obtuse, overlapping. Corolla-lobes oblong-ovate, more or less obtuse, slightly crenulate or entire, erect, less than half as long as cylindrical tube. Stamens included. Scales often bifid, dentate not reaching the stamens. Ovary ovoid. Style twice as long as stigma or longer. Capsule capped by the detached corolla. Seeds 2-3 mm. {\i On} Salix {\i spp. and other trees. C. & E. Europe, extending westwards to the Netherlands.} Au Bu Cz Ge Ho Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. C. monogyna} Vahl, {\i  Symb. Bot.}{\b  2}: 32 (1791). Flowers 3-4 mm, sessile or shortly pedicellate, in spike-like inflorescences of 1- to 4-flowered cymules. Calyx campanulate, 2/3 as long as corolla-tube or equalling it in length; lobes orbicular-ovate obtuse, overlapping, somewhat carinate and with crenulate margins. Corolla-lobes ovate, obtuse, crenulate, erect, c. ½ as long as tube; corolla-tube cylindrical. Stamens included. Scales dentate, nearly reaching the stamens. Ovary globose-conical. Style about as long as stigma. Capsule capped by the detached corolla. Seeds 3-3·5 mm. {\i Mainly on shrubs and trees. S.E. Europe, extending locally westwards to Portugal.} Bu Ga Gr It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 2.             Cressa}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By C.A. Stace.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs, often somewhat woody at the base. Leaves sessile, simple, entire. Flowers in short, terminal, conges-
\par

\par
77}
\par