{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 ted racemes; pedicels with 2 small bracteoles. Corolla divided to about halfway into 5 patent, pubescent lobes. Stamens inserted at about the middle of the corolla-tube, glabrous, exserted. Ovary 2-locular; styles 2, exserted; stigmas capitate. Capsule usually 1-seeded. Pollen grains tricolpate; exine not spinose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. cretica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 223 (1753). Stems up to 30(-50) cm, greyish-pubescent, spreading, much-branched. Leaves 2-10 mm, lanceolate to ovate, cordate or rounded at base, subacute to acuminate, passing gradually into the bracts. Flowers 3-5 mm; pedicels very short. Sepals as long as corolla-tube, obtuse. Corolla 3-5 mm in diameter, whitish-pink or yellow, persistent.{\i  Sandy or saline soils, usually near the sea. Mediterranean region, extending to C. Portugal and S.E. Bulgaria.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 3.             Dichondra}                   J.R.&G. Forster 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A. Lawalree.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Creeping perennial herb rooting at the nodes. Leaves petiolate, simple, entire. Flowers axillary, solitary. Corolla divided to about halfway into 5 erect lobes. Stamens inserted near the top of the corolla-tube, more or less included. Ovary 2-locular; styles 2; stigmas capitate. Capsule 2-lobed; lobes usually 1-seeded.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: A. Lawalree, {\i Acta Bot. Neerl.}{\b  19}: 717-721 (1970).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. micrantha} Urban, {\i Symb. Antill.}{\b  9}: 243 (1924) ({\i D. repens} auct. eur., non J. R. & G. Forster). Stems up to 50 cm, pubescent, slender. Lamina of leaf 5-30 × 5-30 mm, orbicular to reniform, appressed-pubescent; petiole 5-50 mm. Peduncle 3-20 mm; calyx 1·5-2·5 mm, sericeous, divided to more than halfway; corolla 2-2·5 mm, whitish or greenish.{\i  Naturalized in grassland and open sandy ground in W. Europe.} [Az Br It.] ({\i E. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 4.           Calystegia}             R.Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R.K. Brummitt.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial rhizomatous herbs; stem procumbent or climbing. White latex present. Leaves petiolate, variously lobed at the base. Flowers solitary, axillary, with a pair of large and sometimes inflated bracteoles partly or entirely concealing the sepals. Corolla large, infundibuliform or tubiform, glabrous or ciliate. Ovary glabrous, unilocular; ovules 4. Stigma bilobed; lobes swollen and elongate. Pollen grains pantoporate; exine more or less smooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The genus differs constantly from{\i  Convolvulus} in its pollen grains and unilocular ovary, but the European species are most easily distinguished by the pair of broad bracteoles immediately below the sepals. The generic delimitation is discussed by W. H. Lewis & R. L. Oliver, {\i Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard.}{\b  52}: 217-222 (1965).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A{\i  flore pleno} cultivar of{\i  C. pubescens} Lindley, from China, easily recognized by its pink flowers and oblong-hastate leaves, is widely cultivated and has sometimes persisted as a garden escape.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Hybrids may become well established by vegetative reproduction. White-flowered plants from S. Sweden which have been referred to {\b 3} are probably {\b 2}({\b a}) × {\b 4}; and glabrous pink-flowered plants with saccate bracteoles and a rounded leaf-sinus, well established in C. England (Nottinghamshire), may be {\b 3} × {\b 4}. {\b 2}({\b a}) × {\b 3} ({\i C}. × {\i lucana} (Ten.) G. Don) may be widespread in S. Europe and in the British Isles, but is often difficult to distinguish from one or other parent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems not or weakly twisting, procumbent; leaves reniform ..... {\b 1. soldanella}
\par
1 Stems strongly twisting and climbing; leaves not reniform
\par
2 Corolla white (occasionally the centre-band only of 
\par
  each lobe ± pinkish)
\par
3 Bracteoles rarely more than 15 mm wide, not overlapping,
\par
  flat or keeled at the base; corolla usually not more 
\par
  than 50 mm; stamens not more than 23(-25) mm ............................ {\b 2. sepium}
\par
3 Bracteoles 15-10 mm wide when flattened, overlapping, ±
\par
  saccate at the base; corolla 50-90 mm; stamens 24-37(-40) mm .. {\b 3. silvatica}
\par
2 Corolla pink
\par
4 Bracteoles not or scarcely overlapping, acute or 
\par
  somewhat rounded at the apex, flat or keeled at the 
\par
  base; leaf-sinus acute or rounded, with divergent sides .................. {\b 2. sepium}
\par
4 Bracteoles overlapping, obtuse to emarginate at the 
\par
  apex, ± saccate at the base; leaf-sinus oblong ................................. {\b 4. pulchra}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. soldanella} (L.) R. Br.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Nov. Holl.} 484 (1810) ({\i Convolvulus soldanella} L.). Glabrous. Stem up to 50(-100) cm, procumbent, not or weakly twisting. Leaves 1-2 times as wide as long, reniform, somewhat fleshy; apex very broadly obtuse or emarginate. Bracteoles ovate to suborbicular, flat or sometimes tending to invest the calyx. Corolla 32-52 mm, pink. Stamens 20-30 mm; anthers 4-6 mm. 2n = 22.{\i  Maritime sands. Coasts of S. Europe, and of W. Europe northwards to Scotland and Denmark.} Al Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Da Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. sepium} (L.) R. Br.,{\i  op. cit.} 483 (1810) ({\i Convolvulus sepium} L.). Glabrous or pubescent. Stems strongly twisting and climbing. Leaves more or less sagittate; sinus with divergent sides. Peduncle without a narrow, repand wing. Bracteoles 10-30 × 5-20 mm, not or scarcely overlapping, the sides not closely investing the calyx, acute or rarely subobtuse at the apex, flat or keeled at the base. Corolla 30-70 mm, white or pink. Stamens 15-30 mm; anthers 4-6·5 mm. 2n = 22. {\i Most of Europe except the extreme north.} All except Fa Is Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla white .................................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b sepium}
\par
1 Corolla pink
\par
2 Leaf-sinus rounded ................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b spectabilis}
\par
2 Leaf-sinus acute
\par
3 Glabrous; leaf usually shortly acute at the apex;  
\par
  corolla usually pale pink ................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b sepium}
\par
3 Stem, petiole and peduncle often pubescent; leaf usually
\par
  tapered to a long-acute apex; corolla bright pink
\par
4 Stamens 17-25 mm ........................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b roseata}
\par
4 Stamens 25-34 mm .................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b americana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  sepium}: Glabrous. Leaves variable; sinus acute. Bracteoles usually 10-15 mm wide. Corolla usually 30-50 mm, white or rarely pale pink. Stamens (15-)17-23(-25) mm; anthers 4-6 mm. 2n = 22. {\i River- and lake-margins, marshes, hedges and waste places. Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b roseata} Brummitt, {\i Watsonia}{\b  6}: 298 (1967): stem, petiole and peduncle usually pubescent. Lamina glabrous or sparsely pubescent, usually long-acute; sinus acute. Bracteoles usually 10-15 mm wide. Corolla usually 40-55 mm, pink. Stamens 17-25 mm; anthers 4-6 mm. 2n = 22. {\i Salt-marshes, maritime sands, waste places. Coastal regions of W. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b americana}(Sims) Brummitt,{\i  Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard.}{\b  52}: 216 (1965): stems, petioles and peduncles usually pubescent. Lamina often pubescent; sinus acute. Bracteoles usually 10-20 mm wide. Corolla usually 45-65 mm, pink. Stamens 25-34 mm; anthers 4-6 mm. {\i Salt-marshes and maritime sands. Acores.} ({\i Atlantic coasts of North and South America}.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b spectabilis} Brummitt, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 73 (1971): Glabrous or with stems and petioles pubescent. Leaf sinus rounded. Bracteoles (12-)14-18(-24) mm wide, usually strongly keeled, occasionally slightly overlapping at the margins; apex sometimes more or less obtuse. Corolla usually 50-60 mm,
\par

\par
78}
\par