{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 pink. Stamens 20-30 mm; anthers 5·5-6·5 mm. {\i Naturalized in Fennoscandia, and perhaps elsewhere.} ({\i Probably a native of Siberia but perhaps a garden hybrid between}{\b  2}({\b a}) and {\b 4}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. silvatica} (Kit.) Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 74 (1844) ({\i Convolvulus silvaticus }Kit., {\i Calystegia sylvestris} (Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd.) Roemer & Schultes). Glabrous. Stems strongly climbing. Leaves more or less sagittate; sinus rounded, with divergent or sometimes parallel sides. Peduncle without a narrow, repand wing. Bracteoles 14-32(-38) mm wide when flattened, overlapping, closely investing the calyx and almost completely concealing it, weakly to strongly saccate at the base, subacute to broadly rounded or emarginate at the apex. Corolla usually 50-90 mm, white; occasionally the outside of the centre-band only of each lobe suffused with pink. Stamens 24-37(-40) mm; anthers 6-8 mm. 2n = 22.{\i  Scrub, hedges and open ground. S. Europe; naturalized from gardens elsewhere.} Al Bl Bu ?Co ?Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [Br Hb He Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable; there are marked differences between plants at the western and eastern ends of the European range. In the east the bracteoles are strongly saccate at the base, broadly rounded to emarginate at the apex and often twice as wide as long, the corolla is 55-90 mm and the stamens (25-)28-36(-39) mm. In the west (N.W. Italy, S.E. France and Spain) the bracteoles are much less strongly saccate, obtuse to subacute and about as long as wide, the corolla is 50-65 mm and the stamens 24-28(-30) mm. There seems, however, to be not quite sufficient morphological or geographical discontinuity to recognize subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. pulchra} Brummitt & Heywood,{\i  Proc. Bot. Soc. Brit. Is.}{\b  3}: 385 (1960). Stems strongly climbing. Stems, petioles and peduncles pubescent, at least when young. Leaves more or less sagittate, rather dull green; sinus oblong, with more or less parallel sides. Peduncle usually with a narrow, repand wing. Bracteoles usually 15-25 mm wide when flattened, overlapping, closely investing and almost completely concealing the calyx, more or less saccate at the base, rounded to emarginate at the apex. Corolla 50-75 mm, pink. Stamens 25-35 mm; anthers 6-7·5 mm. 2n = 22.{\i  Naturalized from gardens in N.& C.Europe.} [Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Hb Ho Po Su.] ({\i Origin uncertain; either introduced from N.E. Asia or originated as a garden hybrid in Europe}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 5.               Convolvulus}            L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By C.A. Stace.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs or small shrubs up to 100 cm, sometimes with latex. Stems erect, trailing or twining. Leaves simple, usually entire. Flowers solitary or in terminal or axillary inflorescences; pedicels with 2 minute to leaf-like bracteoles. Corolla infundibuliform, glabrous except for five usually pubescent stripes often of a different colour. Stamens inserted at the base of the corolla-tube, included. Ovary 2-locular; stigma 2-lobed, the lobes filiform to cylindric-clavate. Capsule usually 4-seeded, 1- to 2-celled. Pollen grains tricolpate; exine not spinose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: F. Sa'ad, {\i The Convolvulus Species of the Canary Isles, the Mediterranean Region, and the Near and Middle East}. Rotterdam. 1967.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Dwarf cushion-plant with woody stems
\par
2 Leaves sericeous above, spathulate to rhombic; lateral veins
\par
  distinct ............................................................................................ {\b 2. boissieri}
\par
2 Leaves glabrous above, linear to oblanceolate; only the
\par
  midrib distinct ............................................................................ {\b 3. libanoticus}
\par
1 Not a cushion-plant
\par
3 Leaves very abruptly narrowed into a distinct petiole
\par
4 Lamina cuneate to truncate at base
\par
5 Plant robust, densely lanate; sepals obtuse ................................... {\b 1. persicus}
\par
5 Plant slender, pubescent but not lanate; sepals acute
\par
  to acuminate
\par
6 Entirely herbaceous; corolla 7-12 mm .......................................... {\b 16. siculus}
\par
6 Woody stock present; corolla 15-30 mm
\par
7 Lamina 1-1½(-3) times as long as wide, orbicular to 
\par
  oblong ........................................................................................... {\b 17. sabatius}
\par
7 Lamina (2½-)3½-10 times as long as wide, linear 
\par
  to narrowly oblong .................................................................... {\b 18. valentinus}
\par
4 Lamina hastate or sagittate, or cordate at base
\par
8 Upper leaves and bracts very deeply divided ......................... {\b 23. almaeoides}
\par
8 Upper leaves and bracts not divided, except for basal lobes
\par
9 Corolla 25-45 mm; peduncles usually much longer than
\par
  subtending bracts
\par
10 Corolla usually pink; sepals acute to acuminate; plant
\par
   pubescent ............................................................................ {\b 21. betonicifolius}
\par
10 Corolla usually yellow; sepals emarginate and 
\par
   apiculate; plant glabrous ........................................................ {\b 22. scammonia}
\par
9 Corolla 7-25 mm; peduncles usually shorter or not much
\par
  longer than subtending bracts
\par
11 Annual or short-lived perennial with slender root;
\par
   corolla up to 12 mm, blue ............................................................. {\b 16. siculus}
\par
11 Perennial with stout, often woody stock; corolla white
\par
   to pink
\par
12 Leaves crenate; sepals acuminate to mucronate ...................... {\b 20. farinosus}
\par
12 Leaves more or less entire; sepals obtuse to 
\par
   emarginate, often apiculate ......................................................... {\b 19. arvensis}
\par
3 Leaves sessile or gradually tapered into a petiole
\par
13 Mature stems woody and divaricately branched throughout .. {\b 4. dorycnium}
\par
13 Mature stems herbaceous at least above, not 
\par
   divaricately branched
\par
14 Annual or short-lived perennial, entirely herbaceous
\par
15 Peduncle and pedicel together not or scarcely longer 
\par
   than calyx ..................................................................................... {\b 12. humilis}
\par
15 Peduncle and pedicel together several times longer 
\par
   than calyx
\par
16 Sepals pubescent, herbaceous, with distinct distal and
\par
   proximal regions; capsule pubescent ............................................ {\b 13. tricolor}
\par
16 Sepals glabrous or sparsely pubescent, with scarious margins,
\par
   not divided into distinct regions; capsule glabrous
\par
17 Sepals acute to shortly acuminate; corolla 14-22 mm ........ {\b 14. meonanthus}
\par
17 Sepals obtuse and mucronate; corolla 7-10 mm ........... {\b 15. pentapetaloides}
\par
14 Perennial; shoots woody below, herbaceous above
\par
18 Inflorescence with all flowers on each main branch or
\par
   stem crowded into a compact head
\par
19 Extreme base of leaves at base of main stems widened 
\par
   and scarious; all sepals long-acuminate to caudate
\par
20 Ovary and capsule glabrous .................................................. {\b 7. lanuginosus}
\par
20 Ovary and capsule pubescent ...................................................... {\b 8. calvertii}
\par
19 Extreme base of leaves at base of main stems scarcely widened,
\par
    herbaceous; at least outer sepals obtuse to shortly acuminate
\par
21 Inner sepals obtuse to shortly acuminate; corolla 
\par
   usually white ................................................................................ {\b 5. cneorum}
\par
21 Inner sepals acuminate to cuspidate; corolla usually pink ........ {\b 6. oleifolius}
\par
18 Inflorescence lax, or with at least some branches conspicuous
\par
22 At least lower parts of stems with mostly patent hairs .......... {\b 11. cantabrica}
\par
22 Shoots sericeous, sometimes with some patent hairs
\par
23 Outer sepals cordate at base and conspicuously gibbous
\par
   on back ................................................................................... {\b 9. holosericeus}
\par
23 Outer sepals cuneate to rounded at base; usually 
\par
   convex but scarcely gibbous on back
\par

\par
79}
\par