{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. E. erigena} R. Ross, {\i Watsonia}{\b  7}: 164 (1969) ({\i E. mediterranea} auct., non L.,{\i  E. hibernica} (Hooker & Arnott) Syme, non utinet). Like {\b 14} but an erect shrub 60-120(-200) cm; young twigs distinctly puberulent, and with the ridges decurrent from the leaf-bases rapidly becoming narrower and less prominent when traced downwards; leaves obtuse to subacute, with apparent margin entire and with true margins not quite contiguous, leaving a wider white line beneath; racemes often grouped into a panicle; anthers usually only partly exserted. 2n = 24.{\i  Damp places. • Iberian peninsula and S.W. France; W. Ireland.} Ga Hb Hs Lu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. E. scoparia} L.,{\i  Sp.Pl.} 353 (1753). Slender, erect shrub 1-6 m; young twigs glabrous or puberulent. Leaves 4-7 mm, in whorls of 3-4, linear, erecto-patent, glabrous; margins revolute, concealing about 2/3 of lower surface. Flowers in narrow, often interrupted, terminal racemes, sometimes grouped into lax panicles; pedicels 2 mm, glabrous, with 3 bracteoles near the middle. Sepals 0·5-1·5 mm, ovate, glabrous; corolla 1·5-3 mm, green, variably tinged with red, broadly campanulate, with erect, deltate lobes about as long as the tube; anthers included, without appendages. Ovary glabrous; stigma conspicuously capitate, reddish-purple. {\i Woods and heaths; calcifuge. S. W. Europe, extending eastwards to W.C. Italy and northwards to N.C. France}. Az Bl Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa [Ho].
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b scoparia}: Not more than 2·5 m; corolla (2-)2·5-3 mm, about twice as long as sepals; stigma included or slightly exserted.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except Açores}.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b azorica} (Hochst.) D. A. Webb,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 259 (1972) ({\i E. azorica} Hochst.): Up to 6 m; corolla 1·5-1·75 mm, c. 3 times as long as sepals; stigma conspicuously exserted. •{\i  Açores.}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 2.             Bruckenthalia}             Reichenb.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par 
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Erica} but with sepals united to form a campanulate calyx; pedicel without bracteoles; disc absent.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. spiculifolia} (Salisb.) Reichenb.,{\i  Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 414 (1831). Dwarf shrub with ascending stems 10-15 cm; young twigs puberulent. Leaves 4-5 mm, crowded, in rather irregular whorls of 4-5, linear-oblong, minutely ciliate and often with a stout, terminal, gland-tipped hair; margins revolute, leaving 1/4-1/3 of the lower surface exposed. Flowers 4-merous, in dense, shortly cylindrical or globose, terminal racemes; pedicels 2-3 mm. Calyx 1·5 mm, with broadly deltate lobes scarcely as long as the tube, pink; corolla 3 mm, campanulate, with ovate lobes about as long as the tube, bright reddish-pink. Anthers included, without appendages. Ovary and capsule glabrous.{\i  Woods and subalpine pastures; calcifuge. Mountains of Romania and of the Balkan peninsula, southwards to N. Greece.} ?Al Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 3.          Calluna }     Salisb.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par 
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Small evergreen shrubs; leaves opposite, sessile. Flowers 4-merous, in terminal or intercalary racemes or panicles; pedicels with several bracteoles. Sepals free, petaloid, exceeding the corolla; corolla deeply lobed, persistent in fruit; stamens 8; anthers acuminate, with basal appendages, opening by slits along their whole length, not by pores. Fruit a septifragal capsule.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. vulgaris} (L.) Hull,{\i  Brit. Fl.} ed. 2, {\b 1}: 114 (1808). Sub glabrous to densely grey-pubescent. Stems 15-80(-150) cm, erect, freely branched. Leaves 2·5-3·5 mm (including auricles), closely appressed, widely spaced on leading shoots but densely imbricate on lateral, non-flowering branches, oblong-lanceolate, concave on adaxial, keeled on abaxial surface, amplexicaul, with proximally directed auricles. Flowers shortly pedicellate, in narrow racemes which are sometimes grouped into panicles; bracteoles usually 6-8, crowded together beneath the flower, the upper 4 simulating sepals. Sepals 3-4 mm, oblong, pinkish-lilac; corolla lobed nearly to the base, its lobes like the sepals but smaller; anthers included. 2n = 16.{\i  Moors, heaths, open woods, sand-dunes, etc., often dominant over large areas; calcifuge. Most of Europe, but rare in much of the Mediterranean region and in the south-east}. All except Al Bl ?Co Cr Gr Rs (K) Sa Sb Si.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 4.            Cassiope}             D. Don
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen dwarf shrubs with procumbent to ascending stems; leaves alternate or opposite, small, sessile, imbricate. Flowers 5-merous, axillary or terminal, nodding, on slender pedicels; bracteoles absent. Sepals free, shorter than corolla. Corolla campanulate to hemispherical, lobed about half-way to the base, deciduous. Stamens 10; anthers included, with filiform, deflexed apical appendages. Fruit an erect, loculicidal capsule.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves decussate, obtuse, deeply sulcate on abaxial 
\par  surface, puberulent, closely appressed to stem ............................. {\b 1. tetragona}
\par Leaves alternate, acute, not sulcate, glabrous except for
\par  minute cilia, not closely appressed to stem ................................. {\b 2. hypnoides}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. tetragona} (L.) D. Don,{\i  Edinb. New Philos. Jour.}{\b  17}: 158 (1834). Stems 10-30 cm, decumbent to ascending. Leaves 3-5 mm, decussate, oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, concave adaxially, rounded but deeply sulcate abaxially, closely appressed to stem, puberulent. Flowers axillary, forming short, lax, intercalary racemes; pedicel c. 10 mm in flower, up to 25 mm in fruit, subglabrous. Sepals 2·5 mm, yellowish, scarious. Corolla 6-8 mm, campanulate, creamy-white. Capsule c. 4 mm.{\i  Dryish, stony or sandy heaths or tundra; somewhat calcicole. Arctic Europe, mainly in the mountains.} Fe No Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. hypnoides} (L.) D. Don,{\i  loc. cit.} (1834) ({\i Harrimanella hypnoides} (L.) Coville). Stems 5-15 cm, procumbent, branched, forming a mat. Leaves 2-4 mm, alternate, linear-oblong, acute, not sulcate, erecto-patent or loosely appressed, sometimes somewhat secund, minutely ciliate but otherwise glabrous. Flowers terminal; pedicel 7-10 mm in flower, slightly longer in fruit, puberulent. Sepals 2 mm, crimson, with scarious margin. Corolla 4-5 mm, broadly campanulate to hemispherical, white. Capsule c. 3 mm. 2n = 32. {\i By streams, or in damp, mossy tundra, usually in late snow-patches. Arctic Europe, Iceland, mountains of Fennoscandia.} Fe Is No Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 5.       Rhododendron}          L.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc (incl. {\i Azalea} L. pro parte)
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By T.N. Popova.
\par 
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs or dwarf shrubs, usually evergreen; leaves alternate, shortly petiolate. Flowers 5-merous, actinomorphic or slightly zygomorphic, in short terminal racemes; bracts scarious, deciduous. Sepals connate at the base, or almost throughout their length, often very small. Corolla campanulate to infundibuliform. Stamens 10, rarely 5; anthers without appendages. Ovary 5-locular; fruit a septicidal capsule; seeds numerous, minute.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: J. B. Stevenson (ed.),{\i  The Species of Rhododendron,} ed. 2. London. 1947.
\par 
\par 8}
\par