{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 24 Extreme base of leaves at base of main stems widened
\par
   and scarious ................................................................................. {\b 10. lineatus}
\par
24 Extreme base of leaves at base of main stems scarcely 
\par
   widened, herbaceous
\par
25 Inner sepals obtuse to shortly acuminate; corolla usually white .{\b 5. cneorum}
\par
25 Inner sepals acuminate to cuspidate; corolla usually pink ....... {\b 6. oleifolius}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. persicus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 158 (1753). Densely lanate perennial 10-50 cm, with creeping woody stock and stout, erect, simple or sparingly branched stems. Leaves petiolate, firm, elliptic-oblong, rounded to broadly cuneate at base, rounded to apiculate at apex. Peduncles axillary, 1-flowered, shorter than bracts. Sepals obtuse. Corolla 30-45 mm, white. {\i Maritime sands. W. coast of Black Sea.} Bu Rm Tu. ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. boissieri} Steudel, {\i Nomencl. Bot.} ed. 2, {\b 1}: 407 (1840). Dwarf, cushion-like, densely appressed-pubescent perennial up to 10 cm; stems much-branched, woody, often rooting along their length. Leaves up to 20(-30) mm, crowded, thick, with a distinctly narrowed proximal region, linear to obovate; midrib and lateral veins distinct. Peduncles very short, terminal and axillary, 1-flowered. Corolla 15-20 mm, white to red. {\i Mountain rocks and screes; calcicole. S. Spain; Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Hs Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b boissieri}({\i C. nitidus} Boiss., non Desr.): Distal widened portion of leaves oblong-obovate, distinctly longer than wide. •{\i  S. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b compactus}(Boiss.) stace, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 58 (1971) ({\i C. compactus} Boiss.; incl. {\i C. parnassicus} Boiss. & Orph., {\i C. cochlearis} Griseb.): Distal widened portion of leaves rhombic-obovate, about as long as wide.{\i  Balkan peninsula, from Albania and S. Bulgaria to C. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Usually considered to be two distinct geographically separated species, but intermediates occur, particularly within the range of subsp. ({\b b}). These have been called {\i C. nitidus} var. {\i acutifolius} Kosanin, and sometimes more closely resemble subsp. ({\b a}) than subsp. ({\b b}). The European representatives of subsp. ({\b b}) have been treated as a separate subspecies or species ({\i C. parnassicus} Boiss. & Orph.), but both extremes and many intermediates occur in Anatolia. Plants from Slavjanka, S.W. Bulgaria, resemble Spanish material of subsp. ({\b a}) very closely; they may be best referable to that taxon or described as a third subspecies of{\i  C. boissieri}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. libanoticus} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 11}): 82 (1849) ({\i C. radicosus }Heldr. & Sart.). Like {\b 2} but less compact and less densely pubescent; leaves thin, glabrous above, linear to oblanceolate, with only the midrib distinct; corolla 10-15 mm, red.{\i  Mountain slopes and pastures. S. Greece, Kriti.} Cr Gr. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. dorycnium} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2}: 923 (1759). Upright, divaricately-branched, densely pubescent shrub 50-100 cm; mature stems and branches woody, rigid. Leaves linear-spathulate to.oblanceolate. Peduncles much longer than bracts and flowers, 1-. to few-flowered. Sepals obtuse to emarginate, apiculate. Corolla 10-20 mm, pink. {\i Dry places. S. Greece and Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  C. lanatus} Vahl,{\i  Symb. Bot.}{\b  1}: 16 (1790), was recorded for Kriti by Sibthorp and others but no record can be confirmed. It occurs in N.E. Africa and S.W. Asia. It is an irregularly branched, densely pubescent shrub up to 50 cm, often with rigid spine tipped mature branches, and the flowers are crowded in dense axillary heads. Abnormal forms of 6 have been misidentified as this species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. cneorum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 157 (1753). Densely sericeous, erect or spreading, branched perennial 10-50 cm, woody in much of the lower parts. Leaves linear to oblanceolate, attenuate at base, herbaceous and scarcely widened at the extreme base. Flowers in terminal, usually crowded, heads; peduncles absent or very short, usually hidden. Sepals lanceolate to broadly ovate, obtuse to shortly acuminate. Corolla 15-25 mm, usually white. Capsule longer than calyx when ripe, pubescent. •{\i  Calcareous rocks near the sea. W. & C. parts of Mediterranean region.} Al *Hs It Ju Si [?Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Sicilia usually have narrower leaves than those from elsewhere, and have been separated as a variety or subspecies. Their status requires more investigation. {\b 5} is replaced in Malta by {\b 6}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. oleifolius} Desr. in Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 3}: 552 (1792). Like {\b 5} but usually less robust and stems often less extensively woody; leaves filiform to linear; inflorescence usually somewhat more diffuse with some branches visible; inner sepals acuminate to cuspidate; corolla usually pink; capsule shorter than calyx when ripe.{\i  Rocky places near the sea; calcicole. S. Greece and Aegean region; Malta.} Cr Gr Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Geographically separated from {\b 5}, which it sometimes closely resembles, and perhaps only a subspecies of it.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  C. argyrothamnos} W. Greuter,{\i  Bauhinia}{\b  3}: 251 (1967), is related to{\b  6} but differs in its arcuate-pendent stems with the longest branches near the apex. It is known only from a calcareous cliff in Kriti, and requires further study.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. lanuginosus} Desr. in Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  3}: 551 (1792). Densely pubescent perennial 5-30 cm, with branched woody stock; stems usually branched and often woody below, erect. Leaves filiform to linear, attenuate at the base, the basal ones on each stem widened and scarious at the extreme base. Flowers crowded into dense terminal heads; peduncles absent or nearly so. Sepals linear-lanceolate to broadly lanceolate, long-acuminate to cuspidate. Corolla 15-25 mm, pink. Ovary and capsule glabrous. {\i Dry, calcareous rocks. S. & E. Spain, S. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable in the degree to which the hairs are appressed or patent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. calvertii} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 3}): 124 (1856) (incl. {\i C. sericocephalus} Juz., {\i C. tauricus} (Bornm.) Juz.). Like {\b 7} but stems usually simple and herbaceous; leaves linear to linear-oblanceolate; sepals lanceolate to broadly ovate, long-acuminate to caudate; corolla 12-20 mm, white to pink; ovary and capsule pubescent.{\i  Dry places. Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Geographically widely separated from {\b 7}, but perhaps only a subspecies of it.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. holosericeus} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 147 (1808). Densely sericeous perennial 10-30 cm, with woody stock and usually erect herbaceous stems. Leaves linear to oblanceolate, attenuate at base; basal leaves on each stem widened and scarious at the extreme base. Peduncles terminal and axillary, rarely as long as subtending bract, 1- to 2-flowered. Outer sepals broadly ovate, cordate, cuspidate, conspicuously gibbous on the back. Corolla 20-30 mm, white to yellow. Ovary and capsule pubescent.{\i  Dry, stony slopes. Balkan peninsula, from N. Macedonia to E.C. Greece; Krym.} Bu Gr Ju Rs (K).
\par

\par
80}
\par