{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. lineatus} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2}: 923 (1759). Densely sericeous perennial 3-25 cm, with woody stock and usually procumbent or ascending herbaceous stems. Leaves linear to elliptical or oblanceolate, attenuate at base; basal leaves on each shoot widened and scarious at the extreme base. Peduncles terminal and axillary, much shorter than bracts, 1- to several flowered. Outer sepals linear to lanceolate, convex on the back below, cuneate to rounded at base, acute to acuminate. Corolla 12-25 mm, pink. Ovary and capsule pubescent. {\i Dry, open ground. S. Europe, extending northwards to} 46° 30'{\i  N. in W. France and to }c. 51° {\i N. in S.C. Russia, but rare in the E. Mediterranean region}. Al Bl Bu Co ?Cr Ga ?Gr Hs It ?Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  C. pilosellifolius} Desr. in Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  3}: 551 (1792), was once recorded from Turkey-in-Europe but was perhaps only a casual. It differs from {\b 11} mainly in the broadly cuneate to subcordate base of the cauline leaves, and in the glabrous ovary and capsule. It occurs in N.E. Africa and S.W. Asia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. cantabrica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 158 (1753). Pubescent perennial (with many patent hairs at least below) with woody stock and erect herbaceous stems 10-50 cm. Leaves linear to oblanceolate, attenuate at base; basal leaves on each stem widened and scarious at the extreme base. Peduncles terminal and axillary, the lower longer than subtending bracts, 1- to several-flowered. Outer sepals lanceolate to oblanceolate, convex on the back below, cuneate to rounded at base, acute to acuminate. Corolla 15-25 mm, pink. Ovary and capsule pubescent. 2n = 30.{\i  Dry places. S. & S.C. Europe, extending northwards to} c. 48°{\i  N. in E. France and S. Czechoslovakia.} Al Au Bl Bu Co ?Cr Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. humilis} Jacq., {\i Collect. Bot.}{\b  4}: 209 (1791) ({\i C. undulatus} Cav.). Herbaceous annual or short-lived perennial up to 40 cm. Leaves sessile, mostly oblanceolate. Peduncle and pedicel together shorter than or about as long as calyx, 1-flowered. Sepals elliptic-oblong, sparsely pubescent, with scarious margins, mucronulate to acuminate. Corolla 7-12 mm, violet. Capsule pubescent. {\i Dry, open habitats. C. & S. Spain, S.E. Portugal; isolated stations in N.W. Italy and Sicilia.} Hs It Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. C. tricolor} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }158 (1753). Herbaceous annual or short-lived perennial up to 60 cm. Leaves sessile, mostly obovate to oblanceolate. Peduncle and pedicel together several times as long as calyx, 1-flowered. Sepals with distinct distal and proximal regions, pubescent, herbaceous, obtuse to acuminate. Corolla 15-40 mm, usually with basipetally-zoned blue, white and yellow bands. Capsule pubescent.{\i  Dry, open habitats. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Az Bl Co Ga Gr Hs *It Ju Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tricolor}: Distal part of sepals broadly ovate-oblong, obtuse, subacute or shortly acuminate, shorter than to about as long as proximal part. {\i Throughout the range of the species, but perhaps not native in Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cupanianus}(Sa'ad) Stace, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 58 (1971) ({\i C. tricolor} var.{\i  cupanianus} Sa'ad): Distal part of sepals ovate to lanceolate, acute to long-acuminate, conspicuously longer than proximal part.{\i  Sicilia; naturalized elsewhere}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   This species is often cultivated for ornament, and the natural ranges of the two subspecies have evidently become partly obscured by introductions.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. C. meonanthus} Hoffmanns. & Link,{\i  Fl. Port.}{\b  1}: 369 (1813-1820). Herbaceous annual or short-lived perennial up to 50 cm. Leaves sessile, mostly linear to oblanceolate. Peduncle and pedicel together several times as long as calyx, 1-flowered. Sepals lanceolate to narrowly ovate, glabrous to sparsely pubescent, acute to shortly acuminate; margins scarious. Corolla 14-22 mm, usually with basipetally-zoned blue, white and yellow bands. Capsule glabrous.{\i  Cultivated ground and other open habitats. S. Spain, C. & S. Portugal; W. Italy, Sicilia.} Hs It Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. C. pentapetaloides} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 12,{\b  3}: 229 (1768). Like {\b 14} but up to 30 cm; sepals elliptic-ovate, glabrous, obtuse and mucronate; corolla 7-10 mm, usually blue distally and yellow proximally.{\i  Dry places. Mediterranean region, S.E. Portugal.} Bl Gr Hs It ?Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. C. siculus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 156 (1753). Sparsely pubescent annual or short-lived perennial; stems 10-60 cm, slender, trailing (rarely twining), herbaceous. Leaves petiolate, lanceolate to ovate, cordate or rarely truncate, entire. Peduncles axillary, usually shorter than the bracts, 1-(to 2-) flowered. Sepals acute to acuminate, pubescent. Corolla 7-12 mm, blue.{\i  Dry, open habitats. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  siculus}: Bracteoles leaf-like, borne just below the sepals and greatly overlapping them. 2n = 44.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b agrestis}(Schweinf.) Verdcourt,{\i  Kew Bull.} [{\b 12}]: 344 (1957): Bracteoles filiform, borne well below the sepals and not or scarcely overlapping them. {\i Sardegna.} ({\i Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. C. sabatius} Viv.,{\i  Fl. Lib.} 67 (1824). Sparsely to densely pubescent perennial with branched, woody stock; stems 10-50 cm, slender, trailing or ascending, simple or branched, herbaceous. Leaves petiolate; lamina 1-1½(-3) times as long as wide and 3-8 times as long as petiole, orbicular to oblong, cuneate to truncate, entire. Peduncles axillary, usually as long as or shorter than bracts, 1- to 3-flowered. Outer sepals usually acute, inner sepals usually acuminate. Corolla 15-22 mm, pink to blue.{\i  Dry, calcareous rocks. Coasts of N.W. Italy and Sicilia.} It Si. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Variable, particularly with regard to pubescence.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. C. valentinus} Cav.,{\i  Icon. Descr.}{\b  2}: 65 (1793) ({\i C. suffruticosus} Desf.). Like {\b 17} but lamina linear to narrowly oblong, (2·5-)3·5-10 times as long as wide and 6-13 times as long as petiole; outer sepals usually acuminate; corolla 18-30 mm, white, yellow or pink to blue.{\i  Dry places. E. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in leaf-shape, pubescence, sepal-shape and colour of corolla. Perhaps only a subspecies of{\b  17}, with which it is, however, sympatric in N. Africa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. C. arvensis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 153 (1753). Glabrous or pubescent perennial; stems up to 200 cm, slender, trailing or twining, herbaceous. Leaves petiolate, triangular or ovate-oblong to linear, hastate to sagittate, more or less entire. Peduncles axillary, often about as long as bracts, 1- to 2(3)-flowered. Sepals obtuse to emarginate, and often apiculate. Corolla 10-25 mm, white to pink. Ovary glabrous. 2n = 50. {\i Usually in disturbed habitats. Europe, except the extreme north. }All except Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable in pubescence and leaf-shape. Plants with linear to oblong-lanceolate leaves (often with very prominent backwardly-directed auricles) are known as var. linearifolius Choisy. They are native in S. Europe and widely naturalized in the north, and may merit subspecific status.
\par

\par
81}
\par