{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min28}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min29}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords969}{\nofchars5527}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28   }{\b\fs28 C. mairei }{\fs28 Hal\'e1csy,}{\i\fs28  Bull. Soc. Sci. Nancy}{\fs28  ser. 3, }{\b\fs28 8}{\fs28 : 176 (1907), differs from }{\b\fs28 19}{\fs28  in its smaller parts (stems not more than 25 cm, corolla 7-10 mm) and dense pubescence on the vegetative parts and ovary. It occurs in S. Greece, and may merit specific or subspecific status.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 20. C. farinosus}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Mantissa Alt.}{\fs28  203 (1771). Appressed- pubescent perennial; stems up to 100 cm, slender, twining, herbaceous. Leaves petiolate, triangular-ovate, sagittate, crenate. Peduncles axillary, mostly about as long as bracts, 1- to 3(5)-flowered. Sepals acuminate to mucronate. Corolla c. 10 mm, pinkish. }{\i\fs28 Naturalized in hedges near Lisboa.}{\fs28  [Lu.] (}{\i\fs28 C. & S. Africa.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 21. C. betonicifolius}{\fs28  Miller, }{\i\fs28 Gard. Dict.}{\fs28  ed. 8, no. 20 (1768) (}{\i\fs28 C. hirsutus}{\fs28  Bieb.). Perennial with patent hairs; stems up to 100 cm, slender, trailing or twining, herbaceous. Leaves petiolate, triangular-ovate or -lanceolate, sagittate to cordate, entire. Peduncles axillary, mostly much longer than bracts, frequently with more than 3 flowers. Sepals acute to acuminate. Corolla 30-45 mm, usually pink. }{\i\fs28 Dry, usually acid soils. S.E. Europe, from C. Jugoslavia and Krym southwards.}{\fs28  Al Bu Gr Ju Rs (K) Tu [Ga It Si].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 22. C. scammonia}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl}{\fs28 . 153 (1753). Glabrous perennial; stems up to 75 cm, slender, trailing or twining, herbaceous. Leaves petiolate, triangular-ovate or -lanceolate, sagittate, entire. Peduncles axillary, mostly much longer than bracts, frequently with more than 3 flowers. Sepals emarginate, apiculate. Corolla 25-45 mm, pale yellow.}{\i\fs28  Scrub and forest-margins. Krym.}{\fs28  ?Gr Rs (K). (}{\i\fs28 Anatolia and E. Aegean region}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 23. C. althaeoides}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  156 (1753). Pubescent perennial; stems up to 100 cm, slender, trailing or twining, herbaceous. Leaves petiolate, very variable but at least the upper deeply lobed and cordate to sagittate. Peduncles axillary, usually much longer than bracts, 1- to 3(5)-flowered. Sepals variable, acute to rounded. Corolla 25-40 mm, usually pink.}{\i\fs28  Dry places. S. Europe}{\fs28 . Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  althaeoides}{\fs28 : Relatively robust, with sparse to dense, mostly patent hairs; leaf-lobes relatively wide and shallow; sepals (7)8-9(10) mm. }{\i\fs28 Throughout most of the range of the species, but rarer in the east}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 tenuissimus}{\fs28 (Sibth. & Sm.) Stace,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  64}{\fs28 : 59 (1971) (}{\i\fs28 C. tenuissimus}{\fs28  Sibth. & Sm., }{\i\fs28 C. elegantissimus}{\fs28  Miller, }{\i\fs28 C. althaeoides}{\fs28  var.}{\i\fs28  pedatus}{\fs28  Choisy): Relatively slender, with dense, almost entirely appressed, hairs; leaf-lobes relatively narrow and deep; sepals (6)7-8(-9) mm.}{\i\fs28  From Italy eastwards; naturalized in France}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par  Subsp. (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) is more eastern in distribution, but (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) and (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) are sympatric in many areas. Intermediates occur rather rarely.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 6.              Ipomoea}{\fs28                  L.
\par (incl.}{\i\fs28  Pharbitis}{\fs28  Choisy)
\par }{\fs24 By C.A. Stace.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs with long, trailing or climbing stems. Leaves entire or lobed, alternate; petioles long, distinct. Flowers solitary or in axillary cymes, usually with 2 very small bracteoles. Corolla at least 25 mm, infundibuliform or tubiform, scarcely lobed, more or less glabrous. Ovary 2- to 4-locular; ovules usually 2 in each loculus; style filiform; stigma with 1-3 globose lobes. Capsule usually 4-seeded. Pollen grains pantoporate; exine spinose. The leaves in all species may vary considerably in shape, usually being entire near the base of the plant and variously lobed towards the apex. The descriptions cover most of this variation, but ignore the lowest leaves which are often very aberrant.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28  are two of several species grown for ornament and frequently found as casuals over much of Europe; they have been very much confused in the past.
\par 
\par 1 Sepals acute to rounded, usually abruptly mucronate,
\par   glabrous or rarely hairy
\par 2 Leaves sagittate ............................................................................. }{\b\fs28 2. sagittata}{\fs28 
\par 2 Leaves not sagittate
\par 3 Plant without underground tubers; leaves obtuse to
\par   emarginate or 2-lobed at apex .................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. stolonifera}{\fs28 
\par 3 Plant with large underground tubers; leaves acute to 
\par   acuminate at apex or at apex of lobes .............................................. }{\b\fs28 5. batatas}{\fs28 
\par 1 Sepals acute to long-acuminate, pubescent
\par 4 Sepals finely pubescent, without bristles ................................... }{\b\fs28 3. acuminata}{\fs28 
\par 4 Sepals finely pubescent and also with long bristles near the base }{\b\fs28 4. purpurea}{\fs28 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    Sect. LEIOCALYX Hallier fil. Glabrous, without underground tubers; stems creeping to weakly climbing; sepals acute to rounded, mucronate.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. I. stolonifera}{\fs28  (Cyr.) J. F. Gmelin, }{\i\fs28 Syst. Nat.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 345 (1791) (}{\i\fs28 I. littoralis}{\fs28  (L.) Boiss., non Blume). Stems creeping and usually rooting at the nodes. Leaves more or less fleshy; lamina 1-5 cm, usually oblong, entire to deeply 3- to 5-lobed, broadly cuneate to cordate at base, obtuse to emarginate or 2-lobed at apex. Flowers usually solitary; sepals 8-15 mm, acute to obtuse, mucronate; corolla 35-50 mm, white or pale yellow, sometimes with a purple centre.}{\i\fs28  Sandy places near the sea. S. Europe; very local}{\fs28 . Az ?Bl Cr It. (}{\i\fs28 Tropics and warm-temperate regions}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. I. sagittata}{\fs28  Poiret, }{\i\fs28 Voy. Barb.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 122 (1789). Stems creeping or climbing. Lamina 3-8 cm, usually sagittate with 3 narrow, acute to obtuse, mucronate lobes. Flowers usually solitary; sepals 5-10 mm, rounded to emarginate, mucronate; corolla 40-70 mm, pink to purple.}{\i\fs28  Usually damp, often saline places near the sea. Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  Bl Co Gr Hs It Si. (}{\i\fs28 S. & E. parts of Mediterranean region; Tropical America}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par  Despite the large disjunction in its distribution this species is usually considered to be a native of the Mediterranean region.
\par 
\par    Sect. IPOMOEA (Sect.}{\i\fs28  Pharbitis}{\fs28  (Choisy) Griseb.). Pubescent or hispid, without underground tubers; stems usually strongly climbing; sepals acute to long-acuminate.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. I. acuminata}{\fs28  (Vahl) Roemer & Schultes,}{\i\fs28  Syst. Veg.}{\b\fs28  4}{\fs28 : 228 (1819) (}{\i\fs28 Pharbitis cathartica}{\fs28  (Poiret) Choisy). Usually perennial. Lamina 4-16 cm, ovate or broadly ovate, entire to deeply 3-lobed, acuminate, cordate. Inflorescences few- to many-flowered; sepals 13-22 mm, lanceolate, gradually tapering from near the base, uniformly finely pubescent; corolla 50-85 mm, white, blue, pink, or multicoloured, usually fading to pink. }{\i\fs28 Naturalized in hedges and on roadsides.}{\fs28  [Az Bl Ga Lu Si.] (}{\i\fs28 Tropics.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. I. purpurea}{\fs28  Roth,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Abh.}{\fs28  27 (1787) (}{\i\fs28 Pharbitis purpurea}{\fs28  (Roth) Voigt). Like }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28  but usually annual; lamina usually entire; inflorescences sometimes 1-flowered; sepals 10-16 mm, uniformly finely pubescent and with conspicuous bristles below; corolla 40-60 mm. }{\i\fs28 Naturalized in hedges and on roadsides.}{\fs28  [Au Bl Ga Gr Hs It Rm.] (}{\i\fs28 Tropical America.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par 82}
\par }