{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. BATATAS (Choisy) Griseb. Glabrous to slightly pubescent, with underground fusiform tubers; stems creeping to weakly climbing; sepals obtuse to acute, mucronate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. I. batatas} (L.) Lam., {\i Tab. Encycl. Méth. Bot.} {\b 1}: 465 (1793). Lamina 4-14 cm, broadly ovate, entire to deeply 3- to 5(7)-lobed,truncate to cordate. Inflorescences 1- to several-flowered; sepals 7-12 mm, oblong to ovate-oblong, glabrous to hairy; corolla 30-50 mm, white, or violet to purple. {\i Cultivated for its edible tubers }({\i sweet potatoes}) {\i in parts of S. Europe.} [Az Gr Hs Lu. (Tropical America.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 147.               HYDROPHYLLACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs. Leaves usually alternate, entire to pinnatisect, exstipulate. Flowers usually in simple or dichotomous scorpioid inflorescences (sometimes solitary), actinomorphic, usually 5-merous. Calyx deeply divided. Corolla infundibuliform, campanulate or rotate; lobes imbricate. Stamens as many as the corolla-lobes and alternating with them; anthers versatile. Ovary superior, 1- to 2-locular, with 2, parietal placentae; ovules 2 to many on each placenta; styles 1-2; stigmas usually capitate. Fruit a usually loculicidal capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers solitary; calyx with sepal-like appendages 
\par
  between the lobes ...................................................................... {\b 1. Nemophila}
\par
1 Flowers in scorpioid inflorescences; calyx without 
\par
  appendages between the lobes
\par
2 Leaves pinnatisect; styles connate below .....................................{\b  2. Phacelia}
\par
2 Leaves crenate-serrate; styles free to base ..................................{\b  3. Wigandia}
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.                 Nemophila}            Nutt.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual herbs with pinnatisect, opposite leaves. Flowers solitary, pedicellate. Calyx with sepal-like appendages between the lobes. Corolla rotate to campanulate. Filaments with appendages at their base.
\par

\par
   {\b 1. N. menziesii} Hooker & Arnott,{\i  Bot. Beech. Voy.} 152 (1833). Stems 10-30 cm, diffuse, pubescent. Leaves 2-5 cm, petiolate, ovate to oblong, pinnatisect, with usually 5-9 serrate lobes. Calyx-lobes 4-6 mm, lanceolate, the appendages 1·5-2·5 mm. Corolla 15-40 mm in diameter, almost rotate, blue or white. Capsule 5-12 mm, subglobose.{\i  Often cultivated for ornament and sometimes escaping.} [No Su.] ({\i W. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 2.               Phacelia}              Juss.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual herbs. Leaves alternate. Flowers in scorpioid inflorescences, shortly pedicellate. Calyx without appendages between the lobes. Corolla rotate to campanulate. Filaments with append ages at their base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. tanacetifolia} Bentham, {\i Trans. Linn. Soc. London}{\b  17}: 280 (1835). Stems 20-80 cm, glandular-pubescent and hispid, usually erect and simple or sparingly branched. Leaves 2-10 cm, shortly petiolate, ovate to ovate-oblong in outline, 1- to 2-pinnatisect. Calyx-lobes (5-)6-8, usually linear. Corolla 6-9 mm, blue, persistent. Stamens long-exserted. Styles connate for c. 1 mm. Capsule 3-4 mm, ovoid, pubescent at apex.{\i  Cultivated for bees and frequently naturalized.} [Au Be Bu Cz Da Ga He Ho Hu Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Su.] ({\i W. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Several other species of this large American genus are cultivated and some have been recorded as more or less naturalized. The two commonest of these are: {\b P. ciliata} Bentham, {\i loc. cit.} (1835), with a strongly accrescent calyx, and{\b  P. minor} (Harvey) Thell.,{\i  Ber. Bayer. Bot. Ges. }{\b 14}: 79 (1914), with pedicels up to 15 mm and the styles connate to above the middle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 3.             Wigandia}            Kunth
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G.Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Robust perennial herbs or shrubs with stinging hairs. Leaves alternate. Flowers in scorpioid inflorescences, shortly pedicellate. Calyx without appendages between the lobes. Corolla with short, campanulate tube and rotate limb. Filaments with deflexed hairs in the lower part. Styles free to the base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. W. caracasana} Kunth in Humb., {\i Bonpl. & Kunth, Nov. Gen. Sp.}{\b  3}: 128 (1819). Erect, hispid shrub 200-400 cm. Leaves 20-45 × 12-35 cm, ovate, obtuse, cordate at base, petiolate, coarsely crenate-serrate, yellowish-pubescent beneath. Calyx-lobes linear-lanceolate. Corolla c. 20 mm, the limb lilac, the tube white. Stamens shortly exserted. Capsule oblong-conical, slightly greyish-pubescent.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and locally naturalized on rocks and walls in the W. Mediterranean region.} [Ga Hs It.] ({\i Mexico to Colombia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 148.            BORAGINACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.H. Valentine & A.O. Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or dwarf shrubs, often hispid. Leaves alternate, exstipulate, simple. Flowers usually in scorpioid cymes, usually actinomorphic. Calyx 5-toothed or-lobed. Corollas lobed, cylindrical, campanulate, hypocrateriform or rotate, usually with a distinct tube and limb; tube often with 5 scales, invaginations, or tufts or lines of hairs inside, sometimes with an annulus at the base. Stamens 5, inserted on the corolla and alternating with the lobes. Ovary superior, 2- or 4-locular; style usually simple, arising from between the 4 lobes of the ovary (gynobasic), rarely terminal. Fruit of 2 or 4 nutlets (rarely 1 or 3 by abortion).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla distinctly zygomorphic
\par
2 Corolla-tube without scales or invaginations ................ {\b 14. Echium}
\par
2 Corolla-tube with scales or small invaginations
\par
3 Corolla-tube with small invaginations; style exserted ..... {\b 13. Halacsya}
\par
3 Corolla-tube with ovate or oblong scales; style include .... {\b 21. Anchusa}
\par
1 Corolla more or less actinomorphic
\par
4 Style terminal
\par
5 Corolla infundibuliform; fruit fleshy .......................{\b  1. Argusia}
\par
5 Corolla hypocrateriform; fruit dry ..................... {\b 2. Heliotropium}
\par
4 Style gynobasic
\par
6 Nutlets connate in 2 separate pairs at maturity ........... {\b 10. Cerinthe}
\par
6 Nutlets separate at maturity
\par

\par
83}
\par