{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 7 Calyx-lobes dentate, accrescent and forming a 2-lipped
\par
  covering around the nutlets in fruit ............................................{\b  27. Asperugo}
\par
7 Calyx-lobes entire, ± equal in fruit
\par
8 Nutlets with a distinct, thickened, collar-like ring around the base
\par
9 Corolla rotate
\par
10 Corolla-lobes revolute; scales in 2 series ........................{\b  24. Trachystemon}
\par
10 Corolla-lobes not revolute; scales in 1 series
\par
11 Scales glabrous; stamens long-exserted ..................................... {\b 23. Borago}
\par
11 Scales hairy or papillose; stamens included or only
\par
   slightly exserted
\par
12 Racemes ebracteate; corolla 3-4 mm .......................................{\b  20. Brunnera}
\par
12 Racemes mostly bracteate; corolla more than 4 mm
\par
13 Nutlets stipitate .................................................................... {\b 22. Pentaglottis}
\par
13 Nutlets not stipitate ...................................................................{\b  21. Anchusa}
\par
9  Corolla tubular to campanulate
\par
14 Stamens exserted
\par
15 Corolla-lobes longer than remainder of corolla ..................{\b  19. Procopiania}
\par
15 Corolla-lobes shorter than remainder of corolla
\par
16 Corolla with flange-like ring at mouth of tube ........................ {\b 17. Elizaldia}
\par
16 Corolla with scales at mouth of tube ........................................{\b  21. Anchusa}
\par
14 Stamens included
\par
17 Style exserted; scales at least 3 times as long as wide ....... {\b 18. Symphytum}
\par
17 Style included; scales usually less than 3 times as 
\par
   long as wide, or absent
\par
18 Corolla-lobes longer than remainder of corolla;
\par
   scales  glabrous ............................................................................{\b  23. Borago}
\par
18 Corolla-lobes shorter than remainder of corolla;
\par
   scales hairy or laciniate, or absent
\par
19 Nutlets smooth
\par
20 Corolla with 5 hairy scales near mouth of tube ........................... {\b 16. Nonea}
\par
20 Corolla with 5 tufts of hairs forming a ring in the throat .... {\b 15. Pulmonaria}
\par
19 Nutlets rugose, reticulate or ribbed
\par
21 Scales conspicuous, at least as long as wide ............................ {\b 21. Anchusa}
\par
21 Scales absent or shorter than wide, or replaced by tufts of hairs . {\b 16. Nonea}
\par
8  Nutlets without a collar-like ring around the base
\par
22 Nutlets glochidiate
\par
23 Stamens exserted, or equalling corolla; style exserted ....... {\b 35. Solenanthus}
\par
23 Stamens and style included
\par
24 Nutlets broadly winged ....................................................... {\b 36. Mattiastrum}
\par
24 Nutlets unwinged
\par
25 Nutlets 2 ................................................................................... {\b 28. Rochelia}
\par
25 Nutlets 4
\par
26 Inflorescence usually ebracteate; nutlets attached to
\par
   the receptacle for the whole of their length ........................ {\b 34. Cynoglossum}
\par
26 Inflorescence bracteate; nutlets usually attached to 
\par
   the receptacle for only part of their length .................................. {\b 31. Lappula}
\par
22 Nutlets not glochidiate
\par
27 Nutlets winged, the wing often forming an umbilicus
\par
28 Nutlets more than 10 mm ..........................................................{\b  37. Rindera}
\par
28 Nutlets less than 5 mm
\par
29 Nutlets with erect or incurved wing; sparsely hairy or
\par
   glabrous annual, biennial or perennial, not caespitose ........ {\b 33. Omphalodes}
\par
29 Nutlets with flat wing; densely hairy, caespitose 
\par
   perennial ................................................................................. {\b 30. Eritrichium}
\par
27 Nutlets not winged, or at most with a narrow rim
\par
30 Corolla with scales or invaginations in the throat
\par
31 Corolla rotate ........................................................................... {\b 29. Myosotis}
\par
31 Corolla not rotate, the limb tubular to campanulate or
\par
   infundibuliform
\par
32 Style exserted .......................................................................... {\b 13. Halacsya}
\par
32 Style included
\par
33 Nutlets with conical spines ....................................................... {\b 31. Lappula}
\par
33 Nutlets smooth to tuberculate
\par
34 Nutlets granulate or tuberculate ................................................ {\b 12. Alkanna}
\par
34 Nutlets smooth
\par
35 Plant glabrous; nutlets fleshy ................................................. {\b 25. Mertensia}
\par
35 Plant hairy; nutlets dry
\par
36 Corolla less than 2 mm, blue; nutlets triquetrous .................. {\b 32. Trigonotis}
\par
36 Corolla more than 2 mm, whitish; nutlets ovoid ..............{\b  4. Lithospermum}
\par
30 Corolla without scales or invaginations in the throat,
\par
   though often with tufts of hairs, and sometimes with a
\par
   narrow flange at the base
\par
37 Nutlets conspicuously stipitate ................................................. {\b 12. Alkanna}
\par
37 Nutlets not stipitate
\par
38 Stamens unequal ........................................................................ {\b 14. Echium}
\par
38 Stamens equal
\par
39 Corolla yellow
\par
40 Style exserted ............................................................................. {\b 9. Onosma}
\par
40 Style included
\par
41 Corolla more than 15 mm ..................................................... {\b 8. Macrotomia}
\par
41 Corolla not more than 15 mm
\par
42 Inflorescence bracteate to apex ............................................. {\b 5. Neatostema}
\par
42 Inflorescence ebracteate, or bracteate only at base ............... {\b 26. Amsinckia}
\par
39 Corolla blue, purple, brownish or whitish
\par
43 Style exserted
\par
44 Anthers sagittate at base, usually with a projecting
\par
   connective at the apex ................................................................... {\b 9. Onosma}
\par
44 Anthers not or scarcely sagittate at base, without a
\par
   projecting connective at the apex but sometimes 
\par
   apiculate
\par
45 Annual; nutlets tuberculate ......................................................... {\b 3. Arnebia}
\par
45 Perennial; nutlets smooth ........................................................... {\b 11. Moltkia}
\par
43 Style included
\par
46 Corolla with 5 longitudinal bands of hairs inside ............... {\b 6. Buglossoides}
\par
46 Corolla glabrous or hairy inside, but without 5 
\par
   longitudinal bands of hairs
\par
47 Annual; nutlets 4 ......................................................................... {\b 3. Arnebia}
\par
47 Perennial; nutlets usually 1(-2) ................................................ {\b 7. Lithodora}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc Subfam.     {\b  Heliotropioideae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Style terminal, with a wide, glandular ring below the apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.              Argusia}               Boehmer
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.H. Valentine.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs or shrubs. Flowers in terminal, ebracteate, often branched cymes. Calyx lobed almost to the base. Corolla infundibuliform, without scales; limb lobed to ½-way or more. Stamens included. Style included; stigma entire, surrounded by a ring at the base. Fruit dry, splitting into two 2-seeded mericarps.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. sibirica} (L.) Dandy,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 256 (1972) ({\i Tournefortia argusia} Roemer & Schultes,{\i  T. sibirica} L.). Erect perennial 10-40 cm; rhizome creeping. Stems simple or branched, with appressed or patent hairs. Leaves 1-4 cm, entire, oblong or lanceolate, sessile, hairy. Flowers fragrant, in short, few-flowered cymes. Corolla tube 6-7 mm, 2-3 times as long as calyx; calyx and corolla sericeous; limb of corolla 8 mm in diameter, broadly 5-fid, white. Stigma shortly hairy. Fruit c. 7 × 6 mm, slightly 4-lobed at apex, with coarse appressed hairs. 2n = 26.{\i  Base-rich or saline soils. U.S.S.R., southwards from} c. 56°{\i  N., and shores of the Black Sea}. Bu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 2.               Heliotropium}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R.K. Brummitt.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs, sometimes woody at the base. Flowers in terminal or pseudoaxillary, ebracteate and branched
\par

\par
84}
\par