{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 cymes. Calyx lobed usually to the base. Corolla hypocrateriform; tube usually without scales; limb lobed more or less to the base, usually with teeth between the lobes. Stamens included. Style included, usually very short; stigma large and disc-like, or conical to subulate, entire or 2- to 4-lobed. Fruit dry, splitting into 4 or 2 nutlets, or 1-seeded and remaining entire.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  All species grow in dry, open habitats, especially in cultivated ground or sandy soils.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: H. Riedl,{\i  Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 69}: 81-93 (1966).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers long-pedicellate .......................................................... {\b 8. micranthos}
\par
1 Flowers ± sessile
\par
2 Plant glabrous ..................................................................... {\b 10. curassavicum}
\par
2 Plant hairy
\par
3 Perennial; racemes not more than 1 cm, with not more 
\par
  than 8 flowers ........................................................................... {\b 9. arguzioides}
\par
3 Annual or perennial; racemes more than 1 cm, with more
\par
  than 8 flowers
\par
4 Perennial; corolla purple ..................................................... {\b 11. amplexicaule}
\par
4 Annual; corolla white or cream
\par
5 Calyx lobed to less than ¼ of its length, almost 
\par
  concealing the single-seeded fruit and falling with it ................. {\b 12. supinum}
\par
5 Calyx lobed to the base, not concealing the 4 free 
\par
  nutlets, and persisting after they fall
\par
6 Stems densely villous; corolla with scales in the throat ..... {\b 7. hirsutissimum}
\par
6 Stems ± appressed-pubescent; corolla without scales in
\par
  the throat
\par
7 Corolla 2-5 mm; limb 2-4(-5) mm in diameter ...... ({\b 1-4}). {\b europaeum} group
\par
7 Corolla 4-7 mm; limb 4·5-8 mm in diameter
\par
8 Stigma filiform, deeply bifid ........................................................ {\b 6. halacsyi}
\par
8 Stigma conical, entire or shallowly 2- to 4-lobed .................... {\b 5. suaveolens}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 1-4}).{\b  H. europaeum} group. Annual; stems 4-40 cm, erect or ascending, usually branched, appressed- to erecto-patent-pubescent. Leaves up to 5·5(-6·5) × 2·8(-3·5) cm, ovate to elliptical, cuneate to almost rounded at the base, rounded to subacute at the apex, appressed-pubescent; petiole up to 3·5 cm. Sepals 1·8-3·5 mm, lanceolate to linear-oblong. Corolla 2-5 mm, at least the limb white; limb 2-4(-5) mm in diameter. Anthers 0·7-1·5 mm, inserted in middle of corolla-tube. Stigma conical to linear-subulate, deeply or shallowly divided into 2(-4) lobes at apex or rarely entire, glabrous to hairy. Fruit splitting into 4 nutlets, glabrous or pubescent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The species included here are not well understood and some may perhaps not merit specific status. {\b 1} and {\b 4} are usually fairly easily distinguished from each other in the Mediterranean region, but in Russia and S.W. Asia both may be difficult to separate from {\b 2}. It might prove more satisfactory to regard {\b 3} as merely a variant of {\b 2} with pubescent fruits, and possibly {\b 2} is only subspecifically distinct from {\b 1. H. stevenianum} Andrz., {\i Enum. Pl. Podol.} 116 (1862), described from W. Ukraine, is probably not specifically distinct from {\b 1} but has also been regarded as synonymous with {\b 2}. In the literature {\b 2} and {\b 4} have been much confused and details of their distribution in E. Europe are uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stigma linear-subulate, usually glabrous ................................. {\b 1. europaeum}
\par
1 Stigma conical, usually papillose or hairy
\par
2 Fruit hairy ............................................................................... {\b 3. lasiocarpum}
\par
2 Fruit glabrous
\par
3 Sepals lanceolate; anthers 1-1·5 mm; stigma usually 
\par
  densely hairy ................................................................................. {\b 4. dolosum}
\par
3 Sepals oblong or narrowly triangular; anthers 0·7-1 mm;
\par
  stigma usually papillose .............................................................. {\b 2. ellipticum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. europaeum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }130 (1753). Flowers scentless. Sepals 0·4-0·8 mm wide, linear-oblong or narrowly triangular, irregularly patent-pubescent, usually patent soon after anthesis. Corolla 2-4·2 mm. Anthers 0·7-1 mm. Stigma linear-subulate, usually glabrous. Fruit glabrous or pubescent, usually rugose.{\i  S., C. & W. Europe, northwards to N. France, Czechoslovakia & C. Ukraine; occasionally as a weed or casual further north.} Al Au Az Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Variable in flower-size and fruit-pubescence.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. ellipticum} Ledeb. in Eichw., {\i Pl. Nov. It. Casp.-Cauc.} 10 (1831). Like {\b 1} but corolla 2·3-3·4 mm; stigma shorter and wider, usually more or less papillose; fruit glabrous.{\i  S. part of U.S.S.R.} Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 3. H. lasiocarpum} Fischer & C. A. Meyer,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Petrop.}{\b  4}: 38 (1838). Like {\b 1} but stigma shorter and wider, papillose or hairy; fruit densely hairy.{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E). ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 4. H. dolosum} De Not., {\i Repert. Fl. Ligust.} 284 (1844). Flowers scented. Sepals 0·8-1·1 mm wide, lanceolate, usually appressed-pubescent, curving upwards round the developing fruit, though often patent later. Corolla 3-5 mm. Anthers 1·1-1·5 mm. Stigma conical, hairy. Fruit glabrous, smooth. {\i Usually coastal. C. & E. Mediterranean region and coast of Black Sea}. Bu Cr Gr It Rm Rs (W) ?Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. H. suaveolens} Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3}: 116 (1819). Annual; stems up to 40 cm, erect or ascending, more or less appressed-pubescent. Leaves up to 5·5 × 2·8 cm, ovate to elliptical, cuneate to rounded at the base, rounded to subacute at the apex, appressed-pubescent; petiole up to 3·5 cm. Flowers scented. Sepals 2-3·5 mm, linear-oblong, with dense, patent hairs. Corolla 4-6·5 mm; limb (3·5-)4·5-8 mm in diameter, white. Anthers inserted near base of corolla-tube. Stigma 0·1-0·5 mm, shortly conical or hemispherical, entire or shallowly 2- to 4-lobed, about as long as wide, usually pubescent or papillose. Fruit splitting into 4 nutlets.{\i  S.E. Europe, extending to S. Italy and Sicilia.} Bu ?Co ?Cr Gr It Rm Rs (W, K, E) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. suaveolens: Ripe fruit 1·5-2 mm, light brown, usually hairy.{\i  S.E. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b bocconei}(Guss.) Brummitt, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 67 (1971) ({\i H. bocconei} Guss.): Ripe fruit 1-1·7 mm, blackish-brown, usually glabrous.{\i  Italy and Sicilia, perhaps Corse}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. H. halacsyi} Riedl, {\i Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}){\b  69}: 89 (1966) ({\i H. bocconei} sensu Hayek pro parte, non Guss.). Like {\b 5} but anthers inserted at middle of corolla-tube; stigma c. 2·2 mm, filiform, deeply bifid, glabrous; fruit glabrous. •{\i  W. Greece}. Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. H. hirsutissimum} Grauer,{\i  Pl. Min. Cogn. Dec.} 1 (1784). Like {\b 5} in habit and vegetative characters but stems and petioles with dense, greyish or yellowish, patent hairs c. 1 mm. Flowers scented. Sepals 3-4 mm, linear-oblong, with dense, patent hairs. Corolla 5-8 mm; limb 4-8 mm in diameter, white, with 5 scales in the throat. Anthers inserted near base of corolla-tube. Stigma shallowly hemispherical, wider than long, pubescent. Fruit splitting into 4 nutlets, glabrous.{\i  C. & S. Greece, S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. H. micranthos} (Pallas) Bunge, {\i Beitr. Kenntn. Fl. Russl.} 223 (1852). Annual; stems up to 30 cm, glabrous below, sparsely setose above. Leaves up to 4 × 1·2 cm, narrowly elliptical to
\par

\par
85}
\par