{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 ovate, cuneate to rounded at the base, subacute, hirsute beneath subglabrous above; petiole as long as or longer than lamina. Inflorescence very lax, few-flowered; pedicels up to 1-8 cm. Sepals 2 mm, linear-oblong, rather sparsely hairy, accrescent and up to 4 mm in fruit. Corolla c. 2·5 mm; limb very small, white. Style almost as long as stigma; stigma conical, densely hairy. Fruit splitting into 4 nutlets, sericeous.{\i  S.E. Russia} ({\i near Astrakhan}). Rs (E). ({\i C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. H. arguzioides} Kar. & Kir.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou }{\b 15}: 406 (1842). Perennial; stems up to 40 cm, erect, branched, more or less appressed-pubescent with deflexed hairs, glabrescent below. Leaves up to 3 × 1·5 cm, ovate, cuneate at the base, subacute, margins crenulate-undulate; petiole up to 1 cm. Racemes very short, each branch up to 1 cm and with not more than 8 flowers. Calyx 2 mm, lobed to c. ½ way; lobes oblong. Corolla 3·5-4 mm; lobes very short, white. Anthers inserted in upper part of corolla-tube. Style as long as or longer than the stigma; stigma conical, subentire or lobed, papillose-hairy. Fruit splitting into 4 nutlets, which are white-sericeous dorsally. {\i S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E). ({\i S.W. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. H. curassavicum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 130 (1753). Perennial, glabrous and rather glaucous and fleshy throughout; stems up to 70 cm, procumbent. Leaves up to 4 × 1 cm, spathulate to linear-oblong; lateral veins scarcely visible. Sepals 1-2 mm, ovate. Corolla 1-2·5 mm; limb c. 2 mm in diameter, white. stigma shortly conical. Fruit splitting into 4 nutlets, glabrous.{\i  Sandy saline places near the sea. Naturalized in S. Europe}. [Az Bl Ga Hs Lu Rm Sa Si.] ({\i North and South America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. H. amplexicaule} Vahl,{\i  Symb. Bot. }{\b 3}: 21 (1794) ({\i Cochranea anchusifolia} (Poiret) Gurke). Perennial; stems up to 60 cm woody at the base, glandular-hairy above. Leaves c. 5 × 1·5 cm elliptic- to linear-oblong, sessile and cuneate to slightly amplexicaul at the base, acute, the margins undulate. Sepals 2-4 mm, linear-lanceolate, glandular-hairy. Corolla 5-7 mm; limb 4-8 mm in diameter, purple. Stigma shortly conical or hemispherical, entire or shallowly 2- to 4-lobed, about as long as wide, usually pubescent or papillose. Fruit splitting into 2 nutlets. {\i Widely cultivated for ornament; naturalized in C. Italy and perhaps elsewhere. }[It.] ({\i South America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  H. arborescens} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat}. ed. 10, {\b 2}: 913 (1759), which differs from {\b 11} in having leaves more than 1·2 cm wide and 4 nutlets, is widely cultivated for its fragrant flowers and occasionally naturalized for short periods in S. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. H. supinum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 130 (1753). Annual, branched at the base, the central branch erect, the lateral procumbent. Leaves up to 3·5 × 2 cm, narrowly elliptical to suborbicular, rounded or cuneate at the base, whitish-pubescent at least beneath, the veins conspicuously impressed above; petiole 0·3-1·5(-2) cm. Calyx 2-2·5 mm, lobed to less than ¼ of its length, tubular, accrescent in fruit and becoming pyriform, closely enfolding the fruit and falling with it. Corolla 2·5-3 mm, the limb white. Style almost as long as stigma, inserted slightly obliquely on the ovary; stigma conical, hairy, often shallowly bifid. Fruit a single one-seeded nutlet.{\i  S. Europe, extending northwards to Hungary}. Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subfam.  {\b   Boraginoideae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Style gynobasic, without a glandular ring.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 3.            Arnebia}           Forskal
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.H. Valentine.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, biennial or perennial herbs. Flowers usually dimorphic and heterostylous, in terminal, bracteate cymes. Calyx lobed almost to the base. Corolla yellow, blue or violet, infundibuliform, without scales; tube with a ring of hairs at the base. Stamens included, inserted at mouth or in middle of tube. Style included or exserted, divided into 2 or 4; stigma capitate or bifid. Nutlets erect, ovoid or oblong, acute, tuberculate, with flat base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. decumbens} (Vent.) Cosson & Kralik,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b 4}: 398, 402 (1857). Annual. Stems 5-20 cm, erect, with patent and not very dense hairs. Leaves 20-50 × 3-10 mm, lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, hairy, the lower obtuse, the upper acute. Inflorescence terminal, erect, up to 10 cm in fruit. Bracts linear-lanceolate, slightly exceeding flowers. Calyx 6-8 mm, hairy, with long, linear segments. Corolla 10-15 mm, almost tubular, hairy yellow; limb 2-4 mm in diameter; lobes 1-2 mm. Nutlets 2 mm grey, shallowly tuberculate.{\i  Sandy or stony places. S.E. Russia} ({\i near Astrakhan}'). Rs (E). ({\i N. Africa, S., W. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  4.            Lithospermum}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R. Fernandes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Flowers in terminal and axillary, leafy cymes, sometimes heterostylous. Calyx 5-lobed more or less to the base accrescent. Corolla cylindrical to infundibuliform, whitish; tube with 5 more or less glandular invaginations in the throat and with an annulus at the base. Stamens included, inserted at about the middle of the throat. Style included, simple; stigma 2-lobed. Nutlets 4, detaching completely from the receptacle, smooth, white and shining.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. officinale} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 132 (1753). Perennial; stems 20-100 cm, solitary to many from a stout rhizome, erect, scabrid-pubescent, much-branched above. Leaves up to 10 × 2 cm, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, sometimes linear-lanceolate, very acute, the middle and upper sessile, discolorous, scabrid-pubescent mainly above. Cymes fairly dense in flower. Calyx-lobes oblong-linear, obtuse. Corolla (3-)4-6 mm, yellowish- or greenish-white; tube cylindrical, about as long as calyx. Nutlets 2·7-4 mm, ovoid, obtuse or subacute, rounded dorsally, obtusely keeled ventrally. 2n = 28.{\i  Hedges, thickets and forest-margins. Most of Europe, but rare in parts of the north and west; only as an alien in Finland.} All except Az Cr Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 5.                Neatostema}            I.M. Johnston 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R.Fernandes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Lithospermum} but annual; corolla yellow; tube with a ring or 5 clusters of hairs in the throat; stamens inserted just above the annulus; nutlets light brown, tuberculate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. apulum} (L.) I. M. Johnston, {\i  Jour. Arnold Arb.}{\b  34}: 6 (1953) ({\i Lithospermum apulum} (L.) Vahl). Stems 3-30 cm, solitary to many, erect, hispid, corymbosely branched above. Leaves up to 7 × 0·5 cm, setose mainly on the margins; the cauline linear or oblong-linear, erect, sessile, acute; the basal linear- to oblong-spathulate, attenuate into petiole. Cymes dense. Calyx 3·5-4 mm; lobes linear, acute, hispid outside, softly white-hairy inside, triangular in fruit. Corolla 6-6·5 mm; tube slightly exceeding calyx; lobes of limb glandular-puberulent on both surfaces. Style 0·25-0·5 mm. Nutlets 1·5-1·75 mm, subtetrahedral, contracted at the beak, flat dorsally, keeled ventrally. 2n = 28.{\i  Dry, open habitats. S. Europe.} Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par
86}
\par