{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 6.            Buglossoides}            Moench
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R. Fernandes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Lithospermum} but annual or perennial herbs or dwarf shrubs; cymes all terminal; corolla white, blue or purple, infundibuliform or hypocrateriform, with 5 longitudinal bands of hairs inside, without invaginations, the annulus sometimes discontinuous; stamens sometimes inserted near base of tube; nutlets sometimes tuberculate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perennial; corolla 12-20 mm; nutlets smooth or punctate
\par
  reticulate, white or yellowish, shining
\par
2 Flowering stems procumbent, arising from previous year's growth;
\par
  leaves widest at the middle, not acuminate; corolla blue ................ {\b 3. calabra}
\par
2 Flowering stems erect, arising from the rhizome; leaves
\par
  widest below the middle; corolla at first purple, then blue
\par
3 Leaves sessile, amplexicaul, the lowest scale-like;
\par
  corolla 12-14 mm; filaments inserted 1-1·5 mm above the
\par
  base of the corolla-tube .................................................................. {\b 2. gastonii}
\par
3 Lower leaves attenuate into petiole, not scale-like;
\par
  corolla (12-)14-19 mm; filaments inserted 5-8 mm above
\par
  the base of the corolla-tube ............................................... {\b 1. purpurocaerulea}
\par
1 Annual; corolla not more than 10 mm; nutlets ± 
\par
  tuberculate, brownish or greyish, not shining
\par
4 Plant very glandular .................................................................. {\b 6. glandulosa}
\par
4 Plant eglandular or with some glandular hairs on inflorescence
\par
5 Indumentum of calyx yellowish; nutlets with a very 
\par
  fragile pericarp, distinctly 2-gibbous, with the base
\par
  0·5-0·75 mm wide ....................................................................... {\b 7. tenuiflora}
\par
5 Indumentum of calyx whitish; nutlets with ± hard 
\par
  pericarp, not or only slightly 2-gibbous, with the base
\par
  more than 0·75 mm wide
\par
6 Calyx c. ½ as long as corolla-tube, very densely 
\par
  hispid; lobes obtuse ........................................................................ {\b 5. minima}
\par
6 Calyx distinctly more than ½ as long as corolla-tube,
\par
  with long, sparse hairs; lobes acute ............................................... {\b 4. arvensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. purpurocaerulea} (L.) I. M. Johnston,{\i  Jour. Arnold Arb.}{\b  35}: 44 (1954) ({\i Lithospermum purpurocaeruleum} L.). Perennial; flowering stems 15-60(-70) cm, arising from a rhizome, erect,unbranched, with appressed hairs below and more patent hairs above. Leaves 3·5-8 × 0·7-1·5 cm, lanceolate to narrowly elliptical, very acute. Cymes 2-3. Calyx 6-8·5 mm; lobes linear,acute, setose. Corolla (12-)14-19 mm, at first reddish-purple,then bright blue. Filaments inserted 5-8 mm above the base of the corolla-tube. Style 6·5-9 mm. Nutlets 3·5-5 × 3-3·5 mm, ovoid-globose, convex dorsally, obtusely keeled ventrally, white, smooth, shining. 2n = 16.{\i  Scrub and wood-margins.S. & C. Europe, extending to Britain and S.C. Russia. }Al Au Be Br Bu ?Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. gastonii} (Bentham) I. M. Johnston, {\i op. cit.} 45 (1954)({\i Lithospermum gastonii} Bentham). Perennial; flowering stems 10-30 cm, arising from a rhizome, erect, unbranched, appressed-hairy. Leaves up to 6·5 × 2·5 cm, the middle and upper crowded, ovate-lanceolate or lanceolate, semiamplexicaul, acuminate, appressed-hairy, the lowest scale-like. Cymes solitary or paired; flowers crowded; pedicels nearly as long as the calyx. Calyx-lobes linear-lanceolate, acute. Corolla 12-14 mm, at first purple or violet, then blue. Filaments inserted 1-1·5 mm above the base of corolla-tube. Style 0·5-1 mm. Nutlets 4·5 × 4·5 mm, ovoid, acute, keeled near the apex, yellowish, punctate-reticulate.{\i  Mountain woods and rocky slopes. • W. Pyrenees. }Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. B. calabra} (Ten.) I. M. Johnston, {\i op. cit.} 45 (1954) ({\i Lithospermum calabrum} Ten.). Perennial; stems 30-80 cm, procumbent, slender, patent-hairy, the flowering stems unbranched arising from previous year's growth from a rosette of persistent coriaceous leaves. Leaves up to 4 × 1·5 cm, elliptical or ovate-oblong, acute or obtuse. Cymes solitary, few-flowered; pedicels short. Calyx 6-7 mm; lobes linear, hairy. Corolla 17-20 mm blue, 2-3 times as long as the calyx. Stamens inserted c. 2 mm above the base of the corolla-tube. Style 1-2 mm. Nutlets 3·5 × 2·5 mm, ellipsoid, convex dorsally, obtuse ventrally, white, smooth, shining. 2n = 20.{\i  Rocky places on mountains. • S. Italy.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. B. arvensis} (L.) I. M. Johnston,{\i  op. cit.} 42 (1954) ({\i Lithospermum arvense} L.). Annual; stems (1·5-)5-50(-90) cm, solitary to many, appressed-setulose-hispid. Lowest leaves oblong-spathulate or obovate, obtuse, the others oblong to linear, acute or subacute, usually erect. Cymes solitary or paired. Calyx-lobes linear or linear-lanceolate, unequal, acute. Corolla (4-)6-9 mm, white, purplish or blue. Stamens inserted below the middle of the corolla-tube. Nutlets brownish, hard. 2n = 28, 42.{\i  Most of Europe.} All except Az Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Nutlets 2·5-4 × 1·5-2·5 mm, with crowded, prominent tubercules;
\par
  corolla 6-9·5 mm, white (rarely purplish), infundibuliform;
\par
  calyx usually equalling or longer than corolla-tube in flower;
\par
  pedicels cylindrical in fruit ............................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b arvensis}
\par
1 Nutlets 2-3 × 1·5-2 mm; corolla 4-8 mm, blue or white,
\par
  hypocrateriform; calyx usually distinctly shorter than
\par
  corolla-tube in flower
\par
2 Pedicels cylindrical in fruit; receptacle not oblique
\par
  in fruit; adaxial nutlet not embedded in receptacles 
\par
  and pedicel; nutlets with prominent tubercles ........ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b sibthorpiana}
\par
2 Pedicels obconical or clavate in fruit; receptacle ± 
\par
  oblique in fruit; adaxial nutlet ± embedded in the receptacle 
\par
  and pedicel; nutlets with small, low tubercles
\par
3 Stems 1·5-17(-45) cm, usually many, procumbent or ascending;
\par
  cauline leaves 1·5-4(-6) mm wide ............................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b gasparrinii}
\par
3 Stems 10-65 cm, usually solitary, erect, cauline leaves
\par
  up to 8(-10) mm wide .................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b permixta}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  arvensis}: stems 10-50(-90) cm, solitary, usually erect, sometimes branched, sparsely hispid. Cauline leaves up to 8(-10) mm wide, oblong, obovate-oblong or oblong-spathulate to linear. Corolla white or with a blue zone at about the middle of the tube, rarely purplish. Pedicels cylindrical in fruit. Receptacle not oblique in fruit. 2n = 28.{\i  Cultivated ground and dry, open habitats. Almost throughout the range of the species. }
\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28  Plants with 2n = 42 from Portugal (and perhaps from elsewhere in S. Europe) have the pedicels shorter and thicker in fruit and less expanded corollas than in those of N. Europe. They should probably be distinguished as a separate subspecies.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b permixta}(Jordan ex F. W. Schultz) R. Fernandes,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 379 (1971) ({\i Lithospermum permixtum} Jordan ex F. W. Schultz): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but pedicels obconical in fruit; receptacle oblique; corolla 5-7 mm, blue; nutlets 2·75-3 × 2 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  S. W. & W. C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b gasparrinii}(Heldr. ex Guss.) R. Fernandes,{\i  loc. cit.} (1971) ({\i Lithospermum gasparrinii }Heldr. ex Guss., {\i L. incrassatum} Guss.): stems 1·5-17(-45) cm, usually numerous, the central erect, the others procumbent or ascending, densely leafy, densely hispid. Cauline leaves 1·5-4(-6) mm wide, linear or oblong. Pedicels obliquely clavate. Receptacle very oblique. Corolla 4-6·5(-8) mm, usually blue or blue-violet. Nutlets 1·5-2·5 × (1-)1·5-2 mm, contracted into a short beak. {\i Mountain grassland. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b sibthorpiana}(Griseb.) R. Fernandes, {\i loc. cit}. (1971) ({\i Lithospermum sibthorpianum} Griseb., {\i L. leithneri} Heldr. &
\par

\par
87}
\par