{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Sart.): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but pedicels cylindrical; receptacle not or only slightly oblique in fruit; corolla usually white; nutlets 2·5-2·75 × 1·5-1·75 mm, more attenuate than in subsp. ({\b c}). {\i S.E. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. B. minima} (Moris) R. Fernandes,{\i  loc. cit.} (1971) ({\i Lithospermum minimum} Moris). Annual; stems 2-10(-27) cm, solitary or few, erect or ascending, simple or sparingly branched, appressed-hispid. Basal leaves obovate or oblong, obtuse, the others oblong to oblong-linear, obtuse or acute. Calyx 1·5-3 mm in flower, 4-6 mm in fruit, very densely appressed-hispid with rather long hairs; lobes oblong, usually obtuse. Corolla 4-6 mm, blue or white, densely hispid outside; tube 2·5-4·5 mm, cylindrical, abruptly dilated at the limb. Nutlets 2-2·75 × 1·25-1·75 mm, subtrigonous-conical, not much constricted below the beak, brownish, tuberculate-echinulate.{\i  Dry places. • S. W. Italy, Sicilia, Sardegna.} It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Considered by some authors as identical with{\b  7}, because their corolla-tubes are very alike; but it approaches rather more {\b 4}({\b d}) (mainly the dwarf littoral variants from Greece), from which it differs in the more densely hispid and relatively longer corolla-tube, the oblong-linear, obtuse calyx-lobes and the smaller base of the nutlets.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. B. glandulosa} (Velen.) R. Fernandes,{\i  loc. cit.} (1971) ({\i Lithospermum glandulosum} Velen.). Hispid and glandular annual; stems numerous, erect. Basal leaves spathulate, narrowed into petiole, the cauline oblong-spathulate to linear, undulate or dentate. Cymes short; pedicels short, slightly thickened in fruit. Calyx-lobes linear-subulate, setose. Corolla 6-8 mm, white. Nutlets ovoid, acute, brownish, more or less tuberculate, dull. •{\i  Bulgaria, S.E. Romania.} Bu Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. B. tenuiflora} (L. fil.) I. M. Johnston,{\i  Jour. Arnold Arb.}{\b  35}: 42 (1954) ({\i Lithospermum tenuiflorum} L. fil.). Annual; stems (5-)10-30(-50) cm, simple or branched above, usually erect, appressed-hispid. Cauline leaves 15-40 × (2-)3-8 mm, oblong-spathulate to linear, obtuse. Cymes up to 8(-12) cm in fruit, paired or 3 together; flowers crowded; pedicels very short, not or only slightly thickened in fruit. Calyx 3-4 mm, up to 10 mm in fruit, with dense, yellowish, subappressed setae; lobes linear-lanceolate, obtuse. Corolla 5-6 mm, bluish-violet, rarely white; tube narrowly cylindrical, somewhat expanded at the base. Nutlets c. 2 mm, erect or slightly incurved, urceolate in outline, distinctly 2-gibbous laterally on the back, abruptly contracted into a beak, densely and minutely tuberculate; pericarp very fragile. {\i Dry hills and cultivated ground. S.E. Europe.} Gr Ju Rs (E) ?Si. ({\i S.W. & C. Asia, N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 7.         Lithodora}            Griseb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R. Fernandes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dwarf shrubs. Flowers in terminal, leafy cymes. Calyx 5-lobed more or less to the base, slightly accrescent. Corolla blue, purple or white, infundibuliform or hypocrateriform; tube without scales or invaginations in the throat, without a basal annulus, sometimes glandular or villous. Stamens usually included. Style simple or branched above. Nutlets usually 1(-2), circumscissile above the base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla glabrous outside
\par
2 Leaves up to 15(-20) × 4·5 mm, oblong-ovate to oblanceolate
\par
  with flat or slightly inflexed margin; calyx setose, c. ½ as
\par
  long as corolla-tube ...................................................................... {\b 3. hispidula}
\par
2 Leaves 20-40 × 2-4 mm, linear or oblong-linear with 
\par
  strongly revolute margin; calyx softly hairy, more than
\par
  ½ as long as corolla-tube .................................................................. {\b 4. zahnii}
\par
1 Corolla sericeous or setulose outside
\par
3 Leaves obovate to obovate-oblong, not more than 3 times
\par
  as long as wide
\par
4 Leaves obtuse, sparsely hispidulous above, whitish-
\par
  sericeous beneath; calyx-lobes not more than 1 mm wide,
\par
  linear, subacute .............................................................................. {\b 5. oleifolia}
\par
4 Leaves shortly acuminate, mucronate, very densely
\par
  whitish-sericeous on both surfaces; calyx-lobes  1·25-
\par
  1·5 mm wide, lanceolate-oblong, acuminate ..................................... {\b 6. nitada}
\par
3 Leaves linear to lanceolate, usually more than 3 times
\par
  as long as wide
\par
5 Stamens inserted at different levels in the corolla-
\par
  tube or throat; corolla-throat ±densely hairy ................................... {\b 7. diffusa}
\par
5 Stamens all inserted at the same level at the apex or 
\par
  near the base of the corolla-tube; corolla-throat glabrous
\par
6 Corolla setulose throughout; leaves 10-60 × 1-10 mm,
\par
  sparsely appressed-setose above; anthers c. 1·75 mm ......... {\b 1. rosmarinifolia}
\par
6 Corolla setulose only on the lobes (sometimes very 
\par
  sparsely so); leaves not more than 23 × 3·5 mm, patent-
\par
  hispid; anthers 2·5-3 mm .............................................................. {\b 2. fruticosa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. rosmarinifolia} (Ten.) I. M. Johnston, {\i Contr. Gray Herb.} nov. ser., {\b 73}: 56 (1924) ({\i Lithospermum rosmarinifolium} Ten.). Caespitose dwarf shrub 30-60 cm; branches erect or pendent, greyish-appressed-hairy above. Leaves 10-60 × 1-10 mm, linear to lanceolate, acute or subacute, rigid, dark green, sparsely appressed-setulose or glabrous above, densely greyish-appressed-setose beneath; margin inflexed or strongly revolute. Calyx c. 6 mm, whitish-appressed-setose. Corolla blue, lilac or whitish, setulose on the outside, mainly at the middle; tube c. 12 mm; limb c. 17 mm in diameter, with oblong lobes, rounded at the apex. Anthers c. 1·75 mm. Nutlets whitish, smooth. 2n = 26. {\i Rock-crevices. S. Italy, Sicilia.} It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. fruticosa} (L.) Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 531 (1846) ({\i Lithospermum fruticosum} L.). Caespitose dwarf shrub 15-60 cm; branches erect, tortuous, the oldest dark grey, the younger whitish-setose. Leaves up to 23 × 1-2·5(-3·5) mm, oblong-linear or linear, obtuse, those of the current year concolorous, whitish and appressed-setulose on both surfaces, the older coriaceous, patently tuberculate-hispid mainly on the strongly revolute margin and on the veins beneath. Calyx c. 6 mm, hispid. Corolla 12-15 mm, purplish-violet or blue, sparsely setulose on the lobes outside. Anthers 2·5-3 mm. Nutlets c. 4 × 2 mm, ovoid, strongly constricted just above the base, whitish, striate. 2n = 28. {\i Dry ground; calcicole. S., C. & E. Spain, S. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. hispidula} (Sibth. & Sm.) Griseb., {\i loc. cit.} (1846) ({\i Lithospermum hispidulum} Sibth. & Sm.). Much-branched dwarf shrub 10-35 cm; branches short, stiff, whitish-appressed-setulose. Leaves up to 15(-20) × 4·5 mm (usually smaller), oblong-obovate to oblanceolate, obtuse or acute, coriaceous, dark green, appressed-setulose and patently tuberculate-hispid above, strongly whitish-appressed-setulose beneath; margin flat or more or less inflexed. Cymes 1- to 4-flowered. Calyx c. 7 mm; lobes appressed-setose. Corolla bluish-violet, glabrous; tube c. 12 mm; limb c. 10 mm in diameter, with short, rounded lobes. Anthers 2 mm. Nutlets ovoid-trigonous, white, minutely tuberculate.{\i  Rock-crevices and other dry places. Kriti and Karpathos.} Cr. ({\i E. Mediterranean.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. zahnii} (Heldr. ex Halácsy) I. M. Johnston,{\i  Contr. Gray Herb.} nov. ser.,{\b  73}: 56 (1924) ({\i Lithospermum zahnii} Heldr. ex Halácsy). Much-branched dwarf shrub up to 40(-60) cm, forming
\par

\par
88}
\par