{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 dense tufts up to 90 cm in diameter; branches erect, the older black and leafless, the younger densely leafy, sericeous. Leaves 20-40 × 2-4 mm, linear or oblong-linear, more or less obtuse, coriaceous, green or greyish and appressed-hispid above, densely greyish-setose beneath; margin strongly revolute. Cymes 1- to 3-flowered. Calyx (6·5-)8-11 mm; lobes linear, densely and softly white-appressed-hairy. Corolla blue or white, hypocrateriform, glabrous; tube c. 10 mm; limb 13-15 mm in diameter with patent, ovate, obtuse lobes. Anthers 2-2·5 mm. Nutlets smooth. {\i Cliffs. S. Greece }({\i S.E. of Kalamai}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. oleifolia} (Lapeyr.) Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel.} {\b 2}: 531 (1846) ({\i Lithospermum oleifolium} Lapeyr.). Laxly branched dwarf shrub with slender, diffuse ascending stems 10-45 cm, leafless for some distance at the base. Leaves up to 4 × 1·5 cm, obovate or obovate-oblong, obtuse, shortly petiolate, dull green and sparsely hispidulous above, whitish-sericeous beneath, not very thick, crowded at the apex of short non-flowering branches or surrounding the base of the flowering ones; leaves of flowering branches smaller and sparser. Cymes 3- to 7-flowered. Calyx 5-8(-10) mm, whitish-sericeous; lobes not more than 1 mm wide, linear, subacute. Corolla at first pale pink, then blue, sericeous outside, glabrous inside; tube 8-12 mm; lobes c. 3 mm, rounded. Nutlets c. 3 × 2·25 mm, broadly ovoid, contracted into a short beak, greyish-white, smooth.{\i  Rocks. • E. Pyrenees} ({\i a small region c. 25 km W.N.W. of Figueras});{\i  planted in a few places on the French side of the frontier.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. nitida} (Ern) R. Fernandes,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 73 (1971) ({\i Lithospermum oleifolium} subsp.{\i  nitidum} Ern). Like {\b 5} in habit but leaves not more than 2 × 0·8 cm, elliptical-obovate, shortly acuminate, mucronate, sessile, very densely whitish-sericeous on both surfaces, hairs shorter, stiffer and more appressed; cymes 2- to 5-flowered; calyx-lobes 1·25-1·5 mm wide, lanceolate-oblong, acuminate; corolla-tube up to 14 mm; lobes c. 5·5 mm, ovate-oblong, obtuse. 2n = 50.{\i  Stony places, }1800-1900{\i  m. • S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Mágina}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. L. diffusa} (Lag.) I. M. Johnston,{\i  Contr. Gray Herb.} nov. ser., {\b 73}: 56 (1924) ({\i Lithospermum diffusum} Lag.). Stems with appressed and patent setae. Leaves obtuse, more or less discolorous, setose on both surfaces, the older ones tuberculate hispid above. Calyx (5-)6-8(-10) mm. Corolla up to 21 mm, infundibuliform or hypocrateriform, appressed-hairy outside. Stamens inserted at different levels in the corolla-tube or throat. Nutlets pale brown to greyish, smooth.{\i  Pinewoods, scrub, hedges and maritime sands; usually calcifuge. S.W. Europe, extending northwards to N.W. France.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b diffusa}({\i Lithospermum prostratum} Loisel.): Diffuse; branches up to 60 cm, procumbent or climbing, flexuous. Leaves 7-38 × 1-8 mm, patent, linear to oblong or elliptical, flat or more or less inflexed at the margin. Corolla blue, rarely purple; throat with a wide ring of very dense, white, soft, long hairs. Anthers 1·5-1·75 mm, oblong. Nutlets 3·25-4 × 2 mm, oblong, somewhat acute. 2n = 24.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lusitanica}(Samp.) P. Silva & Rozeira, {\i Agron. Lusit.}{\b  24}: 170 (1964): Erect, much-branched, forming dense tufts. Leaves up to 23 × 3·5(-6) mm, appressed to the stems, linear, strongly revolute, thick. Corolla blue; throat sparsely or somewhat densely hairy. Anthers c. 0·5 mm, suborbicular. Nutlets 2·5-3 × 2 mm, ovoid, obtuse.{\i  C. & S. Portugal, S. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 8.           Macrotomia}          DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.H. Valentine.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Flowers in short, terminal, bracteate cymes clustered to form a head. Calyx lobed to the base. Corolla violet or yellow, infundibuliform, without scales or annulus. Stamens included, inserted at or above the middle of the tube. Style included; stigma emarginate or bifid. Nutlets ovoid or trigonous, erect, keeled, slightly concave at base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. densiflora} (Ledeb. ex Nordm.) Macbride,{\i  Contr. Gray Herb.} nov. ser.,{\b  48}: 56 (1916) ({\i M. cephalotes} (A. DC.) Boiss.). Perennial. Stock up to 7 × 4 cm, stout, erect or horizontal, covered with lanate bases of old leaves. Current basal leaves up to 10 × 2 cm, forming a rosette, lanceolate, acute, sessile, entire, with appressed hairs. Stem 15-20 cm, simple or branched above, erect, clothed with linear-lanceolate leaves and terminating in a cluster of cymes to form a dense head 5-10 cm in diameter. Calyx-lobes linear, acute, pectinate-setose. Corolla up to 3 cm; tube twice as long as calyx; limb 2 cm in diameter, patent, golden-yellow. Nutlets minutely pitted. {\i Mountain rocks. S. Greece} ({\i Aroania Oros}). Gr. ({\i Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 9.       Onosma}             L.        
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball assisted by H. Riedhl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Biennial or perennial, hispid herbs. Flowers in terminal, usually branched, bracteate cymes. Calyx lobed almost to the base, often accrescent. Corolla yellow, whitish or purplish, tubular to tubular-campanulate, with 5 short, patent or deflexed lobes, without scales, but with an annulus near the base. Stamens included or exserted, inserted at about the middle of the corolla; anthers sagittate at base, usually with a projecting connective at the apex. Style exserted; stigma capitate to bifid. Nutlets sometimes fewer than 4 by abortion, ovoid or trigonous, acute or beaked, erect, smooth or tuberculate, with triangular, flat base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Literature: S. Jávorka,{\i  Ann. Hist.-Nat. Mus. Hung.}{\b  4}: 406-449 (1906); {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}){\b  66}: 1-9, 57-75 (1928). C.C. Lacaita,{\i  Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.} nov. ser., {\b 31}: 18-35 (1924). G. Stroh,{\i  Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  59B}: 430-454 (1939). M. G. Popov, {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 14}: 287-304 (1951).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In addition to the setae with an enlarged base, known from many genera of the Boraginaceae, many species of Onosma have setae with usually 4-20 rays arising from the base. These are referred to as stellate setae, and are fully described by Jávorka ({\i loc. cit}.). The central seta is occasionally absent from these hairs, but usually it is distinctly longer and stouter than the rays. The descriptions of the stellate setae in this account are of those found on the lower leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The genus presents considerable taxonomic difficulty, particularly in C. & S.E. Europe, which cannot be satisfactorily resolved without experimental investigation. The presence or absence of stellate setae is widely used as a major character in the genus, but in a number of species (particularly {\b 13}-{\b 20}) there may be a wide range of variation in the presence, frequency and length of the stellate setae. There has, in the past, been considerable nomenclatural confusion and the following names have been widely misapplied: {\i O. echioides} L.,{\i  O. setosa }Ledeb., {\i O. stellulata }Waldst. & Kit. and {\i O. taurica} Willd.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b    O. fruticosa} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 122 (1806), a species endemic to Cyprus, has been recorded in error from Kriti.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All species occur in dry, sunny habitats.
\par

\par
89}
\par