{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1.Deciduous; stamens 5; ovary and immature capsule strigose ........ {\b 1. luteum}
\par 
1 Evergreen; stamens usually 10; ovary and immature 
\par 
  capsule glabrous or lepidote
\par 
2 Leaves at least 6 cm, glabrous; ovary and immature 
\par 
  capsule glabrous .......................................................................... {\b 2. ponticum}
\par 
2 Leaves not more than 4 cm, hairy or lepidote; ovary and
\par 
  immature capsule lepidote
\par 
3 Procumbent; corolla glabrous; stamens 5-8 ........................... {\b 6. lapponicum}
\par 
3 Erect; corolla lepidote outside; stamens 10
\par 
4 Leaves ciliate ............................................................................... {\b 5. hirsutum}
\par 
4 Leaves not ciliate
\par 
5 Leaves acute or mucronate; pedicels glabrous; style 
\par 
  about twice as long as ovary ................................................... {\b 3. ferrugineum}
\par 
5 Leaves obtuse; pedicels pubescent; style about as long
\par 
  as ovary ................................................................................... {\b 4. myrtifolium}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. luteum} Sweet,{\i  Hort. Brit.} ed. 2, 343 (1830) ({\i Azalea pontica} L.,{\i  R. flavum} G. Don fil.). Erect, deciduous shrub 2-4 m, spreading by suckers; young twigs glandular-pubescent. Leaves 6-12 × 2-4 cm, oblong-lanceolate, cuspidate, ciliate-serrulate, shortly strigose above and on the veins beneath, somewhat glaucous. Flowers in crowded, umbel-like racemes terminating leafless shoots; pedicels glandular-pubescent. Calyx 5-7 mm, deeply lobed; lobes narrowly oblong, ciliate. Corolla yellow, pubescent outside; tube 10-15 mm, narrow; limb 50 mm in diameter. Stamens 5. Ovary glandular-strigose.{\i  Woods, usually coniferous, or wet, peaty ground. E. & E.C. Europe, in a few scattered localities from N.W. Jugoslavia to S. White Russia. }Au Ju Po Rs (C, W) [Br]. ({\i Anatolia and Caucasus}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 2. R. ponticum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 562 (1762). Erect, evergreen shrub 2-5(-8) m, with spreading branches. Leaves 8-25 cm, entire, coriaceous, dark shining green above, paler beneath, glabrous. Racemes with 8-15 flowers; pedicels 2-6 cm. Calyx 1-2 mm; lobes rounded. Corolla 40-60 mm, campanulate, violet-purple; tube somewhat shorter than lobes. Stamens 10. Ovary glabrous.{\i  In woods or by streams in the mountains; calcifuge. E. part of Balkan peninsula; S. Spain, C. & S. Portugal; cultivated elsewhere for ornament and extensively naturalized in parts of N.W. Europe}. Bu Hs Lu Tu [Be Br Ga Hb].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ponticum}: Leaves 12-18(-25) cm, obovate, 2½-3½ times as long as wide; inflorescence-axis more or less glabrous. {\i Turkey-in-Europe and S.E. Bulgaria} ({\i Istrancadaglari}). ({\i W. Caucasus, Anatolia, Lebanon.})
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b baeticum} (Boiss. & Reuter) Hand.-Mazz., {\i Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 23}: 53 (1909) ({\i R. baeticum }Boiss. & Reuter): Leaves 6-12(-16) cm, elliptic-oblong, 3-5 times as long as wide; inflorescence-axis tomentose. •{\i  S. Spain, C. & S. Portugal}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. R. ferrugineum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 392 (1753). Evergreen shrub 50-120 cm; branches numerous, erect; young twigs ferruginous-lepidote. Leaves 2-4 cm, elliptic-oblong, acute or mucronate, entire, dark shining green above, densely lepidote beneath with ferruginous scales (yellowish when young); margin revolute. Racemes with 6-10 flowers; pedicels c. 8 mm, glabrous. Calyx c. 1·5 mm, ciliate. Corolla 15 mm, campanulate-infundibuliform, with lobes about as long as tube, deep pinkish-red, lepidote outside. Stamens 10. Style twice as long as ovary; ovary lepidote.{\i  Mountain slopes and open woods or scrub; often dominant over large areas in dwarf-shrub zone; somewhat calcifuge. • Alps, Pyrenees, Jura, mountains of W. Jugoslavia; rarely in adjacent lowlands.} Au Ga Ge He Hs It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. R. myrtifolium} Schott & Kotschy, {\i Bot. Zeit.}{\b  9}: 17 (1851) ({\i R. kotschyi} Simonkai,{\i  R. ferrugineum} subsp.{\i  kotschyi} (Simonkai) Hayek). Like {\b 3} but usually not more than 50 cm; leaves 1-2 cm, obtuse, crenulate, rather less densely lepidote and with lower surface often greenish; pedicels pubescent; corolla clear pink, very sparsely lepidote; style about as long as ovary. Shady rocks and stony slopes. •{\i  E. & S. Carpathians; mountains of Bulgaria and Makedonija.} Bu Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. R. hirsutum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 392 (1753). Like {\b 3} but less densely lepidote throughout and with paler scales; young twigs hairy; leaves 1-3 cm, ciliate, obscurely crenulate, with scarcely revolute margin; pedicels up to 15 mm; calyx 4 mm, with acute, lanceolate lobes; corolla bright pink; style scarcely longer than ovary.{\i  Open woods and scrub, screes and stony slopes; calcicole. • C. & E. Alps, mountains of N. W. Jugoslavia; planted in Jura and W. Carpathians but scarcely naturalized.} Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. R. lapponicum} (L.) Wahlenb.,{\i  Fl. Lapp.} 104 (1812). Procumbent, evergreen dwarf shrub; stems up to 50 cm, freely branched; young twigs densely lepidote. Leaves 0·6-2 cm, obtuse, sparsely lepidote above and densely so beneath with brownish scales, otherwise glabrous; margins revolute. Racemes with 3-6 flowers; pedicels 6-12 mm. Calyx 1·5 mm; lobes triangular, ciliate. Corolla c. 8 × 15 mm, broadly campanulate purple, glabrous. Stamens 5-8. Style much longer than ovary, ovary lepidote. {\i Dry heaths and stony slopes; calcicole. Mountains of Fennoscandia.} Fe No Su. ({\i North America.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 6.          Ledum}          L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen shrubs; leaves alternate, shortly petiolate. Flowers 5-merous, in terminal, umbel-like, more or less corymbose racemes; bracts scarious, deciduous; bracteoles absent. Sepals small, connate for most of their length. Petals free. Stamens (5-)8-10(-14); anthers without appendages. Fruit a septicidal capsule; seeds with very loose testa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. palustre} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 391 (1753). Stems up to 120 cm, decumbent to erect; young twigs ferruginous-tomentose. Leaves 12-50 × 1·5-12 mm, linear to elliptic-oblong, ferruginous-tomentose beneath, deflexed in winter; margins revolute. Flowers numerous; pedicels 5-25 mm, persistently glandular-verrucose and often also ferruginous-tomentose at first, erect in flower, deflexed in fruit. Petals 4-8 mm, obovate, patent, white. Ovary and capsule verrucose-glandular.{\i  Bogs, heaths and coniferous woods. N. & C. Europe, southwards to S. Germany, N.E. Austria and N. Ukraine; extinct in several stations further south.} Au Cz Fe Ge No Po †Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su 
\par 
[*Br].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  A polymorphic, circumpolar species. The two taxa recognized below as subspecies are often treated as separate species, but intermediates are frequent in N.E. Asia. Some populations in Arctic Europe have very narrow leaves with strongly revolute margins, and have been assigned to subsp.{\b  decumbens} (Aiton) Hultén,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} ser. 3,{\b  8}({\b 2}): 8 (1930), which is widespread in arctic and subarctic Asia and America, but it is probably better to regard them as minor variants of subsp.{\i  palustre}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b palustre} (incl.{\i  L. decumbens} sensu N. Busch, vix (Aiton) Loddiges ex Steudel): Leaves narrowly oblong to linear, 4-12 times as long as wide; midrib usually visible from beneath; stamens (7-)10(-11). 2n = c. 52. {\i Throughout the range of the species.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b groenlandicum} (Oeder) Hultén, {\i Fl. Alaska Yukon }1219 (1948) ({\i L. groenlandicum} Oeder): Leaves elliptic-oblong,
\par 

\par 
9}
\par