{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 All setae simple
\par
2 Corolla 8-15 mm
\par
3 Nutlets 6-7 mm, tuberculate
\par
4 Corolla c. 1½ times as long as calyx; anthers shorter 
\par
  than filaments ................................................................................... {\b 2. graeca}
\par
4 Corolla scarcely exceeding calyx; anthers longer than
\par
  filaments ........................................................................................ {\b 3. taygetea}
\par
3 Nutlets 2·5-4(-5) mm, smooth
\par
5 Corolla red or purple, or yellow with a red or purple tinge ........ {\b 10. tinctoria}
\par
5 Corolla pale yellow
\par
6 Corolla 8-12(-15) mm; setae white, sometimes with yellow
\par
  apex .............................................................................................. {\b 10. tinctoria}
\par
6 Corolla 12-15 mm; setae yellow or dull brown .......................... {\b 15. arenaria}
\par
2 Corolla 15-25 mm
\par
7 Nutlets 4-9 mm, with 3 horns at apex .................................. {\b 7. tricerosperma}
\par
7 Nutlets 2-6 mm, not horned
\par
8 Nutlets 4-6 mm, ± tuberculate
\par
9 Corolla puberulent
\par
10 Calyx 12-17 mm in flower, 20-25 mm in fruit; cells in
\par
   tubercles of setae in 1-2 rows ......................................................... {\b 4. visianii}
\par
10 Calyx 15-20 mm in flower, 25-40 mm in fruit; cells in
\par
   tubercles of setae in at least 3 rows ............................................. {\b 5. rhodopea}
\par
9  Corolla glabrous, but sometimes shortly papillose
\par
11 Cauline setae 1-3 mm; plant with long, slender,
\par
   branched woody stock and simple flowering stems .................. {\b 1. frutescens}
\par
11 Longest cauline setae 3-4 mm; plant caespitose with 
\par
   branched flowering stem
\par
12 Calyx 20-30 mm in fruit; corolla 20-25 mm, not papillose ........... {\b 6. setosa}
\par
12 Calyx not more than 20 mm in fruit; corolla 18-20 mm,
\par
   papillose ............................................................................... {\b 7. tricerosperma}
\par
8  Nutlets 2-4 mm, usually smooth
\par
13 Lower leaves white or grey, at least beneath, with 
\par
   very dense, closely appressed setae
\par
14 Calyx 6-8 mm in flower, 10-13 mm in fruit; setae on 
\par
   stem and calyx appressed ..................................................... {\b 8. simplicissima}
\par
14 Calyx 12-15 mm in flower, 20-25 mm in fruit; setae on
\par
   stem and calyx patent ................................................................ {\b 9. polyphylla}
\par
13 Lower leaves green or grey-green with patent or 
\par
   semipatent setae
\par
15 Pedicels 5-8 mm in flower, up to 12 mm in fruit ................. {\b 11. propontica}
\par
15 Pedicels 0-4 mm
\par
16 Corolla c. 1 1/3 times as long as calyx; flowering 
\par
   stems 30-60 cm, with numerous branches .................................. {\b 15. arenaria}
\par
16 Corolla 1½-2 times as long as calyx 
\par
17 Flowering stems 10-20 cm, simple or with 1-2 branches;
\par
   calyx with bright yellow setae when dry ..................................... {\b 12. bubanii}
\par
 17 Flowering stems 20-50 cm, usually with at least 2 branches; 
\par
    calyx with pale yellow or brownish setae when dry
\par
18 Upper surface of leaves densely puberulent between setae  ....{\b 13. fastigiata}
\par
18 Upper surface of leaves sparsely puberulent between setae .. {\b 14. vaudensis}
\par
1  Stellate setae present, at least on the lower leaves
\par
19 Rays of the stellate setae not more than 1/5 as long as the seta 
\par
   on the upper surface of the leaves, not more than 1/4 as long on 
\par
   the lower surface
\par
20 Corolla 10-18 mm
\par
21 Lower leaves 1-4 mm wide
\par
22 Caespitose; calyx (8-)9-12 mm in flower ................................ {\b 19. helvetica}
\par
22 Plant with lax, slender, much-branched stock; calyx 
\par
   6-8 mm in flower ......................................................................... {\b 21. thracica}
\par
21 Lower leaves 4-13 mm wide
\par
23 Leaves ± glabrous between setae ..................................... {\b 17. pseudarenaria}
\par
23 Leaves puberulent between setae
\par
24 Corolla 12-15 mm, c. 1 1/3 times as long as calyx ................... {\b 15. arenaria}
\par
24 Corolla 15-18 mm, usually 1½-2 times as long as calyx
\par
25 Leaves densely puberulent between setae ............................... {\b 13. fastigiata}
\par
25 Leaves sparsely puberulent between setae ................................ {\b 15. arenaria}
\par
20 Corolla 18-25 mm
\par
26 Flowering stems simple or with not more than 4 branches at apex
\par
27 Leaves with mainly simple setae; stellate setae few,
\par
   with rays c. 0·1 mm
\par
28 Biennial, with several flowering stems and usually without
\par
   non-flowering rosettes; upper surface of leaves densely 
\par
   setose and densely puberulent between setae ........................... {\b 13. fastigiata}
\par
28 Perennial, usually with non-flowering rosettes; upper
\par
   surface of leaves sparsely setose and sparsely 
\par
   puberulent between setae ............................,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,.... {\b 14. vaudensis}
\par
27 Leaves with mainly stellate setae and few simple 
\par
   setae; stellate setae with rays at least 0·2 mm
\par
29 Lower leaves linear-oblong, 20-25 times as long as wide; 
\par
   corolla 18-20 mm .............................,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,.......... {\b 18. tridentina}
\par
29 Lower leaves oblong-spathulate, 10-20 times as long as
\par
   wide; corolla (18-)20-24 mm ..................,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,............ {\b 19. helvetic}
\par
26 Flowering stems branched, usually with at least 6 
\par
   branches in the upper half
\par
30 Setae nearly all stellate; anthers 8-10 mm ............,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,..... {\b 20. lucana}
\par
30 Simple setae numerous, particularly on stem; anthers 5-8 mm
\par
31 Upper surface of leaves glabrous between setae;
\par
   usually biennial with several flowering stems .........,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,.. {\b 16. austriaca}
\par
31 Upper surface of leaves sparsely to densely puberulent
\par
   between setae
\par
32 Biennial without non-flowering rosettes and usually 
\par
   with several flowering stems; leaves usually densely
\par
   puberulent between the setae ....................,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,........ {\b 13. fastigiata}
\par
32 Perennial with non-flowering rosettes and usually 1-2 
\par
   flowering stems; leaves sparsely puberulent between 
\par
   the setae
\par
33 Corolla not more than 19 mm; bracts shorter than calyx .,,,,,,,.. {\b 15. arenaria}
\par
33 Corolla 20-24 mm; lower bracts equalling or exceeding 
\par
   calyx ......................................................................................... {\b 14. vaudensis}
\par
19 Rays of stellate setae at least 1/5 as long as the 
\par
   seta on the upper surface of the leaves, at least 1/4 
\par
   as long on the lower surface
\par
34 Pedicels 6-14 mm in flower; corolla glabrous
\par
35 Leaves densely setose; stellate setae with c. 20 rays ............... {\b 31. leptantha}
\par
35 Leaves sparsely setose; stellate setae with 3-10 rays ............... {\b 32. stellulata}
\par
34 Pedicels 0-6 mm in flower
\par
36 Corolla glabrous, but sometimes papillose
\par
37 Lower bracts exceeding calyx
\par
38 Calyx with numerous stellate setae ...............................................{\b 29. erecta}
\par
38 Calyx with mainly simple setae .................................................. {\b 30. taurica}
\par
37 Lower bracts shorter than or about equalling calyx
\par
39 Corolla c. 1 1/3 times as long as calyx; pedicels 
\par
   4-6 mm in flower ....................................................................... {\b 31. leptantha}
\par
39 Corolla about twice as long as calyx; pedicels 0-3 mm 
\par
   in flower
\par
40 Lower leaves c. 2 mm wide, narrowly linear; stem and 
\par
   leaves densely appressed-stellate-setose ............................ {\b 25. elegantissima}
\par
40 Lower leaves 3-7 mm wide, linear-spathulate or 
\par
   linear-oblong; stem and leaves ± patent-setose
\par
41 Corolla not papillose; lower and upper leaves not 
\par
   markedly different in size .......................................................... {\b 23. tornensis}
\par
41 Corolla densely papillose; lower leaves at least twice
\par
   as long as upper ......................................................................... {\b 27. mattirolii}
\par
36 Corolla puberulent
\par
42 Lower bracts exceeding calyx
\par
43 Setae semipatent; lower leaves 3-5 mm wide, oblong- 
\par
   to linear-lanceolate ......................................................................... {\b 29. erecta}
\par
43 Setae closely appressed; lower leaves 10-18 mm wide,
\par
   lanceolate .................................................................................... {\b 33. spruneri}
\par
42 Lower bracts shorter than or about equalling calyx
\par
44 Corolla 10-18 mm
\par

\par
90}
\par