{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 45 Lower leaves 1-3 mm wide, linear, with setae 1-2 mm on
\par
   lower surface ............................................................................... {\b 21. thracica}
\par
45 Lower leaves 3-8 mm wide, linear-spathulate to oblong or
\par
   oblong-spathulate, with setae 0-1 mm on lower surface
\par
46 Lower leaves linear-spathulate, 7-12 times as long as wide ... {\b 23. tornensis}
\par
46 Lower leaves oblong or oblong-spathulate, 3-6 times as
\par
   long as wide ................................................................................. {\b 26. euboica}
\par
44 Corolla 18-30 mm
\par
47 Stellate setae on stem with all rays deflexed; corolla
\par
   cylindrical at apex and then tapering to the base ...................... {\b 22. echioides}
\par
47 Stellate setae on stem with rays patent or semipatent;
\par
   corolla tapering from apex to base
\par
48 Calyx with stellate setae, the seta 1-2 times as long as rays .... {\b 28. montana}
\par
48 Calyx with simple setae, or with stellate setae and 
\par
   the seta at least 5 times as long as rays
\par
49 Lower surface of leaves with the seta at least 3 times
\par
   as long as rays ........................................................................... {\b 19. helvetica}
\par
49 Lower surface of leaves with the seta not more than 
\par
   twice as long as rays, sometimes absent .............................. {\b 24. heterophylla}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. frutescens} Lam.,{\i  Tabl. Encycl. Méth. Bot.} {\b 1}: 407 (1792). Perennial with slender, branched, woody stock; flowering stems 10-25 cm, erect, simple, puberulent and patent-setose, the setae 1-3 mm. Leaves 20-70 × 4-10 mm, linear- or oblong-lanceolate, puberulent and setose. Inflorescence simple or with few short branches; pedicels 5-8 mm; bracts not exceeding calyx. Calyx 10-15 mm in flower, 12-16 mm in fruit. Corolla 16-21 mm, pale yellow tinged with purple, glabrous, c. 1½ times as long as calyx. Nutlets c. 5 mm, smooth. 2n = 14. {\i C. & S. Greece, Aegean region.} ?Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. O. graeca} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 11}): 106 (1849). More or less caespitose biennial; stems 10-30 cm, erect, much branched, puberulent and patent-setose, the setae 2-4 mm. Lower leaves up to 100 × 10 mm, linear or linear-lanceolate. Inflorescence much-branched; pedicels 2-5 mm; bracts about equalling calyx. Calyx c. 10 mm in flower, up to 15 mm in fruit. Corolla 14-15 mm, pale yellow tinged with purple, puberulent, c. 1½ times as long as calyx; anthers shorter than filaments. Nutlets 6-7 mm, tuberculate. 2n = 14.{\i  S. Greece and S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. O. taygetea} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i op. cit.} 101 (1849) ({\i O. visianii} subsp. {\i taygetea} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Hayek). Like {\b 2} but corolla white, scarcely exceeding calyx; anthers subsessile; nutlets finely and sparsely tuberculate.{\i  S. Greece} ({\i Taïyetos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. O. visianii} G. C. Clementi, {\i Atti} 3{\i  Riun. Sci. Ital. Firenze} 519 (1841) (incl.{\i  O. calycina} Steven ex Avé-Lall., {\i O. setosa} auct., non Ledeb.). Biennial; stems 15-60 cm, erect, much-branched, puberulent and patent-setose, the setae 2-4 mm; cells in tubercles of setae in 1-2 rows. Lower leaves 100-250 × 4-8(-12) mm, linear-lanceolate, densely setose, glabrous or sparsely puberulent between setae. Inflorescence much-branched; pedicels 1-5 mm; lower bracts about equalling calyx. Calyx 12-17 mm in flower, 20-25 mm in fruit. Corolla 15-20 mm, cream or pale yellow, puberulent, c. 1 1/3 times as long as calyx. Nutlets 4-6 mm, minutely tuberculate. 2n = 18.{\i  E.C. & S.E. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. O. rhodopea} Velen., {\i Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ({\i Math.Nat. Kl.}){\b  1894}({\b 29}): 22 (1895) ({\i O. visianii} subsp. {\i rhodopea} (Velen.) Hayek). Like {\b 4} but setae 3-7 mm, coarse; cells in tubercles of setae in at least 3 rows; calyx 15-20 mm in flower, 25-40 mm in fruit; corolla 18-22 mm, scarcely exceeding calyx. •{\i  Mountains of S. Bulgaria and N. Greece.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. O. setosa} Ledeb.,{\i  Beitr. Naturk}. ({\i Dorpat}) {\b 1}: 70 (1820). Like {\b 4} but lower leaves 50-100 × 5-10 mm; calyx 20-30 mm in fruit; corolla 20-25 mm, glabrous.{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan}. Rs (E)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. O. tricerosperma} Lag.,{\i  Gen. Sp. Nov.} 10 (1816). Perennial; flowering stems 20-40 cm, erect, much-branched, puberulent and patent-setose, the setae 2-4 mm. Lower leaves 60-150 × 4-15 mm, oblong-spathulate, patent-setose, puberulent. Inflorescence much-branched; pedicels up to 10 mm, bracts shorter than or about equalling calyx. Calyx 10-22 mm in flower, up to 32 mm in fruit. Corolla 16-23 mm, pale yellow, glabrous but minutely papillose, usually c. 1 1/3 times as long as calyx. Nutlets 4-9 mm, rugose-tuberculate, usually with 3 horns. •{\i  C., S. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Nutlets without horns ................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b granatensis} 
\par
1 Nutlets with 3 horns 
\par
2 Stem usually reddish-purple; nutlets 7-9 mm .......... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b tricerosperma}
\par
2 Stem usually greenish-yellow; nutlets 4-7 mm .............. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b hispanica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  tricerosperma}: stem usually reddish-purple; setae with large conspicuous tubercle at base; leaves green; nutlets 7-9 mm, with horns up to 5 mm.{\i  S.E. Spain} ({\i near Alcaraz}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b hispanica}(Degen & Hervier) P. W. Ball,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 354 (1972) ({\i O. setosa} f. vel subsp.{\i  hispanica} Degen & Hervier,{\i  O. hispanica} (Degen & Hervier) Lacaita): stem usually greenish-yellow; setae with small tubercle at base; leaves grey-green; nutlets 4-7 mm, with horns 1-3 mm. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b granatensis}(Debeaux & Degen) Stroh,{\i  Beih. Bot. Centr.} {\b 59B}: 432 (1939): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but nutlets without horns. {\i S. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. O. simplicissima} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 196 (1762). Perennial with branched woody stock and numerous non-flowering rosettes; flowering stems 15-30 cm, simple, appressed-setose. Lower leaves 30-50 × 2-4 mm, linear or linear-lanceolate, densely white or grey appressed-setose; upper leaves green above, white or grey appressed-setose beneath. Inflorescence simple or with few short branches; pedicels 1-4 mm; bracts shorter than calyx. Calyx 6-8 mm in flower, 10-13 mm in fruit, appressed-setose. Corolla 16-22 mm, pale yellow, glabrous but shortly papillose, 2-3 times as long as calyx. Nutlets 2-3 mm, smooth.{\i  S.E. Russia, E. Ukraine.} Rs (C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. O. polyphylla} Ledeb.,{\i  Beitr. Naturk.} ({\i Dorpat}) {\b 1}: 72 (1820). Like {\b 8} but stem, middle and upper leaves and calyx patent-setose; lower leaves 20-70 × 2-5 mm; pedicels up to 10 mm; calyx 12-15 mm in flower, 20-25 mm in fruit; corolla 20-24 mm, about twice as long as calyx; nutlets 3-4 mm.{\i  Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. O. tinctoria} Bieb.,{\i  Beschr. Länd. Terek Casp.} 136 (1800) (incl. {\i O. polychroma} Klokov). More or less caespitose biennial; stems 20-70 cm, several, erect, much-branched, puberulent and patent-setose, the setae 1-3 mm. Lower leaves 30-150 × 3-15 mm, oblong or oblong-spathulate, puberulent and setose above, the setae with conspicuous tubercle at base, puberulent beneath with setae on midrib and margin. Inflorescence much branched; pedicels 1-2 mm; bracts about equalling calyx.
\par

\par
91}
\par