{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Calyx 6-11 mm in flower, 12-20 mm in fruit. Corolla 8-12 (-15) mm, pale yellow, often with purple tinge, glabrous or with the lobes puberulent, c. 11 times as long as calyx. Nutlets 3-4 mm, smooth. S. part of U.S.S.R., northwards to c. 53° N. Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. O. propontica} Aznav.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b 46}: 145 (1899). More or less caespitose perennial; flowering stems up to 50 cm, several, erect, much-branched, puberulent and patent-setose, the setae 1-3 mm. Lower leaves 40-50 × 5-7 mm, linear-spathulate, setose above, glabrous or sparsely puberulent between setae, puberulent beneath with setae on midrib and margin. Inflorescence much-branched; pedicels 5-8 mm in flower, up to 12 mm in fruit; bracts shorter than calyx. Calyx 10-15 mm in flower. Corolla c. 20 mm, pale yellow, glabrous but minutely papillose, 1½-2 times as long as calyx. Nutlets 3-4 mm, smooth. {\i Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i W. of Istanbul}). Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. O. bubanii} Stroh, {\i Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b 59B}: 432 (1939). Perennial; flowering stems 15-20 cm, erect, simple, puberulent and patent-setose, the setae up to 2-3 mm. Lower leaves 40-50 × 3-5 mm, narrowly oblong. Inflorescence simple; pedicels 0-2 mm; bracts about equalling calyx. Calyx 11-14 mm in flower, with dense, long, yellow setae. Corolla 16-20 mm, pale yellow, glabrous, but sometimes with a few hairs on the lobes. •{\i  Pyrenees.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. O. fastigiata} (Br.-Bl.) Br.-Bl. ex Lacaita,{\i  Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.} nov. ser., {\b 31}: 30 (1924). Caespitose biennial, usually with several flowering stems; stems 10-30 cm, branched, puberulent and patent-setose, the setae 1·5-2 mm. Lower leaves 50-100 × 4-8 mm, oblong, often with stellate setae 1·5-2 mm, with rays 0·1-0·2 mm. Inflorescence branched; pedicels 0-2 mm; bracts equalling calyx. Calyx 10-15 mm in flower, 16-25 mm in fruit. Corolla 16-22 mm, pale yellow, sparsely puberulent, 1½ times as long as calyx. Nutlets c. 3 mm, smooth.{\i  C. & S. France, N.W. Italy.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i  O. echioides} var. {\i catalaunica} Sennen, from N.E. Spain, appears to be intermediate in most characters between {\b 7}({\b b}) and {\b 13}. It is like {\b 13} but with the stem up to 45 cm, with setae 2-4 mm, corolla 15-16 mm, glabrous, and nutlets 3-4·5 mm, sometimes with 2 minute lateral horns.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. O. vaudensis} Gremli,{\i  Beitr. Fl. Schweiz} 83 (1870). Perennial with non-flowering rosettes and 1-2 flowering stems; stems 10-40 cm, usually with 2-4 branches at apex, puberulent and patent-setose, the setae 2-4 mm. Lower leaves 60-150 × 4-12 mm, narrowly oblanceolate, sparsely puberulent, setose, the setae 1·5-2 mm, sometimes stellate, with rays c. 0·1 mm. Inflorescence with few branches; pedicels 0-2 mm; bracts about equalling calyx. Calyx 12-15 mm in flower, up to 16 mm in fruit. Corolla 19-22 mm, pale yellow, glabrous or with hairs on the lobes or in lines from the lobes, c. 1½ times as long as calyx. Anthers 6·5-8 mm, entire or slightly toothed at apex. Nutlets c. 3 mm, smooth. 2n = 20. •{\i  W. Switzerland} ({\i Rhone valley near Aigle}). He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   O. arenaria} subsp.{\b  pennina} Br.-Bl., {\i Viert. Naturf. Ges. Zürich}{\b  62}: 606 (1917), from S. Switzerland and N. Italy, is intermediate between {\b 14} and {\b 15}, and may merit specific rank. It is like {\b 14} but with flowering stems 30-50 cm, usually much branched, calyx 10-14 mm, corolla 20-24 mm, often puberulent and anthers toothed at apex.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 15. O. arenaria} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  3}: 308 (1812). Perennial or biennial with non-flowering rosettes and usually a single flowering stem; stem 15-70 cm, with numerous branches, puberulent and semipatent-setose, the setae 2-3 mm. Lower leaves 45-180 × 4-13 mm, oblong-spathulate, sparsely to densely puberulent, setose, the setae 1-2 mm, sometimes stellate. Inflorescence branched; pedicels 0-4 mm; bracts shorter than or about equalling calyx. Calyx 6-12 mm in flower, up to 18 mm in fruit. Corolla 12-19 mm, pale yellow, glabrous or puberulent, 1 1/3-1 1/2 times as long as the calyx. Nutlets 2·5-3 mm, smooth, shining. 2n = 12.{\i  S.E. & S.C. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ge Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b arenaria}(incl. {\i O. transrhymnensis} Klokov): Upper surface of leaves densely puberulent; setae simple or some stellate with rays c. 0·1 mm; corolla 12-17 mm, c. 1 1/3 times as long as calyx. 2n = 20.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b fallax}(Borbás) Jav., {\i Ann. Hist.-Nat. Mus. Hung.}{\b  4}: 430 (1906): Upper surface of leaves sparsely puberulent; some setae always stellate, with rays 0·1-0·2 mm; corolla 15-19 mm, c. 1½ times as long as calyx. 2n = 26.{\i  N.W. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. O. austriaca} (G. Beck) Fritsch,{\i  Excursionsfl. Österr. }461 (1897). Like {\b 15}({\b a}) but usually perennial with several stems, each with 1-2 branches at apex; leaves always with some stellate setae, upper surface not puberulent between setae; corolla 18-22 mm, 1½-2 times as long as calyx; nutlets 3-3·5 mm. 2n = 26. •{\i  E. Austria.} Au ?Hu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. O. pseudarenaria} Schur, {\i Verh. Mitt. Siebenb. Ver. Naturw.}{\b  10}: 76 (1859). Biennial; stems up to 80 cm, robust, much branched, puberulent and patent-setose, the setae 2-3 mm. Lower leaves 80-200 × 8-13 mm, linear-oblong, not puberulent but densely setose, the setae 1·5-2 mm, some always stellate, with rays 0·1-0·2 mm. Inflorescence branched; pedicels 0-2 mm; bracts shorter than calyx. Calyx 8-10 mm in flower, up to 16 mm in fruit. Corolla 12-16 mm, pale yellow, glabrous or sparsely puberulent, 1 1/3-1 1./2 times as long as calyx. Nutlets 2·5-3 mm, smooth, shining. •{\i  Romania.} Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. O. tridentina} Wettst. in A. Kerner, {\i Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung.}{\b  4}: 64 (1886). Perennial with several, erect flowering stems. Stems 20-40 cm, simple or with up to 6 branches at apex, densely puberulent and setose, the setae 2-3 mm, usually stellate, with rays 0·1-0·2 mm. Lower leaves 60-130 × 3-5 mm, linear-oblong, stellate-setose, the setae 1-2 mm, with rays 0·2-0·3 mm, glabrous or sparsely puberulent between setae. Pedicels 2-4 mm; bracts shorter than calyx. Calyx 10-12 mm in flower, up to 16 mm in fruit, with simple setae. Corolla 18-20 mm, pale yellow, sparsely puberulent. Nutlets c. 3 mm, smooth, shining. 2n = 28. •{\i  N.E. Italy} ({\i Trentino}), ?{\i N.W. Jugoslavia}. It ?Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. O. helvetica} (A. DC.) Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 11}): 111 (1849). Perennial, usually with non-flowering rosettes and several erect flowering stems; stems 20-50 cm, simple or with up to 6 branches at apex, puberulent and setose, the setae 2-3 mm, usually stellate, with rays c. 0·1 mm. Lower leaves 30-70 × (2-)4-6 mm, oblong-spathulate, puberulent, stellate-setose, the setae 1-1·5 mm, with rays 0·1-0·3 mm. Pedicels 0-2 mm; bracts shorter than calyx. Calyx (8-)9-12 mm in flower, up to 17 mm in fruit, with stellate setae. Corolla (16-)20-24 mm, pale yellow, puberulent, 1½-2 times as long as calyx; anthers 6-8 mm. Nutlets 2-4 mm, smooth, shining. 2n = 26, 28. •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. O. lucana} Lacaita, {\i Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital}. nov. ser., {\b 31}: 33 (1924). Like {\b 19} but more robust with stems 40-75 cm, much
\par

\par
92}
\par