{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 branched; lower leaves 60-120 × 6-8 mm, the setae on the upper surface 1·5-2 mm; bracts about equalling calyx; calyx 10-11 mm in flower, up to 20 mm in fruit; corolla papillose, shortly puberulent on teeth; anthers 8-10 mm. •{\i  S. Italy} ({\i Basilicata}). It.
\par

\par
   {\b 21. O. thracica} Velen.,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ({\i Math. Nat. Kl.}) {\b 1895}({\b 37}): 8 (1896). Perennial with slender branched stock and several erect flowering stems; stems 15-25 cm, usually simple, densely puberulent and setose, the setae 1-2 mm, usually stellate, with rays 0·1-0·2 mm. Lower leaves 10-25 × 1-3 mm, linear, stellate-setose, the setae 1-2 mm, with rays 0·1-0·3 mm. Pedicels 0-2 mm; bracts shorter than calyx. Calyx 6-8 mm in flower, with stellate setae. Corolla 14-18 mm, pale yellow, puberulent, about twice as long as calyx. Nutlets c. 2·5 mm, smooth, shining. •{\i  S. & E. Bulgaria.} Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. O. echioides} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 196 (1762) ({\i O. aucherana} subsp.{\i  javorkae} (Simonkai) Hayek). More or less caespitose perennial with several erect flowering stems; stems 10-30 cm, simple or with few branches, puberulent and stellate-setose, the rays all deflexed. Lower leaves 20-60 × 1-7 mm, linear or linear-oblong, sparsely to densely stellate-setose, the setae 1-1·5 mm, white, grey or yellow, with rays 0·3-0·4 mm. Pedicels 0-2 mm; bracts shorter than or about equalling calyx. Calyx c. 10 mm in flower, up to 15 mm in fruit, with simple and some stellate setae with short rays. Corolla 18-25 mm, pale yellow, puberulent, about twice as long as calyx, cylindrical at the apex then tapering towards the base. Nutlets c. 2·5 mm, smooth, shining. 2n = 14. •{\i  Italy, Sicilia, W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Variable in leaf-width and in the density and colour of the setae. Lacaita,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London }({\i Bot.}) {\b 46}: 387-400 (1924), gives an account of this variation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. O. tornensis} Jáv., {\i Ann. Hist.-Nat. Mus. Hung.} {\b 4}: 431 (1906). Perennial with several erect flowering stems; stems 15-30 cm, usually simple, stellate-setose. Lower leaves 30-60 × 3-5 mm, linear-spathulate, stellate-setose, above with setae 1-2 mm and rays 0·2-0·4 mm, beneath with setae 0-1 mm and rays 0·2-0·4 mm. Pedicels 0-2 mm; bracts shorter than calyx. Calyx 6-10 mm in flower, up to 12 mm in fruit, with simple and stellate setae. Corolla 14-17 mm, pale yellow, sparsely to densely puberulent, about twice as long as calyx. Nutlets 2·5-3 mm, smooth, shining. 2n = 14. •{\i  S.E. Czechoslovakia, just extending to N.E. Hungary.} Cz Hu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Possibly not specifically distinct from {\b 22}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. O. heterophylla} Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 80 (1844) (incl. {\i O. paradoxa} Janka,{\i  O. tubiflora} Velen.). Perennial, caespitose or with long branched stock, with several flowering stems; stems 15-40 cm, simple or branched, puberulent and stellate-setose. Lower leaves 25-150 × 4-12 mm, oblong or linear-oblong, stellate-setose, above with setae 1-2 mm and rays 0·2-0·4 mm, beneath with setae 0-1 mm and rays 0·2-0·4 mm. Pedicels 0-2 mm; bracts usually shorter than calyx. Calyx 8-12 mm in flower, up to 15 mm in fruit, with simple and some stellate setae with short rays. Corolla 20-30 mm, pale yellow, puberulent, about twice as long as calyx, tapering from apex to base. Nutlets 2·5-3 mm, smooth, shining.{\i  Balkan peninsula, S. Romania}. Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  O. halacsyi} Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 88 (1928) ({\i O. helvetica} sensu Halácsy, non (A. DC.) Boiss.), from N. Greece, is a little-known but probably distinct species. It is a perennial with few, erect flowering stems; stems 15-20 cm, with simple setae with a ring of short hairs around the base arranged in a stellate manner; leaves 35-50 × 4-6 mm, the indumentum on the lower surface similar to that on the stem, on the upper surface with stellate setae, the setae c. 3 times as long as the rays; lower bracts equalling or longer than calyx; calyx 15-18 mm, with simple setae; corolla 20-22 mm, puberulent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. O. elegantissima} Rech. fil. & Goulimy,{\i  Anzeig. Akad. Wiss. }({\i Wien}){\b  94}: 22 (1957). Caespitose perennial with numerous erect flowering stems; stems 20-35 cm, simple, densely appressed-stellate-setose. Lower leaves 50-120 × c. 2 mm, narrowly linear, densely appressed-stellate-setose, the setae 1-2 mm, with rays 0·3-0·5 mm. Pedicels 1-3 mm; lower bracts about as long as calyx. Calyx c. 10 mm in flower, with simple setae. Corolla c. 20 mm, pale yellow, glabrous, about twice as long as calyx. Nutlets c. 3 mm, smooth. •{\i  N. Greece} ({\i Vourinos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. O. euboica} Rech. fil.,{\i  Bot. Jahrb}.{\b  80}: 378 (1961). Perennial, lax, caespitose or with elongate woody stock, and several flowering stems; stems 20-30 mm, simple, puberulent and setose, the setae simple or with rays 0·1 mm. Lower leaves 12-50 × 4-8 mm, oblong or oblong-spathulate, stellate-setose, above with setae c. 1 mm and rays 0·3-0·4 mm, beneath with setae 0-1 mm and rays 0·3-0·4 mm. Pedicels 0-2 mm; bracts shorter than calyx. Calyx 8-9 mm in flower, up to 10 mm in fruit, with usually stellate setae. Corolla 15-16 mm, pale yellow, puberulent, c. 1½ times as long as calyx. Nutlets c. 3 mm, smooth, shining. •{\i  E.C. Greece} ({\i N. Evvoia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from E.C. Greece (Pilion Oros, near Portaria) are similar to {\b 26} but have the leaves 7-15 mm wide, oblong or oblong-elliptical and the corolla 23-25 mm, about 3 times as long as the calyx. Their taxonomic position is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. O. mattirolii} Bald.,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss}.{\b  3}: 226 (1895). Caespitose perennial with several flowering stems; stems 10-30 cm, simple, puberulent and setose, the setae usually stellate. Lower leaves 30-110 × 4-7 mm, linear-oblong, sparsely stellate-setose, the setae 1-2 mm with rays 0·5-0·7 mm; middle and upper leaves 15-50 × 2-5 mm, not more than ½ as large as the lower. Pedicels 2-3 mm in flower; bracts about equalling calyx. Calyx 7-10 mm in flower, 12-15 mm in fruit, setae simple or with very short rays. Corolla 15-20 mm, pale yellow, glabrous but densely papillose, about twice as long as calyx. Nutlets c. 3 mm, smooth, shining. •{\i  C. Albania and N.W. Greece.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. O. montana} Sibth. & Sm., {\i Fl. Graec. Prodr.} {\b 1}: 121 (1806) ({\i O. aucherana} auct., non DC.). Caespitose perennial with several flowering stems; stems 15-30 cm, simple or with few branches at apex, puberulent and stellate-setose. Lower leaves 30-100 × 3-8 mm, oblong-spathulate, densely stellate-setose; setae 0·7-1·5 mm above, with rays 0·3-0·5 mm, 0-0·5 mm beneath, with rays 0·3-0·5 mm. Pedicels 0-2 mm; bracts shorter than or about equalling calyx. Calyx 8-11 mm in flower, up to 15 mm in fruit, stellate-setose. Corolla 20-30 mm, pale yellow, puberulent, 2-3 times as long as calyx. Nutlets 2·5-3·5 mm, smooth, shining. 2n = 14.{\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula and Aegean region.} Bu Gr ?Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   It is not certain whether this species occurs frequently in Europe, and many records clearly refer to {\b 24}. The European plants referred to this species differ somewhat from those from Anatolia, and are transitional to {\b 24}. Their taxonomic position must be considered uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b O. rigida} Ledeb., {\i Beitr. Naturk.} ({\i Dorpat}) {\b 1}: 67 (1820), from S. Ukraine, is probably not distinct from {\b 28}. It is said to differ mainly in having the corolla 15-22 mm, 1½ times as long as the calyx.
\par

\par
93}
\par