{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr15\min26}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr15\min27}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1025}{\nofchars5845}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 29. O. erecta}{\fs28  Sibth. & Sm.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 121 (1806) (incl. }{\i\fs28 O. laconica}{\fs28  Boiss. & Orph.). Caespitose perennial with several flowering stems; stems 15-25 cm, simple, densely stellate-setose. Lower leaves 30-60 \'d7 3-5 mm, oblong or linear-lanceolate, densely stellate-setose, the setae 1-1\'b75 mm with rays 0\'b73-0\'b74 mm. Pedicels 1-5 mm; lower bracts exceeding calyx. Calyx 10-14 mm, densely stellate-setose. Corolla 20-24 mm, pale yellow, glabrous or puberulent, about twice as long as calyx. Nutlets 3-3\'b75 mm, smooth, shining. \bullet }{\b\fs28  }{\i\fs28 S. Greece, Kriti}{\b\fs28 .}{\fs28  Cr Gr.
\par 
\par   The plants from Kriti have a glabrous corolla, those from S. Greece a puberulent corolla.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 30. O. taurica}{\fs28  Pallas ex Willd.,}{\i\fs28  Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin Neue Schr.}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 : 122 (1799). Caespitose perennial with several flowering stems; stems 10-40 cm, simple, puberulent and stellate-setose. Lower leaves 40-120 \'d7 3-8 mm, linear-oblong, stellate-setose, above with setae 1-2 mm and rays 0\'b73-0\'b75 mm, beneath with setae c. 1 mm and rays 0\'b74 0\'b75 mm. Pedicels 0-2 mm; lower bracts exceeding calyx. Calyx 10-13 mm in flower, up to 18 mm in fruit, with usually simple setae. Corolla 20-30 mm, pale yellow, glabrous but often papillose, 2-3 times as long as calyx. Nutlets 3\'b75-4 mm, smooth, shining. 2n = 14.}{\i\fs28  S.E. Europe}{\fs28 . Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (W, K) Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 31. O. leptantha}{\fs28  Heldr., }{\i\fs28 Sched. Herb. Graec. Norm.}{\fs28  no. 1565 (1898). Caespitose perennial with several flowering stems; stems 10-20 cm, simple, puberulent and stellate-setose. Lower leaves 30-50 \'d7 4-6 mm, linear-oblong, densely stellate-setose, the setae 1-1\'b75 mm with rays c. 0\'b75 mm. Pedicels 4-8 mm in flower, up to 10 mm in fruit; bracts shorter than calyx. Calyx 9-12 mm in flower, up to 16 mm in fruit, with usually simple setae. Corolla 13-17 mm, pale yellow, glabrous, not more than 1 1/3 times as long as calyx. Nutlets smooth, shining. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S. Greece}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Ta\'efyetos}{\fs28 ). Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 32. O. stellulata}{\fs28  Waldst. & Kit.,}{\i\fs28  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 : 189 (1804). Perennial with branched woody stock and several flowering stems; stems 10-25 cm, simple, puberulent and stellate-setose. Lower leaves 40-140 \'d7 7-15 mm, oblong-spathulate, sparsely stellate-setose, the setae 1-1\'b75 mm with rays c. 0\'b74 mm. Pedicels 6-14 mm in flower; bracts shorter than calyx. Calyx 7-9 mm, with simple setae and sometimes with stellate setae with very short rays. Corolla 15-18 mm, pale yellow, glabrous, about twice as long as calyx. Nutlets 2\'b75-3 mm, smooth, shining. 2n = 22. \bullet }{\i\fs28  W. Jugoslavia.}{\fs28  ?Al ?Bu Ju.
\par 
\par Erroneously recorded from many parts of Europe.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 33. O. spruneri}{\fs28  Boiss., }{\i\fs28 Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 11}{\fs28 ): 109 (1849). Biennial; stems 25-40 cm, simple, with dense, closely appressed stellate setae. Lower leaves 10-180 \'d7 10-18 mm, lanceolate, densely appressed-stellate-setose, the setae 1-1\'b75 mm with rays c. 0\'b75 mm. Pedicels 1-6 mm; lower bracts about equalling calyx. Calyx 10-12 mm, with usually simple setae. Corolla 20-30 mm, white, puberulent, 2-3 times as long as calyx. Nutlets c. 5 mm, granular-tuberculate, dull. \bullet }{\i\fs28  C. & S. Greece.}{\fs28  Gr.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 10.             Cerinthe}{\fs28             L.
\par }{\fs24 By R. Domac.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Annual, biennial or perennial herbs, glabrous or glabrescent but often with white tubercles, usually glaucous. Flowers in terminal, usually branched, bracteate cymes. Calyx lobed to half-way or more. Corolla yellow, usually tinged with violet or red, more or less tubular, with 5 erect or recurved lobes; lobes shorter than or as long as rest of corolla, without scales. Stamens included or slightly exserted, inserted at about middle of corolla; anthers appendiculate at base. Style usually exserted; stigma capitate or emarginate. Nutlets connate in 2 separate pairs, each pair ovoid, slightly beaked, dark brown or black, smooth, with a flat base.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 C. tristis}{\fs28  Teyber,}{\i\fs28  \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  63}{\fs28 : 491 (1913), was described from W. Jugoslavia (Biokovo mountains) on the basis of a non-flowering rosette of leaves; it differs from all other species in having a bluish-black margin c. 2 mm wide to the broadly elliptical, petiolate leaves. Its affinities are unknown.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Corolla-lobes lanceolate, acuminate, erect, almost as 
\par   long as the rest of the corolla ............................................................ }{\b\fs28 1. minor}{\fs28 
\par 1 Corolla-lobes ovate, sharply recurved at apex, much 
\par   shorter than the rest of the corolla
\par 2 Corolla curved above, pale yellow, violet distally .......................... }{\b\fs28 4. retorta}{\fs28 
\par 2 Corolla straight, yellow or dark red, usually with red
\par   spots or ring at the throat
\par 3 Corolla 5-8 mm wide, more than twice as long as calyx; annual ..... }{\b\fs28 3. major}{\fs28 
\par 3 Corolla 3-4 mm wide, not more than twice as long as calyx; 
\par   perennial or biennial ......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. glabra}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. C. minor}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  137 (1753). Annual, biennial or perennial; stems 15-60 cm. Lower leaves oblong-ovate, petiolate, glabrescent; the upper ovate, sessile. Bracts cordate. Calyx-lobes obtuse, ciliate. Corolla 10-12 \'d7 3\'b75-5 mm, yellow, sometimes with 5 violet spots in the throat; lobes lanceolate, acuminate, erect, almost as long as the rest of the corolla.}{\i\fs28  C. & E. Europe, northwards to}{\fs28  c. 53\'b0}{\i\fs28  N., and extending westwards to S.E. France; sometimes casual elsewhere}{\fs28 . Al Au Bu ?Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K) Si Tu [Bl].
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 minor}{\fs28 : Annual or biennial. Corolla cylindrical. Pedicels not scabrid. Nutlets dark brown. }{\i\fs28 Throughout most of the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 auriculata}{\fs28 (Ten.) Domac,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  65}{\fs28 : 260 (1972) (}{\i\fs28 C. auriculata}{\fs28  Ten.,}{\i\fs28  C. lamprocarpa}{\fs28  Murb.): Perennial. Corolla swollen. Pedicels scabrid. Nutlets black or blackish-brown. }{\i\fs28 Alps, Appennini, Sicilia and Balkan peninsula}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par   Variable, especially in the colour of the leaves and flowers.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. C. glabra}{\fs28  Miller, }{\i\fs28 Gard. Dict.}{\fs28  ed. 8, no. 2 (1768). Perennial or biennial; stems 15-50 cm. Lower leaves oblong-cuneate, petiolate; the upper ovate, cordate at base, sessile. Cymes very long in fruit; bracts cordate. Calyx-lobes obtuse, glabrous or slightly ciliate. Corolla 8-13 \'d7 3-4 mm, not more than twice as long as calyx, yellow, usually with 5 dark red spots in the throat; lobes ovate, sharply recurved at apex. Nutlets blackish.}{\i\fs28  Usually in damp or shady places; somewhat calcicole. C. & S. Europe, from the Jura and Carpathians to the Pyrenees, S. Appennini and S.W. Bulgaria.}{\fs28  Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge He ?Hs It Ju Po Rm.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Leaves tuberculate; peduncles curved ....................... (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 tenuiflora}{\fs28 
\par 1 Leaves almost smooth; peduncles straight
\par 2 Rosette-leaves persistent at flowering time; calyx-lobes
\par   lanceolate; anthers included ............................................. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 glabra}{\fs28 
\par 2 Rosette-leaves withered at flowering time; calyx-lobes
\par   ovate; anthers exserted .................................................. (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 smithiae}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 glabra}{\fs28 (C. alpina Kit.): }{\i\fs28 Throughout most of the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 tenuiflora}{\fs28 (Bertol.) Domac, }{\i\fs28 Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 65}{\fs28 : 260 (1972) (}{\i\fs28 C. tenuiflora}{\fs28  Bertol.): 2n = 16. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Corse}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 smithiae}{\fs28 (A. Kerner) Domac,}{\i\fs28  loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1972) (}{\i\fs28 C. smithiae}{\fs28  A. Kerner). \bullet }{\i\fs28  N. W. Jugoslavia}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par 94}
\par }