{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. major} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 136 (1753). Annual; stems 15-60 cm. Lower leaves obovate-spathulate, petiolate, ciliate, tuberculate; the upper ovate-lanceolate, cordate at base. Bracts ovate, subcordate at base, often reddish-glaucous, equalling or longer than calyx. Calyx-lobes acute, ciliate. Corolla 15-30 × 5-8 mm, slightly saccate, straight, yellow, with a reddish-brown ring in the throat, sometimes cream distally, or dark red throughout, more than twice as long as calyx; lobes ovate, sharply recurved at apex. Nutlets blackish. 2n = 16.{\i  Cultivated fields, waste places and meadows. Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal}. Al Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. retorta} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 120 (1806). Annual; stems 10-50 cm. Lower leaves ovate to oblong-spathulate, petiolate, tuberculate; the upper cordate at base, sessile. Bracts ovate, cordate at base, violet, equalling calyx. Corolla 10-15 × 3-5 mm, curved above and constricted at throat, pale yellow, violet distally; lobes ovate, sharply recurved at apex. Nutlets blackish.{\i  Rocky places. S. & W. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Al ?Cr Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 11.            Moltkia}              Lehm.    
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R. Fernandes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs or dwarf shrubs. Flowers in terminal bracteate cymes. Calyx lobed almost to the base. Corolla blue, purple or yellow, infundibuliform, without scales or annulus. Stamens exserted or included, inserted at or above the middle of the corolla; anthers sometimes apiculate but without a projecting connective at the apex and not sagittate or apiculate at the base. Style exserted; stigma small, entire or emarginate. Nutlets often solitary by abortion, ovoid and curved, usually smooth and shining, with a ventral keel, flat at base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perennial herb; corolla 19-25 mm; anthers longer than
\par
  filaments, included in corolla-tube ............................................... {\b 3. doerfleri}
\par
1 Dwarf shrub; corolla less than 19 mm; anthers sub-equalling
\par
  or shorter than filaments, exserted from corolla-tube
\par
2 Leaves 50-150 × 1-4 mm; anthers about as long as filaments; 
\par
  stamens not or scarcely exceeding corolla-lobes ..................... {\b 1. suffruticosa}
\par
2 Leaves 10-50 × 1-6 mm; anthers shorter than filaments;
\par
  stamens much exceeding corolla-lobes ........................................... {\b 2. petraea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. suffruticosa} (L.) Brand in Koch, {\i Syn. Deutsch. Fl}. ed. 3, {\b 3}: 1999 (1902). Caespitose dwarf shrub with trailing stock, producing short, non-flowering, densely leafy stems and taller flowering stems. Flowering stems (2-)6-25 cm, erect, slender, appressed-setose, arising at the apex of the non-flowering stems of previous season. Leaves 50-150 × 1-3(-4) mm, linear, acute, sparsely setose and green above, very densely setose and whitish beneath; margin flat or more or less revolute. Cymes short and dense, grouped in corymbs. Calyx 5-6 mm, hispid, with persistent lobes. Corolla 13-16(-17) mm, gradually widened above, blue. Filaments about as long as anthers; anthers c. 3 mm, apiculate, yellow, exserted from the corolla-tube and more or less reaching the apex of the corolla-lobes. Nutlets c. 3 mm, ovoid, beaked. 2n = 16. •{\i  Rocky places; calcicole. Mountains of N. Italy.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. petraea} (Tratt.) Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel.} {\b 2}: 515 (1846). Much-branched dwarf shrub 20-40 cm. Branches slender, rigid, erect, densely whitish-appressed-setose. Leaves 10-50 × 1-6 mm, linear to oblong-oblanceolate, obtuse or subacute, sparsely setulose and green above, very densely setulose and whitish beneath; margin more or less revolute. Cymes short, forming dense heads. Calyx c. 4 mm, with persistent lobes. Corolla 6-10 mm, cylindric-obconical, deep violet-blue, bright pink in bud. Filaments 6·5-8 mm, somewhat exserted; anthers 1·25-2 mm, not apiculate. Nutlets 2·5-3 mm. •{\i  Rock crevices. Mountains of Balkan peninsula, from C. Jugoslavia to C. Greece.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. M. doerfleri} Wettst.,{\i  Anzeig. Akad. Wiss.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 55}: 284 (1918). Perennial herb. Stems 30-50 cm, erect, simple, appressed-setulose, produced from a thick, horizontal, sympodial rhizome. Leaves lanceolate, acute, sparsely appressed-setulose and also ciliate, the lowest imperfectly developed. Calyx c. 10 mm; lobes falling off individually before the calyx-base. Corolla 19-25 mm, gradually widened above, deep purple. Filaments 1·5-2 mm; anthers 2·5-3 mm, biapiculate, included in the tube. Nutlets c. 4 mm. •{\i  Mountains of N.E. Albania.} Al.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 12.           Alkanna}           Tausch
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By S. Kozuharov.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Flowers in terminal, bracteate cymes. Calyx lobed almost to the base. Corolla variously coloured, with more or less cylindrical tube and infundibuliform limb, with a ring of hairs and sometimes with small invaginations in the throat. Stamens included, inserted at about the middle of the tube. Style included; stigma small, entire. Nutlets usually 2 by abortion, subreniform to obliquely ovoid and curved, granular to tuberculate, strongly stipitate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All the species grow in dry places.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: K. H. Rechinger fil.,{\i  Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 68}: 191-220 (1965).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla pubescent or puberulent outside
\par
2 Plant eglandular .......................................................................... {\b 15. scardica}
\par
2 Plant glandular
\par
3 Corolla-tube as long as or slightly longer than calyx
\par
4 Corolla-limb c. 6 mm in diameter ............................................... {\b 3. calliensis}
\par
4 Corolla-limb 8-11 mm in diameter .............................................. {\b 5. stribrnyi}
\par
3 Corolla-tube at least 1 1/3 times as long as calyx
\par
5 Calyx densely glandular-pubescent and sparsely setose;
\par
  bracts as long as or slightly longer than calyx ........................... {\b 6. methanaea}
\par
5 Calyx eglandular or ± glandular but with dense setae;
\par
  bracts usually twice as long as calyx ...................... ({\b 11-14}). {\b pindicola} group
\par
1 Corolla glabrous outside
\par
6 Corolla blue
\par
7 Bracts not or only slightly longer than calyx ............................... {\b 7. tinctoria}
\par
7 Bracts nearly twice as long as calyx ........................................... {\b 15. scardica}
\par
6 Corolla yellow, orange, whitish, greyish or brownish
\par
8 Bracts twice as long as calyx
\par
9 Leaf-margin erose-sinuate and undulate .................................... {\b 1. orientalis}
\par
9 Leaf-margin entire, flat
\par
10 Corolla-limb 8-10 mm in diameter ................................................ {\b 2. graeca}
\par
10 Corolla-limb 5-7 mm in diameter
\par
11 Annual; bracts elliptical, much longer than flowers ........................ {\b 9. lutea}
\par
11 Perennial; bracts lanceolate-triangular, not or only 
\par
   slightly longer than flowers ................................... ({\b 11-14}). {\b pindicola} group
\par
8  Bracts ± equalling calyx
\par
12 Calyx eglandular
\par
13 Corolla-limb c. 10 mm in diameter; tube slightly 
\par
   longer than calyx .............................................................................. {\b 10. pelia}
\par
13 Corolla-limb c. 4 mm in diameter; tube twice as long 
\par
   as calyx .......................................................................................... {\b 16. sieberi}
\par
12 Calyx ± glandular
\par
14 Corolla-tube nearly twice as long as calyx ............................ {\b 8. corcyrensis}
\par
14 Corolla-tube as long as or slightly longer than calyx
\par
15 Calyx 4-5 mm in flower, c. 7 mm in fruit ............................ {\b 4. primuliflora}
\par
15 Calyx c. 7 mm in flower, 9-15 mm in fruit
\par
16 Nutlets 3·5 mm in diameter; corolla yellow ............................. {\b 1. orientalis}
\par
16 Nutlets 2 mm in diameter; corolla whitish ............................. {\b 17. sartoriana}
\par

\par
95}
\par