{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. orientalis} (L.) Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 1}({\b 4}): 46 (1844). Setose and glandular-pubescent perennial. Stems 30-50(-80) cm, erect or ascending. Leaves erose-sinuate and undulate; basal 10-15 × 1·5-2 cm, lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate; cauline oblong to ovate-lanceolate. Racemes dense or lax in fruit; bracts up to twice as long as calyx. Calyx 6-8 mm in flower, 10-15 mm in fruit, glandular. Corolla yellow, glabrous outside; tube up to 1 1/3 times as long as calyx; limb 9-12 mm in diameter. Nutlets c. 3·5 mm in diameter, minutely granular, tuberculate. 2n = 28.{\i  Rocky places. S. Greece.} Gr. ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. graeca} Boiss. & Spruner in Boiss., {\i op. cit.} 47 (1844). Setose-hispid perennial. Stems 15-50(-80) cm, ascending, pubescent, sometimes glandular. Leaves entire; basal 6-10 × 1-1·5 cm, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate; cauline linear-oblong to linear. Bracts narrowly triangular-lanceolate, twice as long as calyx. Calyx 5-6 mm in flower, 10-12 mm in fruit, usually eglandular. Corolla yellow, glabrous outside; tube 1-2 times as long as calyx; limb 8-10 mm in diameter. Nutlets 2·5-3·5 mm in diameter, tuberculate-reticulate. 2n = 30.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  graeca}: stems glandular. Calyx 6 mm in flower, 11 mm in fruit, long-pedicellate. Corolla-tube as long as calyx. Nutlets tuberculate-reticulate.{\i  Mainly below }1500{\i  m}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b baeotica}(DC.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 517 (1881) ({\i A. baeotica} DC.): stems eglandular. Calyx 5-6 mm in flower, 10-12 mm in fruit, shortly pedicellate. Corolla-tube nearly twice as long as calyx. Nutlets tuberculate.{\i  Mainly above} 1500{\i  m.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Many intermediates are known, some of which may deserve subspecific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. calliensis} Heldr. ex Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or., Suppl.} 353 (1888). Densely glandular-pubescent and sparsely hispid perennial; stems 20-40 cm, ascending or decumbent. Basal leaves 6-10 × 0·7-1·2 cm, oblong; cauline ovate-lanceolate. Bracts lanceolate, the lower twice, the upper half as long as calyx. Calyx c. 6 mm in flower, c. 8 mm in fruit, densely glandular. Corolla yellow, pubescent outside; tube slightly exceeding calyx; limb c. 6 mm in diameter. Nutlets c. 2 mm in diameter, irregularly reticulate-tuberculate. •{\i  Mountains of S.C. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. primuliflora} Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel.} {\b 2}: 89 (1844). Setose-hispid and glandular-pubescent perennial; stems (5-)10-30 cm, ascending. Basal leaves 3-6 × 0·4-0·6 cm, linear-lanceolate; cauline oblong-lanceolate. Bracts as long as calyx, narrowly lanceolate. Calyx 4(-5) mm in flower, c. 7 mm in fruit, shortly glandular-hairy. Corolla yellow, glabrous outside; tube slightly longer than calyx; limb 5-7 mm in diameter. Nutlets c. 2 mm in diameter, minutely granular, irregularly tuberculate.{\i  Dry, rocky slopes; calcifuge. • Bulgaria and E. Greece.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. stribrnyi} Velen.,{\i  Fl. Bulg.} 647 (1891). Setose-hispid and glandular-pubescent perennial; stems 30-60 cm, ascending or suberect. Basal leaves not developed; lower cauline 3-6 × 0·5-0·9 cm, oblong-lanceolate. Bracts much longer than calyx, lanceolate. Calyx 8-9 mm in flower, 10-11 mm in fruit, glandular. Corolla deep orange, violet or greyish, hairy outside; tube shorter or slightly longer than calyx; limb 8-11 mm in diameter. Nutlets c. 2 mm, minutely scrobiculate-tuberculate.{\i  Dry, stony slopes. • W. & C. Bulgaria, S.E. Jugoslavia.} Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. methanaea} Hausskn.,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver.}{\b  6}: 32 (1888). Setose-hispid and densely glandular-pubescent perennial; stems 10-30 cm, ascending. Basal leaves 5-12 × 0·7-1·4 cm, lanceolate; cauline oblong-lanceolate. Bracts as long as or slightly longer than calyx, linear-lanceolate. Calyx 6-7 mm in flower, 10-11 mm in fruit, densely glandular, and with sparse long setae. Corolla yellowish, hairy outside; tube at least 1½ times as long as calyx; limb 6-7 mm in diameter. Nutlets c. 3 mm in diameter, minutely granular, tuberculate.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S. & C. Greece. }Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Many plants are known which are intermediate between {\b 5} and {\b 6} in presence and shape of basal leaves, indumentum of corolla and in calyx and corolla dimensions. Some of them, with large greyish to violet flowers, stout, woody stems and wider leaves are ecologically well isolated.
\par

\par
   {\b 7. A. tinctoria} (L.) Tausch, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 7}: 234 (1824). Setose-hispid perennial; stems (5-)10-20(-30) cm, procumbent or ascending, eglandular. Basal leaves 6-15 × 0·7-1·5 cm, linear-lanceolate; lower cauline oblong-linear, cordate at base. Bracts not or only slightly longer than calyx, oblong-lanceolate. Calyx 4-5 mm in flower, 5-6 mm in fruit, eglandular. Corolla blue, glabrous outside; tube as long as or slightly longer than calyx; limb 6-7(-8) mm in diameter. Nutlets c. 2 mm in diameter, irregularly reticulate-tuberculate. 2n = 30. {\i Sandy and rocky places. S. Europe, extending northwards to S.E. Czechoslovakia.} Al Bu Cr Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A very variable species, which needs further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. corcyrensis} Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 71 (1928). Setose-hispid, shortly glandular-pubescent perennial; stems 25-40 cm, ascending. Basal leaves 6-8 × 1-2 cm, withering at maturity; lower cauline oblong, obtuse. Bracts as long as or slightly longer than calyx, oblong or lanceolate. Calyx 7-8 mm in flower, 8-9 mm in fruit, more or less glandular. Corolla whitish, the lobes bluish when dry, glabrous outside; tube nearly twice as long as calyx. Nutlets c. 2·5 mm in diameter, minutely granular-tuberculate.{\i  Calcareous mountain rocks. • S. Albania, W. Greece.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. lutea} DC., {\i Prodr. }{\b 10}: 102 (1846). Setose-hispid, glandular-pubescent annual; stems 30-80 cm, erect or ascending. Basal leaves not developed; lower cauline 2-7 × 0·7-1·2 cm, elliptical to elliptic-lanceolate. Bracts at least twice as long as calyx, elliptical to elliptic-lanceolate. Calyx 5-6 mm in flower, 6-8 mm in fruit. Corolla yellow, glabrous outside; tube nearly twice as long as calyx; limb 5-7 mm in diameter. Nutlets 2·5 mm in diameter, scrobiculate-tuberculate. 2n = 28.{\i  Dry, stony places. • W. Mediterranean region.} Bl Co Ga Hs It ?Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. pelia} (Halácsy) Rech. fil.,{\i  Ann. Naturh. Mus. Wien}{\b  68}: 206 (1965) ({\i A. stribrnyi} var.{\i  pelia} Halácsy). Rigidly setose and glandular-pubescent perennial. Basal leaves 6-10 × 2-2·5 cm, lanceolate; cauline cordate. Bracts longer than calyx. Calyx 6-7 mm in flower, 9 mm in fruit, eglandular. Corolla white (brownish when dry), glabrous outside; tube as long as calyx; limb c. 10 mm in diameter. Nutlets 2 mm, minutely granular, tuberculate. {\i Mountain woods. • C. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b 11-14}). {\b A. pindicola} group. Setose-hispid, more or less glandular-pubescent perennials, woody at base. Basal leaves lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate; cauline ovate to ovate-lanceolate, cordate at base. Bracts twice as long as calyx, cordate- to lanceolate-triangular. Corolla hairy, rarely subglabrous. Nutlets minutely granular, scrobiculate-tuberculate.
\par

\par
96}
\par