{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min30}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min30}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1022}{\nofchars5830}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 1 Corolla-tube only slightly longer than calyx ........................ }{\b\fs28 13. noneiformis}{\fs28 
\par 1 Corolla-tube nearly twice as long as calyx
\par 2 Corolla-limb c. 9 mm in diameter .......................................... }{\b\fs28 14. pulmonaria}{\fs28 
\par 2 Corolla-limb 5-6 mm in diameter
\par 3 Bracts cordate-triangular; calyx c. 8 mm in flower ................... }{\b\fs28 11. pindicola}{\fs28 
\par 3 Bracts lanceolate, acute; calyx 4-5 mm in flower .................... }{\b\fs28 12. sandwithii}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 11. A. pindicola}{\fs28  Hausskn.,}{\i\fs28  Mitt. Th\'fcr. Bot. Ver.}{\b\fs28  6}{\fs28 : 32 (1888). Stems 30-50 cm, ascending. Basal leaves 10-20 \'d7 3 cm. Lower bracts twice as long as calyx, cordate-triangular. Calyx c. 8 mm in flower, c. 11 mm in fruit. Corolla pale yellowish to brownish, sometimes with blue veins, blackish when dry, hairy outside; tube nearly twice as long as calyx; limb 5-6 mm in diameter. Nutlets c. 3 mm in diameter, reticulate-tuberculate. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Balkan peninsula, from }{\fs28 39\'b0}{\i\fs28  to }{\fs28 41\'b0}{\i\fs28  N}{\fs28 . Al Gr Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 12. A. sandwithii}{\fs28  Rech. fil.,}{\i\fs28  Ann. Naturh. Mus.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Wien}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  68}{\fs28 : 212 (1965). Stems 20-40 cm. Basal leaves 4-7 \'d7 0\'b77-1\'b72 cm. Bracts nearly twice as long as calyx, lanceolate, acute. Calyx 4-5 mm in flower, 5-6 mm in fruit. Corolla yellow, hairy or subglabrous outside; tube nearly twice as long as calyx; limb c. 5 mm in diameter. Nutlets c. 2\'b75 mm in diameter, reticulate-tuberculate. Stony limestone slopes. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S.E. Albania.}{\fs28  Al.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 13. A. noneiformis}{\fs28  Griseb., }{\i\fs28 Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 90 (1844). Stems 25-40 cm. Basal leaves 10-15 \'d7 1\'b75 cm. Bracts slightly longer than to twice as long as calyx. Calyx 6-7 mm in flower, 10-11 mm in fruit. Corolla purplish-violet, hairy outside; tube slightly longer than calyx; limb 6-7 mm in diameter. Nutlets 2-2\'b75 mm in diameter, minutely granular and irregularly reticulate-tuberculate.}{\i\fs28  Rocks. \bullet  S. Jugoslavia}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Makedonija}{\fs28 ). Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 14. A. pulmonaria}{\fs28  Griseb.,}{\i\fs28  loc. cit. }{\fs28 (1844). Stems 25-40 cm; basal leaves 10-15 \'d7 1\'b75 cm; bracts slightly longer than to twice as long as calyx. Calyx 5-7 mm in flower, c. 15 mm in fruit. Corolla pale orange, hairy outside; tube twice as long as calyx; limb 9 mm in diameter. Nutlets 2-2\'b75 mm in diameter, granular-tuberculate.}{\i\fs28  Limestone rocks. \bullet  S. Jugoslavia}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 S. Makedonija}{\fs28 ). Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 15. A. scardica}{\fs28  Griseb., }{\i\fs28 op. cit.}{\fs28  91 (1844). Shortly setose-hispid, eglandular perennial. Stems 10-30 cm, ascending or erect. Basal leaves 4-6 \'d7 0\'b78-1\'b72 cm, oblanceolate; cauline oblong-lanceolate. Bracts nearly twice as long as calyx, lanceolate. Calyx c. 5 mm in fruit. Corolla blue, glabrous or hairy outside; tube twice as long as calyx; limb 8-11 mm in diameter. Nutlets c. 2 mm in diameter, reticulate, minutely granular. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Mountains of N. Albania and S.W. Jugoslavia.}{\fs28  Al Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 16. A. sieberi}{\fs28  DC.,}{\i\fs28  Prodr.}{\b\fs28  10}{\fs28 : 99 (1846). Shortly setose-hispid, eglandular, caespitose perennial. Stems 5-15 cm, erect. Basal leaves 3-4 \'d7 0\'b75-0\'b76 cm, oblong-linear; cauline oblong-linear. Bracts as long as or slightly longer than calyx, linear-lanceolate. Calyx 4-5 mm in flower, 6-7 mm in fruit, eglandular. Corolla pale yellowish, later turning blue, glabrous outside; tube twice as long as calyx; limb c. 4 mm in diameter. Nutlets c. 2 mm in diameter, rugose-tuberculate.}{\i\fs28  Dry, often sandy soil. \bullet  Kriti. }{\fs28 Cr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 17. A. sartoriana}{\fs28  Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., }{\i\fs28 Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 ): 134 (1856). Setose, glandular-pubescent perennial; stems 10-40 cm, ascending. Basal leaves 5-7 \'d7 0\'b78-1\'b72 cm, oblong; cauline oblong-linear. Bracts as long as or slightly longer than calyx, lanceolate. Calyx c. 7 mm in flower, c. 9 mm in fruit, densely glandular-pubescent. Corolla whitish, yellowish when dry, glabrous outside; tube as long as calyx; limb c. 10 mm in diameter. Nutlets c. 2 mm in diameter, tuberculate.}{\i\fs28  Dry, sandy places. S. Greece}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Navplion}{\fs28 ). Gr.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 13.           Halacsya}{\fs28          D\'f6rfler 
\par }{\fs24 By D.H. Valentine & E. Mayer.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial herbs. Flowers in termina], bracteate cymes. Calyx slightly unequally lobed almost to the base. Corolla yellow, infundibuliform, slightly unequally 5-lobed to c. \'bd way; tube without annulus or scales, but with 5 small invaginations just below the throat. Stamens included, inserted at the throat. Style exserted; stigma small, entire. Nutlets usually solitary by abortion, ovoid, acute, keeled, rugose, with more or less flat base.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. H. sendtneri}{\fs28  (Boiss.) D\'f6rfler,}{\i\fs28  Herb. Norm.}{\b\fs28  44}{\fs28 : 103 (1902). Appressed-pubescent, with stout, creeping, sometimes branched stock; stems 10-25 cm, ascending to erect, simple. Basal leaves up to 10 \'d7 0\'b75 cm, linear-lanceolate, narrowed into an indistinct petiole; cauline leaves c. 2 cm. Cymes solitary, dense in flower, lax in fruit. Calyx c. 5 mm in flower, up to 8 mm in fruit. Corolla c. 10 mm, yellow. Nutlets c. 3 mm. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Serpentine rocks. \bullet  C. Jugoslavia, N. Albania.}{\fs28  Al Ju.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 14.               Echium}{\fs28                L.
\par }{\fs24 By P.E. Gibbs.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Annual, biennial or perennial, hispid herbs or shrubs, with tubercle-based setae. Flowers in bracteate cymes, often forming panicles. Calyx lobed almost to the base, sometimes accrescent. Corolla blue, purple, yellow or white, broadly to narrowly infundibuliform, usually with an annulus of 10 minute scales or tufts of hairs, or a flange-like membrane, at the base, but without scales or invaginations above; tube straight; limb usually oblique. Stamens unequal, exserted or included, inserted below middle of corolla. Style exserted; stigma capitate or bifid. Nutlets ovoid-trigonous, erect, rugose, with flat base.
\par 
\par   All species, except those for which another habitat is specified, grow in dry, more or less open habitats, such as sand-dunes, roadsides, cultivated fields or dry pastures.
\par 
\par   Many taxa are very variable in habit, leaf-shape and indumentum; species limits in a number of cases are still critical.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 E. strictum}{\fs28  L. fil., }{\i\fs28 Suppl.}{\fs28  131 (1781) (}{\i\fs28 E. ambiguum}{\fs28  DC.), an erect shrub with petiolate, hispid leaves with prominent lateral veins, native of Islas Canarias, is reported from Sicilia, but is not known with certainty to be naturalized. }{\b\fs28 E. candicans }{\fs28 L. fil.,}{\i\fs28  Suppl.}{\fs28  131 (1781), an erect shrub with densely grey-villous leaves with prominent lateral veins, native of Madeira, has been reported from N.W. Spain, probably as a garden escape; }{\b\fs28 E. marianum}{\fs28  Boiss., }{\i\fs28 Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 11}{\fs28 ): 90 (1849) and}{\b\fs28  E. pavonianum}{\fs28  Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\fs28  91 (1849), also reported from Spain, are probably variants of this species.
\par 
\par   Literature: G. Klotz, }{\i\fs28 Wiss. Zeitschr. Univ. Halle}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Math.-Nat}{\fs28 .) }{\b\fs28 9}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 ): 363-377 (1960); }{\b\fs28 11}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 293-302; }{\b\fs28 11}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28 ): 703-711; }{\b\fs28 11}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 9}{\fs28 ): 1087-1103 (1962); }{\b\fs28 12}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 137-142 (1963). R. Fernandes, }{\i\fs28 Bol. Soc. Brot.}{\fs28  ser. 2, }{\b\fs28 43}{\fs28 : 145-158 (1969); }{\b\fs28 44}{\fs28 : 146-166 (1970).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 All stamens completely included in corolla-tube
\par 2 Calyx 6-8 mm at anthesis, up to 15 mm in fruit with 
\par   lobes 3-6 mm wide at the base ............................................... }{\b\fs28 17. parviflorum}{\fs28 
\par 2 Calyx 5-7 mm at anthesis, up to 10 mm in fruit with
\par   lobes 2-3 mm wide at the base .................................................. }{\b\fs28 18. arenarium}{\fs28 
\par 1 At least 1-2 stamens exserted from corolla-tube
\par 3 Stigma capitate, somewhat bilobed ............................................. }{\b\fs28 9. russicum}{\fs28 
\par 3 Stigma distinctly bifid
\par 
\par 97}
\par }