{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 4 Corolla flesh-coloured or yellowish- or bluish-white 
\par
  (usually brown or blue-grey when dry)
\par
5 Inflorescence intricately branched
\par
6 Corolla 13-18 mm; filaments pinkish-red; basal leaves
\par
  usually oblanceolate, ± rounded at base, usually 
\par
  somewhat strigose .................................................................... {\b 4. asperrimum}
\par
6 Corolla 10-12 mm; filaments pale; basal leaves usually 
\par
  ± lanceolate, attenuate at base, usually not strigose ....................... {\b 5. italicum}
\par
5 Inflorescence ± spike-like
\par
7 Plant usually with a single or a dominant flowering 
\par
  stem, with stout, asperous to stinging setae
\par
8 Corolla 10-12 mm, usually yellowish- or bluish-white;
\par
  filaments pale; flowering stem 40-100 cm ..................................... {\b 5. italicum}
\par
8 Corolla 16-18 mm, flesh-coloured; filaments pink-carmine;
\par
  flowering stem 60-250 cm ............................................................. {\b 8. boissieri}
\par
7 Plant usually with several, ± equal ascending or erect
\par
  flowering stems with soft setae
\par
9 Corolla 13-16 mm, flesh-coloured; basal leaves 40-150 mm ......... {\b 7. flavum}
\par
9 Corolla 7-10 mm, bluish-white; basal leaves usually 
\par
  more than 250 mm .................................................................... {\b 6. lusitanicum}
\par
4 Corolla blue, reddish-purple, or pink-carmine turning
\par
  blue-purple (reddish to blue or purple when dry)
\par
10 Corolla 7-10 mm
\par
11 Basal leaves usually more than 250 mm; perennial; stems
\par
   several to many, arising from beneath basal rosette ................ {\b 6. lusitanicum}
\par
11 Basal leaves usually less than 150 mm; biennial; stems
\par
   1 to several, arising from centre of basal rosette .......................... {\b 10. vulgare}
\par
10 Corolla 11-40 mm
\par
12 Corolla subglabrous, hairy on veins and margins only;
\par
   basal leaves usually broadly ovate to spathulate with
\par
   prominent lateral veins ....................................................... {\b 11. plantagineum}
\par
12 Corolla ± uniformly hairy; basal leaves usually lanceo-
\par
   late to oblanceolate, without prominent lateral veins
\par
13 Calyx 10-17 mm at anthesis, densely villous with long,
\par
   white hairs and very sparse setae .................................................. {\b 1. albicans}
\par
13 Calyx 5-10 mm at anthesis, without long, white hairs 
\par
   and with ± dense setae
\par
14 Most flowers with 1-2 exserted stamens
\par
15 Stems ascending, with underlayer of forwardly directed or
\par
   irregularly patent hairs; upper cauline leaves usually ob-
\par
   lanceolate to spathulate, attenuate or petiolate at base ..............{\b 12. sabulicola}
\par
15 Stems erect, with underlayer of appressed, uniformly 
\par
   deflexed hairs at least in the lower third; upper 
\par
   cauline leaves usually narrowly elliptical, lanceolate
\par
   or obovate, ± abruptly sessile
\par
16 Calyx 7-9 mm at anthesis, enlarging to 12-19 mm in 
\par
   fruit; corolla 15-40 mm, broadly infundibuliform ..................... {\b 13. creticum}
\par
16 Calyx 5-8 mm at anthesis, not enlarging in fruit;
\par
   corolla 15-25 mm, narrowly infundibuliform ..................... {\b 14. tuberculatum}
\par
14 Most flowers with 3-5 distinctly exserted stamens
\par
17 Plant whitish or greyish with very dense, patent,
\par
   stinging setae; leaves usually 1·5-5(-8) mm wide,
\par
   linear-oblong or narrowly lanceolate to oblanceolate
\par
18 Corolla 13-14 mm, usually bluish-purple; upper cauline
\par
   leaves 1·5-3 mm wide, ± linear-oblong .......................................... {\b 3. humile}
\par
18 Corolla 16-22 mm, usually reddish-purple; upper 
\par
   cauline leaves 3-5(-8) mm wide, ± narrowly lanceolate
\par
   to oblanceolate ..................................................................... {\b 2. angustifolium}
\par
17 Plant ± greenish with sparse to dense, appressed to 
\par
   patent setae; basal and lower cauline leaves usually
\par
   10-30 mm wide, ovate, lanceolate or oblanceolate
\par
19 Stems several to many, robust, ascending, arising from a stout,
\par
   ± woody stock; upper cauline leaves ovate to broadly lanceolate
\par
20 Perennial; stems and leaves ± greenish; corolla 
\par
   pinkish-violet, the tube dilating gradually ............................... {\b 16. rosulatum}
\par
20 Biennial; stems and leaves ± greyish and pustulate;
\par
   corolla clear blue to bluish-violet, the tube ± 
\par
   abruptly dilating at the middle ................................................ {\b 15. gaditanum}
\par
19 Stems 1 to several, ± slender erect, usually without
\par
   a stout stock; upper cauline leaves ± narrowly 
\par
   lanceolate or narrowly oblong
\par
21 Corolla 11-19 mm,usually bright blue, with 4-5 long-
\par
   exserted stamens .......................................................................... {\b 10. vulgare}
\par
21 Corolla 15-25 mm, usually dark bluish-purple, with 2-4 
\par
   variously exserted stamens .................................................. {\b 14. tuberculatum}
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. albicans} Lag. & Rodr., {\i Anal. Ci. Nat.}{\b  5}: 269 (1802). Erect, more or less softly hairy perennial 20-75 cm, with 1- to several flowering stems; leaves and stems with a dense, short, whitish, layer of appressed hairs and more or less sparse setae. Leaves 35-70 × 4-9 mm, linear-oblong to narrowly lanceolate. Calyx 10-17 mm at anthesis, scarcely accrescent, with long, white hairs. Corolla 16-26 mm, infundibuliform, pinkish-red to bluish-purple, with 2-3 exserted stamens.{\i  Rocks and screes; calcicole. •  Mountains of S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. angustifolium} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 6 (1768) (incl. {\i E. diffusum} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  E. sericeum} Vahl). Erect, hispid perennial 25-40 cm with several flowering stems; stems, leaves and calyx densely white-setose. Leaves 20-55 × 3-8 mm, narrowly lanceolate to narrowly oblanceolate. Calyx 7-10 mm at anthesis, up to 15 mm in fruit. Corolla 16-22 mm, infundibuliform, reddish or reddish-purple to purplish-violet, with 4 more or less long-exserted stamens. {\i Aegean region.} Cr Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Following Klotz, a broad view has been taken of this very variable species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. E. humile} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl. }{\b 1}: 165 (1798) ({\i E. angustifolium} Lam., non Miller; incl. {\i E. pycnanthum} Pomel). Hispid perennial 10-25 cm, with several flowering stems; stems, leaves and especially the calyx densely white-setose. Leaves 20-40 × 1·5-3 mm, linear-oblong to very narrowly oblanceolate. Calyx 6-8 mm at anthesis, not strongly accrescent. Corolla c. 13 mm, more or less infundibuliform, bluish-purple, with 4 more or less long-exserted stamens.{\i  C. & S.E. Spain. }Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. E. asperrimum} Lam., {\i Tabl. Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 412 (1792) ({\i E. italicum} subsp.{\i  pyrenaicum} Rouy). Erect biennial up to 100 cm, much-branched from near the base and with an indumentum of dense, whitish-grey, patent, stinging setae. Basal leaves 120-250 × 30-50 mm, oblanceolate; cauline leaves narrowly lanceolate. Inflorescence intricately branched. Calyx 6-7 mm at anthesis, slightly accrescent. Corolla 13-18 mm, very narrowly infundibuliform, flesh-pink, with 4-5 long-exserted stamens; filaments red. 2n = 14.{\i  W. Mediterranean region. }Bl Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. E. italicum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 139 (1753). Erect, hispid biennial 40-100 cm, usually with a single or a dominant flowering stem. Basal leaves 200-350 × 15-40 mm, lanceolate, with appressed, soft setae; cauline leaves more or less narrowly elliptical. Inflorescence spike-like or much-branched and pyramidal. Calyx 6-7 mm. Corolla 10-12 mm, very narrowly infundibuliform, yellowish-, pinkish- or bluish-white, with 4-5 long-exserted stamens; filaments pale. 2n = 16, 32.{\i  S. & S.C. Europe.} Al Au Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants with a branched inflorescence approach{\b  4} and intermediates possibly occur in S. France and Islas Baleares.
\par

\par
98}
\par