{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. E. lusitanicum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 140 (1753). Erect or ascending more or less softly hairy perennial with several to many flowering stems. Basal leaves 250-450 × 15-70 mm, broadly lanceolate, with appressed, soft setae; cauline leaves narrowly lanceolate. Inflorescence spike-like. Calyx 5-7 mm. Corolla 7-10 mm, infundibuliform, bluish-white to dark grey-blue, with all the stamens long-exserted; filaments red. •{\i  C. Portugal, W. & W.C. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  lusitanicum}: stems shortly and more or less sparsely hairy; corolla bluish-white, very narrowly infundibuliform.{\i  Portugal, W. Spain}.
\par ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b polycaulon}(Boiss.) P. Gibbs, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 379 (1971) ({\i E. polycaulon} Boiss., ?{\i E. salmanticum} Lag.): Stems and leaves densely hairy; corolla dark bluish-grey, more or less dilated, infundibuliform.{\i  W.C. Spain}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. E. flavum} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.} {\b 1}: 165 (1798) ({\i E. fontanesii} DC.). Erect or ascending biennial or perennial 20-80 cm, with 1 or usually several flowering stems. Basal leaves 40-150 × 8-30 mm, narrowly obovate to oblanceolate, with soft, appressed setae; cauline leaves very narrowly elliptical. Inflorescence spike-like. Calyx 5-8 mm. Corolla 13-16 mm, very narrowly infundibuliform, flesh-pink, with 5 long-exserted stamens; filaments red.{\i  Screes and mountain pastures; calcicole. S., C. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. E. boissieri} Steudel, {\i Nomencl. Bot.} ed. 2,{\b  1}: 540 (1840) ({\i E. pomponium} Boiss.). Large, erect, hispid biennial 60-250 cm, usually with a single or a dominant flowering stem. Basal leaves 100-250 × 40-50 mm, elliptical to lanceolate, with soft, appressed setae; cauline leaves narrowly elliptical to lanceolate. Inflorescence spike-like. Calyx 8-9 mm. Corolla 16-18 mm, very narrowly infundibuliform, flesh-pink, with 5 long-exserted stamens; filaments red. {\i S. Spain, Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. E. russicum} J. F. Gmelin, {\i Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 323 (1791) ({\i E. rubrum} Jacq., non Forskal). Erect, hispid biennial 25-50 cm, with 1 to several flowering stems. Basal and cauline leaves 55-100 × 4-10 mm, lanceolate to narrowly elliptical, attenuate at the base, with soft, appressed setae. Inflorescence spike-like. Calyx 5-6 mm. Corolla 9-12 mm, more or less infundibuliform, dark red, with 4-5 long-exserted stamens; filaments red. 2n = 24.{\i  Meadows and uncultivated slopes, scrub. E.C. & S.E. Europe, extending northwards to} c. 55°{\i  N. in C. Russia.} Al Au Bu Cz Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. E. vulgare} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 139 (1753). Erect, hispid biennial (or sometimes perennial ?) 20-90 cm, with 1 to several flowering stems. Leaves with rather soft, appressed setae; the basal and lower cauline 50-150 × 10-20 mm, elliptical to lanceolate, attenuate and petiolate at base; the upper narrowly lanceolate, sessile. Inflorescence more or less spike-like to paniculate. Calyx 5-7 mm. Corolla 10-19 mm, blue to bluish-violet, with 4-5 long-exserted stamens. 2n = 16, 32. {\i Almost throughout Europe.} All except Az Bl Fa Is Rs (N) Sb; casual in some of these.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable and requiring further study. Plants with more or less sparse, rigid setae sometimes arising from white tubercles have been separated as{\b  E. pustulatum }Sibth. & Sm., Fl. Graec.{\i  Prodr.}{\b  1}: 125 (1806) but many intermediates occur.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. E. plantagineum} L., {\i Mantissa Alt.} 202 (1771) ({\i E. lycopsis} L. pro parte,{\i  E. maritimum} Willd.). Erect, softly hairy, annual or biennial 20-60 cm, with 1 to many flowering stems. Basal leaves 50-140 × c. 15 mm, ovate, with prominent lateral veins and soft appressed setae; cauline leaves oblong to lanceolate the uppermost more or less cordate at the base. Inflorescence usually branched. Calyx 7-10 mm at anthesis, up to 15 mm in fruit. Corolla 18-30 mm, infundibuliform, blue becoming pink through purple, hairy on veins and margins only, usually with 2 exserted stamens. 2n = 16.{\i  Roadsides, fields and sandy areas near the sea. S. & W. Europe, northwards to S.W. England; an occasional casual elsewhere.} Al Az Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (C, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 12. E. sabulicola} Pomel, {\i Nouv. Mat. Fl. Atl.} 90 (1874) ({\i E. maritimum} auct., non Willd.,{\i  E. confusum} Coincy). Procumbent, ascending or erect, hispid biennial or perennial 15-50 cm, with several to many flowering stems. Basal leaves ovate to obovate-cauline leaves oblanceolate to spathulate, attenuate and subpetiolate at base, with more or less dense, white, appressed or patent setae. Inflorescence more or less branched, laxly paniculate. Calyx 6-10 mm at anthesis, up to 16 mm in fruit, densely white-setose. Corolla 12-22 mm, infundibuliform, dark blue or pinkish- to bluish-purple, usually with 1-2 stamens exserted; filaments sometimes sparsely hairy.{\i  Roadsides, fields and sandy areas near the sea. W. Mediterranean region.} Bl Co Ga Hs It Sa Si
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. E. creticum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 139 (1753). Erect, hispid biennial 25-90 cm, with 1 to several flowering stems. Basal and lower cauline leaves 60-180 × 10-25 mm, narrowly oblanceolate, with sparse to dense, patent setae; cauline leaves usually narrowly elliptical or oblong. Inflorescence more or less branched, paniculate. Calyx 7-9 mm at anthesis, 12-19 mm in fruit. Corolla 15-40 mm, infundibuliform, persistently reddish-purple, or pink-carmine turning blue or bluish-purple, with 1-2 stamens exserted; filaments sparsely hairy or glabrous.{\i  Roadsides and grassy slopes. W. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Bl Co Ga Hs ?It Lu Sa.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant usually with a single, little-branched stem;
\par  corolla 23-35 mm, reddish-purple .................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b creticum}
\par 1 Plant with several, usually branched, flowering stems;
\par  corolla 15-30 mm, usually bluish-purple or bluish
\par 2 Bracts much longer than the calyx .............................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b algarbiense}
\par 2 Bracts shorter than or equalling the calyx ................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b coincyanum}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  creticum}: Flowering stems usually solitary; lower leaves ovate-lanceolate with yellowish hairs. Filaments with long, straggling hairs.{\i  S. France, N.E. Spain, Islas Baleares, Corse, Sardegna}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b coincyanum}(Lacaita) R. Fernandes,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot}. ser. 2, {\b 43}: 153 (1969): Flowering stems usually several; lower leaves oblong or oblanceolate with whitish hairs. Filaments very sparsely hairy or glabrous. {\i S. & E. Spain, S. Portugal}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b algarbiense} R. Fernandes,{\i  op. cit. }154 (1969): Like ({\b b}) but more robust; leaves elliptic to ovate-oblong. Filaments glabrous. 2n = 16. {\i S. Portugal}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. E. tuberculatum} Hoffmanns. & Link,{\i  Fl. Port.}{\b  1}: 183 (1810). Like {\b 13} but basal leaves 50-130 × 6-15 mm; upper cauline leaves 25-110 × 4-15 mm, narrowly oblong to lanceolate; calyx enlarging up to c. 8 mm in fruit; corolla 15-25 mm, dark blue-purple, with 2-4 irregularly exserted stamens. 2n = 16.{\i  C. & S. Portugal.} Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. E. gaditanum} Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 422 (1841). Erect or ascending, roughly hispid biennial 20-75 cm, with several to many robust flowering stems arising from a more or less woody stock. Leaves 30-110 × 5-30 mm, the lowermost lanceolate to oblanceolate, attenuate at base and long-petiolate;
\par
\par 99}
\par