{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min6}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min7}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords908}{\nofchars5176}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 265 Pericarp with resin-canals .......................................... }{\b\fs28 81. Leucanthemum}{\fs28 
\par 265 Pericarp without resin-canals 
\par 266 Caespitose perennials ............................................... }{\b\fs28 74. Leucanthemopsis}{\fs28  
\par 266 Annuals
\par 267 Basal rosette absent; achenes with stout, prominent
\par     ribs ................................................................................ }{\b\fs28 79. Hymenostemma}{\fs28 
\par 267 Basal rosette present; achenes very weakly ribbed .............. }{\b\fs28 57. Anthemis}{\fs28  
\par 258 At least some leaves 2- to 3-pinnatisect
\par 268 Ligules yellow, at least towards the base
\par 269 Outer achenes 3-angled, winged on the angles, the 
\par     inner with an adaxial wing or cylindrical ..................... }{\b\fs28 66. Chrysanthemum}{\fs28 
\par 269 Achenes all similar, unwinged ........................................... }{\b\fs28 69. Tanacetum}{\fs28 
\par 268 Ligules white, rarely pink or purplish
\par 270 Leaf-lobes subulate
\par 271 Outer achenes curved, transversely lamellate, with a
\par     conspicuous auricle ............................................................ }{\b\fs28 73. Otospermum}{\fs28 
\par 271 Outer achenes neither curved nor lamellate, without an auricle
\par 272 Achenes with a transverse basal attachment-scar,
\par     strongly 3-ribbed, with apical resin-glands ............................ }{\b\fs28 60. Matricaria}{\fs28 
\par 272 Achenes with an oblique lateral attachment scar,
\par     weakly 3- to 5-ribbed, without apical resin-glands ............. }{\b\fs28 61. Chamomilla}{\fs28 
\par 270 Leaf-lobes flat
\par 273 Pericarp with resin-canals ........................................... }{\b\fs28 81. Leucanthemum}{\fs28 
\par 273 Pericarp without resin-canals
\par 274 Pappus a corona; capitula usually in corymbs ................... }{\b\fs28 69. Tanacetum}{\fs28 
\par 274 Pappus absent; capitula usually solitary ...................... }{\b\fs28 68. Dendranthema}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 Subfam. ASTEROIDEAE}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Plant usually without latex. At least some inner florets without a ligulate corolla. Pollen-grains usually with uniformly distributed spines.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  Tribe    }{\b\fs28  Eupatorieae}{\fs28      Cass.
\par }{\fs24 Edit. \'86T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Leaves usually opposite, simple. Capitula without ligules; florets all hermaphrodite; corolla not yellow. Receptacle without scales. Anthers obtuse at base. Style-branches obtuse or clavate, finely papillose. Pappus of hairs.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28  Ageratum houstonianum}{\fs28  Miller, }{\i\fs28 Gard. Dict.}{\fs28  ed. 8, no. 2 (1768), from Mexico, is frequently cultivated for ornament and occurs as a casual. It is an annual up to c. 60 cm, with usually cordate leaves, densely puberulent and somewhat glandular involucral bracts and blue florets.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.          Eupatorium}{\fs28            L.
\par }{\fs24 By \'86T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial herbs or shrubs. Leaves usually opposite. Capitula in terminal corymbs or panicles. Involucral bracts in few rows. Receptacle flat or convex, without scales. All florets tubular, hermaphrodite, 5-lobed or -dentate, white, pink or purplish. Achenes oblong or fusiform, 5-angled, truncate at apex; pappus hairs in 1 row, denticulate.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 Stems and petioles puberulent but eglandular; leaves 
\par   usually 3- to 5-fid .................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. cannabinum}{\fs28 
\par Stems and petioles densely glandular-pubescent; leaves 
\par   simple ................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. adenophorum}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. E. cannabinum}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  838 (1753). Erect, puberulent herb 30-175 cm. Most leaves palmately 3- to 5-fid (rarely all simple), the lobes lanceolate to ovate, acuminate, coarsely serrate, shortly petiolate. Capitula 2-5 mm in diameter; involucre cylindrical to campanulate; outer bracts much shorter than inner; inner c. 6 mm, ovate, broadly scarious and often purplish. Achenes c. 3 mm, black; pappus-hairs numerous.}{\i\fs28  Damp places. Most of Europe northwards to}{\fs28  c. 63\'b0}{\i\fs28  N. in Finland.}{\fs28  All except Az Cr Fa Is Sb.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 cannabinum}{\fs28 : Plant usually robust and tall; middle cauline leaves almost always 3- to 5-fid; pappus longer than achene. 2n = 20, 40. }{\i\fs28 Throughout the range of the species, except Corse}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 corsicum}{\fs28  (Req. ex Loisel.) P. Fourn., }{\i\fs28 Quatre Fl. Fr.}{\fs28  937 (1939): Plant slender and small; all leaves often undivided; pappus not longer than achene. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Corse, Sardegna, S. Italy}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. E. adenophorum}{\fs28  Sprengel, }{\i\fs28 Syst. Veg.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 : 420 (1826). Erect or scrambling perennial up to 200 cm. Stems, petioles and peduncles with short glandular hairs. Leaves unlobed, rhombic or triangular, crenate-serrate except for the cuneate or truncate basal portion; petiole c. \'bd as long as lamina. Capitula 5-10 mm in diameter; involucre campanulate; bracts broadly scarious reddish, acute or acuminate, glandular-serrulate above, and with scattered purplish glandular hairs; outer bracts about as long as the inner. Achenes c. 2 mm, black; pappus hairs 5-10. 2n = 51. }{\i\fs28 Sometimes cultivated for ornament and naturalized in : S. Europe}{\fs28 . [Az Co Cr Hs Lu.] (}{\i\fs28 Mexico}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  Tribe        }{\b\fs28  Asterea }{\fs28        Cass 
\par }{\fs24 Edit. \'86T.G. Tutin.
\par  
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Leaves alternate, simple. Capitula with or without ligules; outer florets female or sterile, the inner hermaphrodite or functionally male; ligules yellow, white or purple; tubular florets usually yellow. Receptacle without scales. Anthers usually obtuse at base. Style-branches flattened, acute or subobtuse; stigmatic surface marginal, usually not reaching apex. Pappus usually of hairs.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 2.          Grindelia}{\fs28           Willd.
\par }{\fs24 By A. Hansen.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Biennial or perennial. Leaves simple, alternate. Capitula medium to large. Involucral bracts in several rows. Receptacle flat or convex, without scales. Outer florets ligulate, female; inner florets tubular, hermaphrodite or sterile. Achenes compressed-subquadrangular, glabrous. Pappus of 2-10 more or less serrulate, deciduous awns.
\par 
\par  Literature: J. A. Steyermark,}{\i\fs28  Ann. Rep. Missouri Bot. Gard.}{\b\fs28  21}{\fs28 : 433-608 (1934).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. G. squarrosa}{\fs28  (Pursh) Dunal,}{\i\fs28  M\'e9m. Mus. Hist. Nat.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Paris}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  5}{\fs28 : 50 (1819). Erect biennial or perennial up to 100 cm, often branched above. Leaves 3-7 cm, ovate-oblong, amplexicaul, resinous-punctate, serrate-crenate or entire. Capitula several, 2-3 cm in diameter, terminating leafy branches. Involucral bracts 3-8 \'d7 0\'b75-1 mm, with cylindrical, squarrose-deflexed apex very viscid. Ligules numerous, 7-15 mm, yellow, rarely absent. Inner florets yellow. Achenes 2-3 mm, oblong, brown. Pappus-awns 2-8, 3-5 mm, usually finely serrulate. }{\i\fs28 Formerly cultivated as a medicinal plant, and naturalized in waste places in Ukraine.}{\fs28  [Rs (W, E).] (}{\i\fs28 North America}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par 109}
\par }