{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 shorter than to as long as the 6-12 flowers; ovary more or less sparsely to densely pubescent; corolla c. 30 mm. 2n = 32. •{\i  Mountains of E.C. Srbija and W.C. Bulgaria.} Bu Ju.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. E. serpyllifolius} (Vis.) A. DC. in DC.,{\i  Prodr.} {\b 7}: 449 (1839). Caespitose perennial. Rhizome stout, woody, branched. Stems 2-5(-8) cm, procumbent to ascending, sparsely leafy, more or less glabrous, simple. Leaves 7-30(-40) × 1·5-4 mm, spathulate, glabrous (rarely sparsely hairy above), ciliate, entire, obtuse or emarginate, the basal petiolate, the cauline subsessile. Bracts ovate-oblong to lanceolate, obtuse, shorter than the flowers, glabrous, ciliate. Ovary glabrous; calyx-teeth oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, about as long as the ovary, ciliate, not appendiculate. Flowers solitary. Corolla 15-20(-30) mm, glabrous, dark violet. •{\i  W. Jugoslavia, N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 7-9}). {\b E. pumilio} group. Dwarf, caespitose perennials. Rhizome stout, woody, branched. Leaves with more or less involute margin, more or less densely appressed-hirsute and greyish above, glabrous beneath, entire, ciliate. Flowers solitary, very rarely 2-3.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla ± densely hirsute .......................................................... {\b 9. wettsteinii}
\par 1 Corolla glabrous, very rarely sparsely hirsute on the veins
\par 2 Stem 1-3 cm, densely leafy ............................................................ {\b 7. pumilio}
\par 2 Stem (1·5-)2-6(-10) cm, sparsely leafy above ............................. {\b 8. dinaricus}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. E. pumilio} (Portenschl.) A. DC. in DC.,{\i  Prodr.} {\b 7}: 449 (1839). Stems 1-3 cm, ascending to erect, densely leafy, simple. Leaves (0·5-)8-20(-25) × 1(-2) mm, linear, sessile. Bracts subovate-lanceolate, linear-attenuate, shorter than the flowers, ciliate, hirsute above. Flowers solitary, sessile. Ovary glabrous; calyx-teeth lanceolate, 11/2-2 times as long as the ovary, sparsely hirsute, not appendiculate. Corolla (11-)14-18(-24) mm, blue-violet, rarely white, glabrous or very rarely sparsely and shortly hirsute on the veins. •{\i  W. Jugoslavia} ({\i Biokovo Planina}). Ju.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. E. dinaricus} (A. Kerner) Wettst.,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 53} ({\b 2}): 192 (1887). Like {\b 7} but flowering stems (1·5-)2-6(-10) cm, sparsely leafy above; leaves (10-)25-35 (-40) × (0·5-)1·5-2·5 mm; bracts oblong-lanceolate; corolla 12-15(-20) mm. •{\i  W. & C. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. E. wettsteinii} Halácsy & Bald.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  41}: 371 (1891). Like {\b 7} but leaves up to (1-)2 mm wide; calyx-teeth 2-3 times as long as the ovary; flowers solitary, rarely 2-3(-5); corolla (8-)10-12 mm, more or less densely hirsute. •{\i  Mountains of Crna Gora and N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 13.          Jasione}            L.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, biennial or perennial herbs. Flowers small, sessile to shortly pedicellate, not subtended by bracts, in capitula surrounded by 1 or more rows of involucral bracts. Calyx 5-toothed. Corolla splitting into 5 linear-lanceolate lobes from the base towards the apex. Stamens 5; filaments subulate; anthers usually connate at base. Style hairy in upper half; stigmas 2. Capsule dehiscing by 2 short, apical valves.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Descriptions of leaves refer to those on the flowering stems.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Basal leaves much longer than the cauline ..................................... {\b 9. foliosa}
\par 1 Basal leaves not or little longer than the cauline
\par 2 Calyx-teeth villous, lanate or ciliate
\par 3 Perennial, with stout stock and non-flowering shoots ..................... {\b 5. crispa}
\par 3 Annual, with slender root and no non-flowering shoots
\par 4 Stems leafless in upper half ......................................................... {\b 1. montana}
\par 4 Stems leafy almost to apex
\par 5 Stems erect, usually branched near apex; calyx-teeth
\par   subulate, villous throughout ...................................................... {\b 3. corymbosa}
\par 5 Stems decumbent, unbranched; calyx-teeth linear-
\par   spathulate, villous near apex only .............................................. {\b 2. penicillata} 
\par 2 Calyx-teeth glabrous, not ciliate
\par 6 Outer involucral bracts entire or shallowly toothed
\par 7 Perennial; margin of leaves and involucral bracts 
\par   strongly thickened and papillose
\par 8 Longest leaves at least 20 mm; pedicels at least twice 
\par   as long as ovary ................................................................................. {\b 6. laevis}
\par 8 Longest leaves not more than 10 mm; pedicels shorter 
\par   than ovary
\par 9 Stems usually 2-10 cm; calyx-teeth subulate ................................... {\b 5. crispa}
\par 9 Stems usually 20-70 cm; calyx-teeth linear-lanceolate .............. {\b 4. lusitanica}
\par 7 Annual or biennial; margin of leaves and involucral 
\par   bracts not or weakly papillose
\par 10 Stem usually leafless in upper half; involucral bracts
\par    shorter than the flowers ................................................................ {\b 1. montana}
\par 10 Stem leafy almost to apex; involucral bracts at least 
\par    as long as the flowers ............................................................... {\b 3. corymbosa}
\par 6  Outer involucral bracts deeply toothed; teeth aristate
\par 11 Leaves glabrous and not ciliate ................................................. {\b 7. bulgarica}
\par 11 Leaves villous or ciliate
\par 12 Outer involucral bracts lanceolate .......................................... {\b 8. heldreichii}
\par 12 Outer involucral bracts ovate, suborbicular or broadly
\par    triangular
\par 13 Perennial, with non-flowering shoots; leaves not undulate ............ {\b 6. laevis}
\par 13 Annual or biennial, without non-flowering shoots;
\par    leaves undulate ............................................................................. {\b 1. montana}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. J. montana} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 928 (1753). More or less villous biennial or annual. Stems 5-50 cm, erect or ascending, leafless in the upper half, simple or branched in the lower part. Leaves linear-oblong to -lanceolate, undulate, entire or remotely crenate; margin usually thin and not or weakly papillose, ciliate. Outer involucral bracts ovate to triangular, rarely lanceolate, entire, crenate or serrate, usually shorter than the flowers. Calyx-teeth subulate, green, glabrous or rarely ciliate. Corolla blue, rarely pink or white. 2n = 12. {\i Most of Europe, northwards to} c. 62°{\i  N. in Finland.} *Az Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Sa Si Su.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable, though apparently with little geographical or ecological differentiation. Subsp.{\b  echinata} (Boiss. & Reuter) Rivas Martinez, {\i Publ. Inst. Biol. Apl.} ({\i Barcelona}){\b  42}: 122 (1967) is a fairly well-marked variant occurring in S.E. Spain and perhaps S. Italy and Sicilia. It is a large, robust, white-hispid plant, with involucral bracts with thickened margins. In other parts of the range of the species the correlation between these characters breaks down, so it does not seem possible to maintain it at subspecific rank.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  A small, annual variant from S. Spain, with thickened leaf-margins, long involucral bracts and ciliate calyx-teeth has been described as {\b J. blepharodon} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Pugillus }72 (1852). It is connected by numerous intermediates with typical{\i  J. montana,} and also has 2n = 12.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. J. penicillata} Boiss., {\i Elenchus} 63 (1838). Slender, pubescent annual. Stems up to c. 10 cm, decumbent, leafy almost to apex. Leaves linear-lanceolate, remotely serrate; margin thin. Outer involucral bracts ovate, coarsely and remotely serrate. Calyx-teeth linear-spathulate, villous at apex only.{\i  Mountain rocks,} c. 900{\i  m. • S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Tejeda}). Hs.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. J. corymbosa} Poiret ex Schultes in Roemer & Schultes, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  5}: 474 (1819). Stout, usually hispidulous annual.
\par 
\par 100}
\par