{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Stems 10-15 cm, erect, with short fastigiate branches in the upper part, leafy almost to apex, sulcate. Leaves linear-lanceolate, undulate; margin somewhat thickened and papillose. Involucral bracts at least as long as the flowers. Calyx-teeth subulate, villous. {\i Sandy places at low altitudes. S. Portugal, S. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. J. lusitanica} A. DC.,{\i  Monogr. Camp.} 105 (1830). Subglabrous or shortly villous perennial. Stems (5-)20-70 cm, numerous, ascending, leafless and glabrous in the upper 1/3-1/2, usually simple. Leaves 3-6 mm, very numerous, obovate to obovate-oblong; margin thick and papillose. Outer involucral bracts shorter than the flowers, ovate, crenate or subentire, shortly villous, with thick, papillose margins. Calyx-teeth linear-lanceolate, glabrous. Corolla blue.{\i  Maritime sands. • N.W. Portugal.} Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. J. crispa} (Pourret) Samp.,{\i  Ann. Sci. Acad. Polyt. Porto}{\b  14}: 161 (1921). More or less hairy perennial with a stout woody stock and usually short non-flowering shoots. Flowering stems 2-10(-40) cm, erect or ascending. Leaves linear-oblong to linear-lanceolate or rarely obovate, usually flat, entire or remotely toothed, rather coriaceous; margin thick, strongly papillose, often ciliate. Outer involucral bracts lanceolate to ovate, entire to crenate-serrate or deeply and sharply serrate; margin thick, cartilaginous and strongly papillose. Calyx-teeth subulate to narrowly triangular, often purplish, glabrous to densely lanate. Corolla blue.{\i  Mountain rocks and screes; rarely on maritime sands. S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucral bracts not imbricate ...................................({\b a}) subsp. {\b cavanillesii}
\par 
1 Involucral bracts closely imbricate
\par 
2 Calyx-teeth glabrous
\par 
3 Leaves with very thick, white margins; bracts whitish
\par 
  ..................................................................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b serpentinica}
\par 
3 Leaf-margins not very thick and white; bracts purplish
\par 
  ..................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b amethystina}
\par 
2 Calyx-teeth ciliate, villous or lanate
\par 
4 Involucral bracts whitish and membranous, at least in 
\par 
  the basal half
\par 
5 Stems and leaves glabrous to softly hairy; leaves thin .... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b mariana}
\par 
5 Stems and leaves hispidulous; leaves thick ................... ({\b g}) subsp. {\b maritima}
\par 
4 Involucral bracts entirely herbaceous or coriaceous
\par 
6 Involucral bracts entire, or nearly entire ......................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b centralis}
\par 
6 Involucral bracts crenate-serrate to serrate
\par 
7 Involucral bracts and upper part of stem lanate ............ ({\b i}) subsp. {\b tomentosa}
\par 
7 Involucral bracts and upper part of stem glabrous or 
\par 
  thinly villous
\par 
8 Flowering stems usually 20-30 cm; plant laxly caespitose  
  ....................................................................................... ({\b h}) subsp. {\b sessiliflora}
\par 
8 Flowering stems usually 5-10 cm; plant ± densely caespitose
\par 
9 Flowering stems very densely leafy; leaves c.2 mm wide;
\par 
  involucral bracts usually green .................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b arvernensis}
\par 
9 Flowering stems rather sparsely leafy; leaves c. 1 mm  wide
\par 
10 Stems crispate-villous near the apex; involucral 
\par 
   bracts ovate, usually purplish-blue ...................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b crispa}
\par 
10 Stems usually glabrous or sparsely villous near the apex; 
\par 
   involucral bracts lanceolate to elliptical, whitish ...... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b serpentinica}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b amethystina} (Lag. & Rodr.) Tutin,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  67}: 278 (1973) ({\i J. amethystina} Lag. & Rodr.): Densely caespitose, with a stout stock. Flowering stems 2-10 cm, usually leafless for some distance below the capitulum. Leaves up to 7 × 2 mm. Involucral bracts ovate, entire or shallowly toothed, purplish. Calyx-teeth linear-lanceolate, glabrous, purplish. 2n = 36. •{\i  S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b centralis} (Rivas Martínez) Rivas Martinez, {\i Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  27}: 154 (1970) ({\i J. humilis} subsp. {\i centralis} Rivas Martínez): Like ({\b a}) but leaves usually less than 5 × 1 mm; involucral bracts triangular-lanceolate; calyx-teeth villous in lower part. •{\i  C. & E. Spain}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b arvernensis} Tutin,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  67}: 278 (1973). Densely caespitose, with a slender stock. Flowering stems 5-10 cm, densely leafy, usually almost up to the capitulum. Leaves 8-12 × c. 2 mm, widest just below the apex. Involucral bracts ovate, coriaceous, obtusely serrate, usually green. Calyx-teeth villous. •{\i  S.C. France} ({\i near le Mont-Dore}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b crispa} ({\i J. humilis} (Pers.) Loisel.): Densely caespitose, with a rather slender stock. Flowering stems 5-10 cm, crispate-villous near apex, rather sparsely leafy and usually leafless for a short distance below the capitulum. Leaves 5-10 × 1-2 mm, usually widest at or below the middle. Involucral bracts ovate, coriaceous, crenate-serrate, usually purplish. Calyx-teeth villous. 2n = 36. {\i  E. Pyrenees, N.E. Spain.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b serpentinica} P. Silva, {\i Agron. Lusit.}{\b  30}: 225 (1970): Like subsp. ({\b d}) but flowering stems leafless in the upper half; margin of leaves very thick, white, papillose; involucral bracts coriaceous, whitish; calyx-teeth glabrous or ciliate. On serpentine. •{\i  N.E. Portugal}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b mariana} (Willk.) Rivas Martínez,{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  28}: 45 (1972) ({\i J. mariana} Willk.): Like subsp. ({\b d}) but stock often very stout; leaves 2-3 mm wide; involucral bracts membranous, at least below. •{\i  C. Spain} ({\i Sierra Morena, Montes de Toledo}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b g}) Subsp. {\b maritima} (Duby) Tutin,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  67}: 278 (1973) ({\i J. montana} var.{\i  maritima} Duby): Stock stout. Flowering stems 5-12 cm, procumbent, leafy almost up to the capitulum, hispidulous throughout. Leaves 3-5 × 0·5-1·5 mm, usually widest about the middle, hispidulous. Involucral bracts ovate, membranous, entire to slightly toothed. Calyx-teeth villous.{\i  Maritime sands. • Coast of S.W. France and N.W. Spain}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b h}) Subsp. {\b sessiliflora} (Boiss. & Reuter) Rivas Martinez,{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  27}: 154 (1970) ({\i J. sessiliflora} Boiss. & Reuter): Laxly caespitose, with a stout stock. Flowering stems (10-)20-40 cm, decumbent, leafless for some distance below the capitulum. Leaves 7-15(-25) × 1·5-3 mm, oblong, often sinuate-crenate, glabrous or sparsely pubescent, usually widest above the middle. Involucral bracts ovate to lanceolate, green, crenate-serrate. Calyx-teeth glabrous or villous. •{\i  C. Spain, N. & C. Portugal}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b i}) Subsp. {\b tomentosa} (A. DC.) Rivas Martínez, {\i op. cit.}{\b  28}: 45 (1972) ({\i J. humilis} var. {\i tomentosa} A. DC.): Laxly caespitose, with a stout stock. Flowering stems 5-10 cm, decumbent, tomentose near the apex, often leafy almost up to the capitulum. Leaves 5-15 × 1-3 mm, oblanceolate, usually entire, more or less pubescent. Involucral bracts ovate, crenate-serrate to serrate, lanate. Calyx-teeth densely villous. •{\i  W.C. Spain}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b j}) Subsp. {\b cavanillesii} (C. Vicioso) Tutin, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  67}: 278 (1973) ({\i J. cavanillesii} C. Vicioso): Laxly caespitose. Flowering stems 2-11 cm, decumbent, usually sparsely leafy almost up to the capitulum. Leaves 2-5 × c. 1·5 mm, oblanceolate, entire, nearly glabrous. Involucral bracts elliptical, entire, not imbricate. Calyx-teeth glabrous or sparsely ciliate. •{\i  Mountains of N.W. Spain}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  J. brevisepala} Rothm., {\i Cavanillesia}{\b  7}: 121 (1935) is probably a high mountain variant of subsp. ({\b h}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. J. laevis} Lam., {\i Fl. Fr.} 2: {\b 3} (1779) ({\i J. perennis} Lam.). Nearly glabrous to moderately villous perennial with numerous non-flowering shoots. Flowering stems erect or ascending, leafless above. Leaves linear-oblong to linear-oblanceolate, not undulate, nearly entire; margin thin, not or weakly papillose. Outer involu-
\par 

\par 
101}
\par