{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 169.           COMPOSITAE}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.M. Moore, †T.G. Tutin & S.M. Walters
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or shrubs. Leaves alternate, opposite or rosulate, exstipulate. Flowers small ({\i florets}), hermaphrodite, functionally male, female, or sterile, in terminal or axillary, usually pedunculate capitula, surrounded by an involucre of bracts. Capitula solitary or in corymbose, less frequently racemose, inflorescences. Calyx-limb ({\i pappus}) absent or represented by a corona, auricle, scales, setae or simple or plumose hairs. Corolla of 3 main types: ({\i a}) tubular, with (3-)4- to 5-lobed limb, actinomorphic or rarely weakly zygomorphic; ({\i b}) tubular, with a 2-lipped limb; ({\i c}) ligulate, with a short tube and the limb prolonged on one side into a usually 3- or 5-toothed ligule; female florets sometimes without a corolla or with a filiform corolla. Stamens 5, epipetalous; anthers usually connate into a tube round the style, often caudate or sagittate at base and with apical appendages. Ovary inferior, 1-locular; ovule solitary, basal, anatropous; style solitary, with 2 stigmatic branches. Fruit a cypsela ({\i achene}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  The capitula vary greatly in size, but attempts to give measurements of the diameter or length are often subject to uncertainty owing to the tendency of ligules to be variously developed, to curl up in the live state or to be distorted in pressing. In the following account the terms 'small' 'medium' and 'large' are used, except where the diameter can be unambiguously measured. Examples of a small, medium and large capitulum are those of{\i  Filago, Taraxacum} and {\i Helianthus} respectively. The length of the involucre is measured from the base of the capitulum. Pappus-hairs are described as plumose when the length of the branches is at least 3 times the diameter of the main hair but much shorter than it.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant with latex; florets all ligulate (Subfam. {\i Cichorioideae})
\par 
2 Scapose (all leaves basal, though flowering stems some-
\par 
  times with a few small bracts or scales) 
\par 
3 Pappus absent
\par 
4 Annual; scapes strongly inflated above after anthesis;
\par 
  involucre 3-6 mm .................................................................... {\b 151. Arnoseris}
\par 
4 Perennial; scapes not inflated above; involucre 10-12 mm ..... {\b 156. Aposeris}
\par 
3 At least some achenes with a pappus of hairs or scales
\par 
5 Receptacle with scales ...................................................... {\b 158. Hypochoeris}
\par 
5 Receptacle without scales (though sometimes with rigid hairs)
\par 
6 At least some pappus-hairs plumose
\par 
7 Pappus-hairs in 1-2 rows ...................................................... {\b 159. Leontodon}
\par 
7 Pappus-hairs in more than 2 rows ....................................... {\b 161. Scorzonera}
\par 
6 Pappus entirely of simple hairs, or scales, or both
\par 
8 At least some achenes with pappus partially or entirely
\par 
  of scales .................................................................................... {\b 153. Hyoseris}
\par 
8 Pappus entirely of simple hairs
\par 
9 Scapes unbranched, usually without bracts; achenes 
\par 
  usually muricate above ..........................................................{\b 173. Taraxacum}
\par 
9 Scapes branched or unbranched, usually with bracts;
\par 
  achenes not muricate
\par 
10 Achenes with a collar of scales below the beak
\par 
11 Capitula with fewer than 15 florets; involucre 2·5-5 mm
\par 
   wide ...................................................................................... {\b 174. Chondrilla}
\par 
11 Capitula with more than 15 florets; involucre 7-12 mm
\par 
   wide .................................................................................. {\b 175. Calycocorsus}
\par 
10 Achenes without a collar of scales
\par 
12 Involucral bracts in 2 rows, the outer much shorter than the inner
\par 
13 At least some pappus-hairs thickened at base; ligules
\par 
   usually turning greenish on drying .............................................. {\b 150. Tolpis}
\par 
13 Pappus-hairs not thickened at base; ligules not 
\par 
   turning greenish on drying .......................................................... {\b 178. Crepis}
\par 
12 Involucral bracts in several rows
\par 
14 Rhizomes long and slender, often bearing whitish,
\par 
   subglobose tubers; achenes ± attenuate at apex ................. {\b 165. Aetheorhiza}
\par 
14 Rhizomes thick, never bearing tubers; achenes obconical ..{\b 181. Hieracium} 
\par 
2  Flowering stems with at least 1 well-developed cauline leaf
\par 
    15 Achenes longer than involucre, incurved, with hooks .... {\b 152. Koelpinia} 
\par 
15 Achenes shorter than involucre, straight, without hooks
\par 
16 Leaves spiny
\par 
17 Receptacle with scales which enfold the achenes ............... {\b 145. Scolymus}
\par 
17 Receptacle without scales
\par 
18 Achenes compressed; spines on leaves not bulbous based .... {\b 166. Sonchus}
\par 
18 Achenes not compressed; spines on leaves bulbous based ........ {\b 160. Picris} 
\par 
16 Leaves not spiny
\par 
19 At least some achenes without pappus
\par 
20 Outer involucral bracts enfolding achenes, patent and
\par 
   stellate in fruit .................................................................... {\b 155. Rhagadiolus}
\par 
20 Outer involucral bracts not enfolding achenes, not
\par 
   patent in fruit
\par 
21 Receptacle with scales .................................................... {\b 158. Hypochoeris}
\par 
21 Receptacle without scales
\par 
22 Achenes beaked .................................................................... {\b 176. Heteracia}
\par 
22 Achenes not beaked
\par 
23 Stems with a solitary capitulum .......................................... {\b 179. Hispidella}
\par 
23 Stems with numerous capitula ............................................... {\b 177. Lapsana}
\par 
19 All achenes with a pappus of scales or hairs
\par 
24 Achenes strongly compressed
\par 
25 Achenes beaked
\par 
26 Pappus of 2 equal rows of hairs .............................................. {\b 169. Lactuca}
\par 
26 Pappus of 2 unequal rows of hairs
\par 
27 Involucral bracts in several rows, the outer not 
\par 
   clearly demarcated from the inner ............................... {\b 168. Steptorhamphus}
\par 
27 Involucral bracts in 2 rows, the outer smaller and patent ....... {\b 172. Mycelis}
\par 
25 Achenes not beaked
\par 
28 Ligules yellow
\par 
29 Pappus of uniform deciduous or persistent hairs; at 
\par 
   least the outer involucral bracts with a scarious  margin ......... {\b 164. Launaea}
\par 
29 Pappus of a few scabrid deciduous hairs and ± persistent 
\par 
   softer hairs in fascicles; involucral bracts without 
\par 
   a scarious margin ..................................................................... {\b 166. Sonchus}
\par 
28 Ligules purplish or blue
\par 
30 Capitula with c. 5 florets; involucre 3-5 mm wide ............ {\b 171. Prenanthes}
\par 
30 Capitula with c. 10 florets; involucre 7-12 mm wide ........... {\b 170. Cicerbita}
\par 
24 Achenes not compressed
\par 
31 At least some achenes with a pappus of scales
\par 
32 Receptacle with scales, at least near the margin
\par 
33 Achenes beaked ............................................................... {\b 158. Hypochoeris}
\par 
33 Achenes not beaked
\par 
34 Involucral bracts silvery and shiny ................................... {\b 147. Catananche}
\par 
34 Involucral bracts neither silvery nor shiny
\par 
35 All achenes with a pappus of 5-6 scales .......................... {\b 148. Rothmaleria}
\par 
35 At least the inner achenes with a pappus of 10-20
\par 
   scales or hairs .................................................................. {\b 149. Hymenonema}
\par 
32 Receptacle without scales
\par 
36 Ligules purple or blue ......................................................... {\b 146. Cichorium}
\par 
36 Ligules yellow
\par 
37 Achenes 0·5-4 mm ..................................................................... {\b 150. Tolpis}
\par 
37 Achenes 5-9 mm ................................................................. {\b 154. Hedypnois}
\par 
31 All achenes with a pappus of hairs
\par 

\par 
103}
\par