{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 85 Stem freely branched; at least some leaves dentate to pinnatisect;
\par 
    middle involucral bracts with very shortly decurrent
    appendage. .............................................................................{\b 138. Centaurea}
\par 
83 Pappus present
\par 
86 Pappus at least partly of plumose hairs
\par 
87 Receptacle fleshy ..................................................................... {\b 126. Cynara}
\par 
87 Receptacle not fleshy
\par 
88 Outer involucral bracts leaf-like ..................................... {\b 144. Carduncellus}
\par 
88 Outer involucral bracts not leaf-like
\par 
89 Florets yellow
\par 
90 Pappus of 2 rows of plumose hairs .................................... {\b 141. Wagenitzia}
\par 
90 Pappus of an outer row of plumose hairs and an inner 
\par 
   row of very short, ciliate setae ............................................ {\b 140. Chartolepis}
\par 
89 Florets not yellow
\par 
91 Filaments glabrous and smooth; pappus-hairs free ............... {\b 130. Serratula}
\par 
91 Filaments hairy or papillose; pappus-hairs connate at base ..... {\b 131. Leuzea}
\par 
86 Pappus of simple hairs or scales
\par 
92 Achenes hairy
\par 
93 Achenes with entire apex .................................................... {\b 138. Centaurea}
\par 
93 Achenes with denticulate apex or denticulate apical ring
\par 
94 Capitula without an involucre of leaves ............................. {\b 132. Amberboa}
\par 
94 Capitula subtended by an involucre of leaves .......................... {\b 142. Cnicus}
\par 
92 Achenes glabrous
\par 
95 Appendages decurrent on the bracts
\par 
96 Outer achenes without pappus, the inner with a pappus 
\par 
   of setae ............................................................................. {\b 129. Cheirolophus}
\par 
96 All achenes with a pappus of setae or scales or both .......... {\b 138. Centaurea}
\par 
95 Appendages not decurrent on the bracts
\par 
97 Pappus of several rows of scales ......................................... {\b 134. Cyanopsis}
\par 
97 Pappus of setae or setae and scales
\par 
98 Outer florets sterile; middle bracts with lacerate to 
\par 
   pectinate-fimbriate or spinose appendage ............................. {\b 138. Centaurea}
\par 
98 All florets hermaphrodite; middle bracts with an 
\par 
   entire or lacerate but not fimbriate appendage
\par 
99 Filaments papillose or hairy; stem thickened below the
\par 
   capitulum .................................................................................... {\b 131. Leuzea}
\par 
99 Filaments smooth and glabrous; stem not thickened 
\par 
   below the capitulum
\par 
100 Cauline leaves entire or remotely dentate ........................ {\b 136. Acroptilon}
\par 
100 Cauline leaves deeply pinnatifid ......................................... {\b 130. Serratula}
\par 
81 All involucral bracts without an apical appendage
\par 
101 At least some pappus-hairs plumose
\par 
102 Inner bracts shiny, radiating when dry and simulating
\par 
    ligules ........................................................................................ {\b 106. Carlina}
\par 
102 Inner bracts not shiny, erect
\par 
103 Pappus-hairs in 1(-2) rows ................................................. {\b 114. Saussurea}
\par 
103 Pappus-hairs in several rows
\par 
104 Achenes with transverse basal attachment-scar ................... {\b 118. Cirsium}
\par 
104 Achenes with oblique lateral attachment-scar .................... {\b 130. Serratula}
\par 
101 Pappus without plumose hairs
\par 
105 Inner bracts white or pink, simulating ligules ............ {\b 108. Xeranthemum}
\par 
105 Inner bracts not white or pink
\par 
106 Outer bracts hooked at the apex ........................................... {\b 112. Arctium}
\par 
106 Outer bracts not hooked at the apex
\par 
107 Achenes hairy
\par 
108 All florets hermaphrodite; achenes usually with corona ........ {\b 116. Jurinea}
\par 
108 Outer florets sterile or female; achenes without corona
\par 
109 Middle bracts acuminate, spinulose-mucronate at apex ..... {\b 133. Volutaria}
\par 
109 Middle bracts obtuse, not apiculate or spinulose at apex
\par 
110 Outer achenes without pappus; inner achenes with an
\par 
    outer row of unequal, scabridulous setae and an inner
\par 
    row of 5-10 short scales ........................................................... {\b 139. Crupina}
\par 
110 All achenes with 1 row of c. 10 linear scales ........... {\b 105. Amphoricarpos} 
\par 
107 Achenes glabrous
\par 
111 Middle bracts obtuse, not apiculate or spinulose at apex
\par 
112 Pappus of 1 row of c. 10 linear scales ...................... {\b 105. Amphoricarpos}
\par 
112 Pappus of 2 or more rows of setae, the inner sometimes
\par 
    scale-like
\par 
113 Leaves entire, nearly all basal ...................................... {\b 128. Palaeocyanus}
\par 
113 Leaves pinnatifid to pinnatisect, rarely entire, ± 
\par 
    evenly distributed along the stem ......................................... {\b 138. Centaurea}
\par 
111 Middle bracts with an acute to spinulose or spinose apex
\par 
114 Pappus of long, subacuminate scales surrounded by 
\par 
    long setae ............................................................................ {\b 135. Mantisalca}
\par 
114 Pappus of several rows of simple, sometimes scale-like hairs
\par 
115 Pappus-hairs free
\par 
116 All florets hermaphrodite; innermost row of pappus-
\par 
    hairs longer than the outer
\par 
117 Capitula at least 50 mm; pappus twisted at base ................. {\b 111. Berardia}
\par 
117 Capitula not more than 40(-50) mm; pappus not twisted ... {\b 130. Serratula}
\par 
116 Outer florets sterile; innermost row of pappus-hairs
\par 
    shorter than the outer ............................................................ {\b 138. Centaurea}
\par 
115 Pappus-hairs connate into a ring at base
\par 
118 Achenes terete
\par 
119 All florets hermaphrodite; innermost row of pappus-hairs 
\par 
    longer than the outer ................................................................ {\b 117. Carduus}
\par 
119 Outer florets sterile; innermost row of pappus-hairs
\par 
    shorter than the outer ............................................................ {\b 138. Centaurea}
\par 
118 Achenes distinctly 4- to 5-angled
\par 
120 Achenes with transverse basal attachment-scar, usually
\par 
    with corona ................................................................................ {\b 116. Jurinea}
\par 
120 Achenes with oblique lateral attachment-scar, without 
\par 
    corona ........................................................................................ {\b 131. Leuzea}
\par 
56  Leaves and involucral bracts very rarely spiny; style
\par 
    neither thickened nor hairy below the branches;
\par 
    ligulate florets often present
\par 
121 At least some leaves opposite
\par 
122 Pappus of numerous hairs
\par 
123 Florets yellow; ligules present .................................................. {\b 93. Arnica}
\par 
123 Florets pinkish; ligules absent ............................................ {\b 1. Eupatorium}
\par 
122 Pappus not of numerous hairs
\par 
124 Pappus of 2-4 setae
\par 
125 All leaves opposite; ligules often absent .................................. {\b 41. Bidens}
\par 
125 Upper leaves alternate; ligules always present
\par 
126 Upper leaves auriculate at base of petiole ........................... {\b 46. Verbesina}
\par 
126 Upper leaves not auriculate at base of petiole .................... {\b 45. Helianthus}
\par 
124 Pappus absent, or of scales, teeth or a corona
\par 
127 Fertile florets in 1 row, completely enclosed by inner
\par 
    involucral bracts ...................................................................... {\b 18. Micropus}
\par 
127 Fertile florets in several rows, not completely 
\par 
    enclosed by inner involucral bracts
\par 
128 Pappus a small, scarious corona
\par 
129 Ligules white; stems terete ........................................ {\b 72. Phalacrocarpum}
\par 
129 Ligules yellow; stems 4-angled ............................................ {\b 47. Silphium}
\par 
128 Pappus absent, or of small teeth or scales
\par 
130 Receptacle strongly conical ................................................ {\b 44. Rudbeckia}
\par 

\par 
105}
\par