{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 223 Plant usually scabrid; receptacle strongly conical ............. {\b 44. Rudbeckia}
\par 
223 Plant not scabrid; receptacle hemispherical
\par 
224 Outer achenes 3-angled; anthers not bearded at base ... {\b 36. Buphthalmum}
\par 
224 Outer achenes terete; anthers bearded at base ......................... {\b 37. Telekia} 
\par 
208 Receptacular scales absent
\par 
225 Inner achenes strongly arcuate to annular, muricate
\par 
    on the back ............................................................................ {\b 100. Calendula}
\par 
225 Inner achenes straight or weakly curved, not muricate
\par 
    on the back
\par 
226 Ligules with a conspicuous basal black patch with a
\par 
    white spot in the centre ............................................................ {\b 104. Gazania}
\par 
226 Ligules without a conspicuous basal black patch with 
\par 
    a white spot in the centre
\par 
227 Achenes densely lanate or villous
\par 
228 Achenes winged; pappus of 2 rows of scales ....................... {\b 102. Arctotis}
\par 
228 Achenes unwinged; pappus of 1 row of scales ................ {\b 103. Arctotheca}
\par 
227 Achenes glabrous or pubescent
\par 
229 Involucral bracts in 1 row, sometimes with supplementary 
\par 
    bracts at the base of the capitulum
\par 
230 Capitula with 3-5 florets, 1 ligulate ..................................... {\b 53. Schkuhria}
\par 
230 Capitula with numerous florets, more than one ligulate
\par 
231 Scapes with numerous purplish scales; ligules in 
\par 
    several rows ............................................................................ {\b 89. Tussilago}
\par 
231 Scapes without numerous purplish scales; ligules in 1 row
\par 
232 Ligules white, at least above; pappus of mixed hairs
\par 
    and scales ..................................................................................... {\b 6. Bellium}
\par 
232 Ligules yellow, less frequently reddish or lilac 
\par 
    above; pappus of numerous hairs
\par 
233 Petioles of basal and lower cauline leaves not or 
\par 
    scarcely sheathing at base; capitula solitary or in
\par 
    corymbose inflorescences ......................................................... {\b 96. Senecio}
\par 
233 Petioles of basal and lower cauline leaves broadly
\par 
    sheathing at base; capitula usually in long panicles
\par 
    or spikes, rarely corymbose ..................................................... {\b 97. Ligularia}
\par 
229 Involucral bracts in 2 or more rows
\par 
234 Pappus with long hairs
\par 
235 Pappus-hairs of inner achenes plumose above ....................... {\b 30. Leysera}
\par 
235 Pappus-hairs not plumose
\par 
236 Ligules not yellow
\par 
237 Scapose ......................................................................................... {\b 7. Aster}
\par 
237 Flowering stems leafy
\par 
238 Ligules distinctly longer than involucre
\par 
239 Ligules usually in 2 or more rows, filiform;
\par 
    pappus-hairs in 1 row ................................................................. {\b 8. Erigeron}
\par 
239 Ligules in 1 row, not filiform; pappushairs in 2 or 
\par 
    more rows ........................................................................................ {\b 7. Aster}
\par 
238 Ligules shorter than involucre
\par 
240 Plant glabrous; leaves fleshy ........................................................ {\b 7. Aster}
\par 
240 Plant hairy, at least on stems or involucre; leaves 
\par 
    usually not fleshy
\par 
241 Capitula usually 1 or few, with several rows of 
\par 
    female florets and numerous hermaphrodite florets ................... {\b 8. Erigeron}
\par 
241 Capitula usually numerous, with many rows of female 
\par 
    florets and few hermaphrodite florets .......................................... {\b 9. Conyza}
\par 
236 Ligules yellow
\par 
242 Anthers without filiform appendages at their base
\par 
243 Involucre 10-20 mm; capitula usually solitary ................. {\b 94. Doronicum}
\par 
243 Involucre not more than 6 mm; capitula in a paniculate 
\par 
    or corymbose inflorescence ....................................................... {\b 3. Solidago}
\par 
242 Anthers with filiform appendages at their base
\par 
244 Pappus of long hairs surrounded by a row of small, ± 
\par 
    connate scales ........................................................................... {\b 33. Pulicaria}
\par 
244 Pappus without an outer row of small, ± connate scales
\par 
245 Pappus-hairs connate near base, forming a brownish cup;
\par 
    achene abruptly contracted at apex ......................................... {\b 32. Dittrichia}
\par 
245 Pappus-hairs free at base; achene not contracted at apex
\par 
246 Pappus-hairs ± equal ................................................................... {\b 31. Inula}
\par 
246 Outer pappus-hairs much shorter than inner ........................... {\b 35. Jasonia} 
\par 
234 Pappus without long hairs
\par 
247 Leaves not pinnatifid to pinnatisect
\par 
248 At least the achenes of the ligulate florets strongly
\par 
    compressed ...................................................................................... {\b 5. Bellis}
\par 
248 Achenes not strongly compressed
\par 
249 Ligules white, sometimes pink- or purplish-tinged
\par 
250 Corolla-lobes of tubular florets unequal .................... {\b 79. Hymenostemma}
\par 
250 Corolla-lobes of tubular florets equal
\par 
251 Corolla of tubular florets compressed and winged below;
\par 
    pericarp with resin-canals .............................................. {\b 81. Leucanthemum}
\par 
251 Corolla of tubular florets unwinged; pericarp without
\par 
    resin-canals
\par 
252 Stems not more than 20 cm; leaves eglandular ....... {\b 74. Leucanthemopsis}
\par 
252 Stems at least 30 cm; leaves glandular
\par 
253 Ligules 4-6 mm .................................................................... {\b 71. Balsamita}
\par 
253 Ligules 10-25 mm ...................................................... {\b 70. Leucanthemella}
\par 
249 Ligules yellow
\par 
254 Pappus of 2-8 caducous setae ................................................. {\b 2. Grindelia}
\par 
254 Pappus a scarious corona or auride, or absent
\par 
255 Outer achenes 2- to 3-winged, the inner 1-to 2-winged
\par 
    or unwinged; pappus absent
\par 
256 Plant not viscid-hairy ................................................ {\b 66. Chrysanthemum}
\par 
256 Plant viscid-hairy .......................................................... {\b 67. Heteranthemis}
\par 
255 Achenes all similar; pappus usually conspicuous
\par 
257 Tubular florets actinomorphic; pappus of ligulate
\par 
    florets not longer than the corolla-tube ............................. {\b 80. Coleostephus}
\par 
257 Tubular florets zygomorphic; pappus of ligulate 
\par 
    florets twice as long as the corolla-tube ........................... {\b 78. Glossopappus}
\par 
247 Leaves pinnatifid to pinnatisect
\par 
258 Leaves 1-pinnatifid to 1-pinnatisect
\par 
259 Ligules yellow, at least at base
\par 
260 Caespitose perennial ................................................ {\b 74. Leucanthemopsis}
\par 
260 Annual
\par 
261 Plant viscid-hairy .......................................................... {\b 67. Heteranthemis}
\par 
261 Plant not viscid-hairy
\par 
262 Ligules entirely yellow ........................................................ {\b 75. Prolongoa}
\par 
262 Ligules white, with yellow base ................................ {\b 79. Hymenostemma}
\par 
259 Ligules white or pinkish, without a yellow base
\par 
263 Involucral bracts 3-9 ........................................................... {\b 85. Nananthez}
\par 
263 Involucral bracts numerous
\par 
264 Achenes of ligulate florets strongly compressed and 
\par 
    winged, those of tubular florets subcylindrical ........................ {\b 77. Daveaua}
\par 
264 Achenes all similar, not winged or strongly compressed
\par 

\par 
108}
\par