{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 130 Receptacle flat or nearly so
\par 
131 Pappus of several scales
\par 
132 Ligules white ....................................................................... {\b 52. Galinsoga}
\par 
132 Ligules yellow
\par 
133 Leaves dentate or serrate .................................................... {\b 45. Helianthus}
\par 
133 Leaves pinnatisect
\par 
134 Involucral bracts connate almost to apex; ligules 3-4 ............. {\b 55. Tagetes}
\par 
134 Involucral bracts free; ligule 1 ............................................ {\b 53. Schkuhria}
\par 
131 Pappus absent, or of few small scales
\par 
135 Plant glandular-hairy
\par 
136 Ligules present; capitula hermaphrodite .......................... {\b 42. Sigesbeckia}
\par 
136 Ligules absent; capitula unisexual ....................................... {\b 49. Ambrosia}
\par 
135 Plant without glandular hairs
\par 
137 Ligules absent
\par 
138 Capitula in pulvinate clusters ...................................................... {\b 16. Evax}
\par 
138 Capitula not in pulvinate clusters
\par 
139 Capitula unisexual, the male in terminal leafless
\par 
    racemes, the female axillary ................................................... {\b 49. Ambrosia}
\par 
139 Capitula hermaphrodite, all in spikes or panicles ........................... {\b 48. Iva}
\par 
137 Ligules present
\par 
140 Perennial; capitula large
\par 
141 Stems terete; leaves not perfoliate ........................................ {\b 51. Heliopsis}
\par 
141 Stems 4-angled; leaves perfoliate ......................................... {\b 47. Silphium}
\par 
140 Annual; capitula small to medium
\par 
142 Ligules white ............................................................................ {\b 43. Eclipta}
\par 
142 Ligules yellow ........................................................................ {\b 40. Guizotia}
\par 
121 All leaves alternate or basal
\par 
143 Capitula unisexual
\par 
144 Monoecious; annual ............................................................. {\b 50. Xanthium}
\par 
144 Dioecious; perennial
\par 
145 Glabrous shrub ..................................................................... {\b 11. Baccharis}
\par 
145 Herb, usually with lanate or arachnoid indumentum
\par 
146 Flowers usually appearing before the leaves; basal 
\par 
    leaves long-petiolate ................................................................. {\b 90. Petasites}
\par 
146 Flowers appearing after the leaves; all leaves sessile
\par 
147 Cauline leaves 5-12 cm, patent; inflorescence 
\par 
    corymbose, with numerous capitula ...................................... {\b 28. Aoaphalis}
\par 
147 Cauline leaves not more than 2 cm, ± erect; inflorescence 
\par 
    ± capitate, with few capitula
\par 
148 Inflorescence not subtended by an involucre of leaves ..... {\b 26. Antennaria}
\par 
148 Inflorescence subtended by an involucre of leaves ..... {\b 27. Leontopodium}
\par 
143 Capitula hermaphrodite
\par 
149 Ligules absent
\par 
150 Receptacular scales present, or involucral bracts sub
\par 
    tending the outer florets
\par 
151 Involucral bracts subtending the outer florets only
\par 
152 Pappus-hairs of inner achenes plumose above ........................... {\b 14. Ifloga}
\par 
152 Pappus-hairs not plumose, or absent
\par 
153 Outer female florets ± enclosed by the bracts; achenes
\par 
    curved, falling enclosed by the bracts
\par 
154 Pappus present; style of outer female florets terminal .............. {\b 15. Logfia}
\par 
154 Pappus absent; style of outer female florets lateral ...... {\b 17. Bombycilaena}
\par 
153 Outer female florets not enclosed by bracts; achenes 
\par 
    straight, falling separately from the bracts
\par 
155 Clusters of capitula pulvinate; involucral bracts 
\par 
    usually more than 30; pappus absent .............................................. {\b 16. Evax}
\par 
155 Clusters of capitula subglobose; involucral bracts 
\par 
    usually not more than 25; pappus usually present
\par 
156 Involucral bracts usually acuminate, ± erect in fruit;
\par 
    receptacle not or scarcely dilated at apex ..................................... {\b 13. Filago}
\par 
156 Involucral bracts obtuse to subacute, stellate in 
\par 
    fruit; receptacle strongly dilated at apex ...................................... {\b 15. Logfia}
\par 
151 Scales subtending at least the inner florets
\par 
157 Corolla-tube not saccate or spurred at base
\par 
158 Lower leaves 1- to 2-pinnatisect .......................................... {\b 57. Anthemis}
\par 
158 Lower leaves 3-fid, the lobes ± toothed .................................... {\b 64. Lonas}
\par 
157 Corolla-tube saccate or spurred at base
\par 
159 Leaves entire; plant not aromatic .......................................... {\b 65. Otanthus}
\par 
159 At least some leaves toothed to pinnatisect; plant 
\par 
    usually aromatic
\par 
160 Herb; leaves 2- to 3-pinnatisect .................................. {\b 59. Chamaemelum}
\par 
160 Small shrub; leaves toothed to 1-pinnatisect ....................... {\b 56. Santolina}
\par 
150 Receptacular scales absent
\par 
161 Achenes with a pappus of numerous hairs
\par 
162 Involucral bracts in 1 row, sometimes with usually small, 
\par 
    supplementary bracts at the base of the capitulum
\par 
163 Leaves fleshy, ± cylindrical ..................................................... {\b 98. Kleinia}
\par 
163 Leaves not fleshy, flat
\par 
164 Leaves deeply lobed ................................................................ {\b 96. Senecio}
\par 
164 Leaves not deeply lobed
\par 
165 Leaves cuneate to rounded at base
\par 
166 Annual; lower leaves much smaller than those above ......... {\b 95. Erechtites}
\par 
166 Perennial; lower leaves not much smaller than those  above .. {\b 96. Senecio}
\par 
165 Leaves cordate to hastate at base
\par 
167 Capitula 1(-3) ..................................................................... {\b 91. Homogyne}
\par 
167 Capitula numerous
\par 
168 Stems not more than 2 mm in diameter .................................. {\b 96. Senecio}
\par 
168 Stems 4-6 mm in diameter
\par 
169 Style-branches tapering gradually from base to apex ...... {\b 92. Adenostyles}
\par 
169 Style-branches ± parallel-sided, with a short, acute apex ....... {\b 99. Cacalia}
\par 
162 Involucral bracts in (2-)3 or more rows
\par 
170 Anthers not sagittate and without filiform appendages at base
\par 
171 Plant glabrous
\par 
172 Florets pink ........................................................................... {\b 12. Karelinia}
\par 
172 Florets yellow or brownish
\par 
173 Capitula in corymbs; involucral bracts mostly herbaceous; 
\par 
    achenes hairy ................................................................................... {\b 7. Aster}
\par 
173 Capitula solitary or in small clusters at ends of branches;
\par 
     involucral bracts entirely scarious or coriaceous; 
\par 
    achenes glabrous ................................................................... {\b 29. Phagnalon}
\par 
171 Plant pubescent to tomentose
\par 
174 Plant tomentose or lanate .................................................... {\b 29. Phagnalon}
\par 
174 Plant not tomentose or lanate
\par 
175 Outer florets tubular, hermaphrodite ............................................. {\b 7. Aster}
\par 
175 Outer florets filiform, female
\par 
176 Most leaves basal; florets purplish .......................................... {\b 8. Erigeron}
\par 
176 Stems leafy throughout; florets yellow or white
\par 
177 Patent-hirsute annual ................................................................. {\b 9. Conyza}
\par 
177 Appressed-pubescent perennial .............................................. {\b 10. Nolletia}
\par 
170 Anthers sagittate, with 2 filiform appendages at base
\par 
178 Pappus-hairs plumose ....................................................... {\b 25. Lasiopogon}
\par 
178 Pappus-hairs smooth or denticulate
\par 
179 Plant with numerous short glandular hairs .............................. {\b 35. Jasonia}
\par 
179 Plant eglandular
\par 
180 Pappus-hairs thickened towards apex, at least in
\par 
    functionally male florets
\par 
181 Capitula numerous, in a corymbose inflorescence .............. {\b 28. Anaphalis}
\par 
181 Capitula few, in a cluster or umbellate inflorescence
\par 
182 Capitula subtended by an involucre of leaves .............. {\b 27. Leontopodium}
\par 
182 Capitula not subtended by an involucre of leaves ............. {\b 26. Antennaria}
\par 
180 Pappus-hairs not thickened towards apex
\par 

\par 
106}
\par