{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  middle internodes 2-7 times as long as the leaves. Leaves 10-30 × 0·3-0·5 mm, with short awn. Inflorescence ovoid to corymbiform; partial inflorescences distinctly capitate; bracts 0·7-1·2 mm wide, broadly lanceolate, more or less dentate; flowers more or less sessile. Corolla 2-5 mm, mostly rough outside; tube about equalling lobes. Fruit 1·5-2 mm. 2n = 20. • {\i  Krym.} Rs (K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. A. tephrocarpa} Czern. ex M. Popov & Chrshan., {\i Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou} nov. ser., {\b 50}({\b 5-6}): 96 (1945) (incl.{\i  A. creticola} Klokov). Shoots grey-green. Stems 3-20(-50) cm, rough with short hairs at least below, more or less branched only above the middle; middle internodes scarcely longer than the leaves. Leaves 5-17 × 0·2-0·7 mm, rough with short hairs. Inflorescence corymbiform; partial inflorescences somewhat compact; bracts up to 1 mm wide, mostly entire, lanceolate; pedicels 0-1 mm. Corolla 2-3·7 mm, rough outside; tube about equalling lobes. Fruit 1·7-2 mm. •{\i  S.C. Russia and E. Ukraine.} Rs (C, W, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. A. exasperata} V. Krecz. ex Klokov in Schischkin, {\i Fl. URSS}{\b  23}: 695 (1958). Like {\b 27} but shoots dark green; stems 2-25 cm, robust and rigid, more or less rough with short hairs throughout; leaves 5-17 × 0·5-1 mm, narrowly oblanceolate to linear, mostly more or less rough; bracts up to 1 mm wide, entire, lanceolate; pedicels 0-1 mm; corolla not more than 2·7 mm, smooth outside; tube about equalling lobes; fruit 2-3 mm. •{\i  S.C. Russia.} Rs (C, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. A. petraea} V. Krecz. ex Klokov,{\i  op. cit.} 696 (1958). Like {\b 27} but shoots shining green; stems 10-25 cm, rather delicate, glabrous and smooth or rough only below; middle internodes scarcely longer than the leaves; leaves 10-15(-20) × 0·5-0·7 mm, narrowly oblanceolate to linear, the lower more or less rough, the upper with more or less smooth margins; corolla 2-3·7 mm, smooth outside; tube about equalling lobes; fruit 3-4 mm.{\i  E.C. Russia and S. Ural.} Rs (C, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. A. occidentalis} Rouy,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  8}: 60 (1903). Laxly caespitose, green, with creeping, subterranean, orange stolons. Stems 3-16(-35) cm, procumbent-ascending, herbaceous throughout, shortly hairy below, glabrous above; middle internodes 1-2(-3) times as long as the leaves. Cauline leaves 3-20 × 1-2 mm oblanceolate to linear-lanceolate, acute, more or less fleshy, midrib comprising less than ¾ of width of leaf; margin flat or slightly revolute; basal leaves broadly ovate. Inflorescence ovoid-corymbiform; flowers more or less glomerate, sessile. Corolla c. 3 mm, broadly infundibuliform, pink, somewhat rough outside; tube about equalling lobes; lobes obscurely appendiculate. Fruit 1·5-2·2 mm, papillose.{\i  Maritime sands. • N. Spain, S.W. France, S.W. Britain, Ireland.} Br Ga Hb Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30} is not a hybrid between {\b 31} and {\i Galium arenarium}, as was originally suggested. Intermediates between {\b 30} and {\b 31} evidently occur.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. A. cynanchica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 104 (1753) (incl. {\i A. papillosa} Lange, {\i A. capillacea} (Lange) Rouy, {\i A. tenuiflora} Jordan). Laxly or densely caespitose, green, sometimes glaucous-pruinose, with more or less numerous non-flowering shoots, but without subterranean stolons. Stems 10-50 cm, ascending to erect, herbaceous at base, usually rough with short hairs at base, subglabrous above; middle internodes 1-3 times as long as the leaves. Leaves (15-)20-35(-40) × 0·8-1·5 mm, in whorls of 4 throughout, narrowly lanceolate to linear, acute; midrib comprising less than ¾ of width of leaf; margin flat to weakly revolute. Inflorescence usually much-branched; pedicels 0-1 mm. Corolla 2·5-3·5(-4) mm, broadly infundibuliform, pale purplish to whitish, usually more or less rough; tube 1-1½(-2) times as long as lobes; lobes distinctly appendiculate. Fruit 1·5-2 mm, papillose, rarely hairy. 2n = 20, 40. {\i Most of Europe northwards to} 54° 30' {\i N. in England and C. Russia.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Cr Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, E) Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable and comprising diploid and tetraploid cytotypes which it has not hitherto been possible to separate. The numerous local races need further study especially in the middle and western part of the range.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants transitional to {\b 1}, {\b 23},{\b  24} and {\b 32} occur where these species meet with {\b 31}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. A. rumelica} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 113 (1856) ({\i A. montana }auct. an Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd. 7.). Like {\b 31} but not caespitose, more or less grey-green, without non-flowering shoots at anthesis; stems 10-90 cm, erect, robust, sometimes woody at base; leaves 0·5-1 mm wide, the midrib often comprising more than ¾ of width of leaf, the margin distinctly revolute; inflorescence elongate-ovoid; pedicels usually distinct and up to 2(-4·5) mm; corolla 2-2·5(-3) mm, narrowly infundibuliform, rough with dense, short hairs outside. •{\i  S.E. Europe.} Bu Gr ?Hu Rm Rs (W, K) Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   This very variable species is taken here in a broad sense.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. barthae} Penzes,{\i  Ann. Hist.-Nat. Mus. Hung.} ({\i Bot}.) {\b 31}: 113 (1938) from S.E. Bulgaria (Strandza Pl.) may belong here.{\i  A. graniticola} Klokov seems to represent populations intermediate between{\b  32} and {\b 27}. {\i A. attenuata} Klokov and{\i  A. hypanica} Klokov tend towards {\b 3}. There are further connections with the {\i A. suaveolens} group.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b 33-40}).{\b  A. graveolens} group (Ser.{\i  Graveolentes} Klokov). Inflorescence elongate-ovoid, the branches squarrosely divaricate after anthesis. Corolla 2-6·5 mm, pink to whitish. Fruit 1·7-4·5 mm, usually densely covered with squamiform tubercles or short setae (rarely glabrescent).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   A group of geographically vicarious species closely related to each other and connected by transitional forms; all grow in dry sandy places.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla-tube at least 1½ times as long as lobes
\par 
2 Stems often rough at base; middle internodes 3-4 times as long as
\par 
   leaves; corolla-tube 2-2½ times as long as lobes .............. {\b 33. danilewskiana}
\par 
2 Stems ± smooth at base; middle internodes 1½-2 times
\par 
  as long as leaves; corolla-tube 1½-2 times as long 
\par 
  as lobes .................................................................................... {\b 34. laevissima}
\par 
1 Corolla-tube about as long as lobes
\par 
3 Stems robust; leaves rigid, straight; corolla usually
\par 
  shortly hispid outside
\par 
4 Fruit with dense squamiform tubercles; internodes on 
\par 
  flowering stems usually fewer than 20, c. 3 times as 
\par 
  long as leaves ............................................................................... {\b 39. setulosa}
\par 
4 Fruit with dense, short setae; internodes on flowering stems
\par 
  usually more than 25,1-2 times as long as leaves ....................... {\b 40. littoralis}
\par 
3 Stems slender; leaves somewhat flaccid, usually falcate;
\par 
  corolla finely hairy or glabrous outside
\par 
5 Fruit almost without or with only a few squamiform 
\par 
  tubercles ............................................................................ {\b 37. leiograveolens}
\par 
5 Fruit with numerous squamiform tubercles
\par 
6 Plant glaucous; stems usually glabrous and smooth ................. {\b 36. diminuta}
\par 
6 Plant ± green; stems hispidulous and rough
\par 
7 Stems hispidulous and rough only at base; leaves (15-)
\par 
  25-30(-40) mm ........................................................................ {\b 35. graveolens}
\par 
7 Stems hispidulous and rough throughout; leaves 2-16 mm ..... {\b 38. savraoica}
\par 

\par 
10}
\par