{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 38 Receptacle with scales
\par 
39 At least some pappus-hairs plumose ............................... {\b 158. Hypochoeris}
\par 
39 Pappus-hairs not plumose
\par 
40 Receptacular scales enclosing the florets .............................. {\b 180. Andryala}
\par 
40 Receptacular scales not enclosing the florets ............................ {\b 178. Crepis}
\par 
38 Receptacle without scales
\par 
41 At least some pappus-hairs plumose
\par 
42 Involucral bracts in 1 row
\par 
43 Leaves lobed ................................................................... {\b 157. Urospermum}
\par 
43 Leaves entire .................................................................... {\b 162. Tragopogon}
\par 
42 Involucral bracts in 2 or more rows
\par 
44 Pappus of 1 row of hairs .................................................. {\b 162. Tragopogon}
\par 
44 Pappus of 2 or more rows of hairs
\par 
45 Pappus of 2 rows of deciduous hairs; planti hispid ................... {\b 160. Picris}
\par 
45 Pappus of more than 2 rows of persistent hairs; plant
\par 
   glabrous or softly hairy ........................................................ {\b 161. Scorzonera}
\par 
41 All pappus-hairs simple
\par 
46 Achenes with a corona below the beak
\par 
47 Capitula with 6-15 florets; involucre 2·5-5 mm wide ........ {\b 174. Chondrilla}
\par 
47 Capitula with more than 15 florets; involucre
\par 
   7-12 mm wide .................................................................. {\b 175. Calycocorsus}
\par 
46 Achenes without a corona
\par 
48 Achenes densely villous .................................................... {\b 161. Scorzonera}
\par 
48 Achenes not villous
\par 
49 Pappus of rigid hairs somewhat expanded at base .................... {\b 150. Tolpis}
\par 
49 Pappus of usually soft hairs not expanded at base
\par 
50 Receptacle with long, silky hairs equalling or exceeding 
\par 
   the florets ................................................................................ {\b 180. Andryala}
\par 
50 Receptacle glabrous or with short hairs
\par 
51 Achenes strongly rugose .................................................... {\b 163. Reichardia}
\par 
51 Achenes smooth or weakly rugose
\par 
52 Achenes all unbeaked
\par 
53 Achenes somewhat attenuate above;
\par 
     plant without stellate hairs ........................................................ {\b 178. Crepis}
\par 
53 Achenes obconical; usually at least some part of plant
\par 
   with stellate hairs .................................................................. {\b 181. Hieracium}
\par 
52 At least the inner achenes beaked
\par 
54 Outer achenes with wings near apex; inner achenes with
\par 
   filiform beak at least twice as long as body ........................... {\b 176. Heteracia}
\par 
54 Achenes without wings and with beak less than twice as
\par 
   long as body
\par 
55 Roots ± tuberous; involucral bracts in several rows
\par 
   ................................................................................... {\b 167. Cephalorrhynchus}
\par 
55 Roots not tuberous; involucral bracts in 2 rows, the 
\par 
   outer clearly demarcated from the inner ..................................... {\b 178. Crepis}
\par 
1  Plant usually without latex; at least the inner florets
\par 
   not ligulate (Subfam. {\i Asteroideae})
\par 
56 Leaves and involucral bracts often spiny; style thick-
\par 
   ened or hairy below the branches; ligulate florets absent
\par 
57 Capitula with 1 floret, grouped into globose heads .............. {\b 110. Echinops}
\par 
57 Capitula usually with many florets, not grouped into heads
\par 
58 Dwarf shrub
\par 
59 Leaves with a spinose-dentate margin
\par 
60 Outer involucral bracts leaf-like ......................................... {\b 143. Carthamus}
\par 
60 Outer involucral bracts not leaf-like .................................... {\b 138. Centaurea}
\par 
59 Leaves unarmed
\par 
61 Pappus-hairs with branches about as long as the hair;
\par 
   achenes oblong, ± ribbed ...................................................... {\b 115. Staehelina}
\par 
61 Pappus-hairs with branches much shorter than the hair
\par 
   (plumose); achenes obliquely obovoid, smooth ................. {\b 121. Ptilostemon}
\par 
58 Herb, often woody at base
\par 
62 Leaves spiny
\par 
63 Pappus not of plumose hairs, sometimes absent
\par 
64 Receptacle without scales or setae ................................... {\b 125. Onopordum}
\par 
64 Receptacle with scales or setae
\par 
65 Pappus a short, dentate corona; anthers with pinnate
\par 
   basal appendages ..................................................................... {\b 113. Cousinia}
\par 
65 Pappus not a short, dentate corona; anthers without 
\par 
   pinnate basal appendages
\par 
66 Achenes densely sericeous-villous .................................. {\b 109. Cardopatum}
\par 
66 Achenes glabrous
\par 
67 At least the outer achenes without a pappus ....................... {\b 143. Carthamus}
\par 
67 All achenes with a pappus
\par 
68 Leaves white-veined or variegated above; pappus-hairs 
\par 
   in 1 row .................................................................................... {\b 127. Silybum}
\par 
68 Leaves usually uniformly coloured above; pappus-hairs 
\par 
   in 2 or more rows
\par 
69 Inner involucral bracts acute or with a simple apical spine
\par 
70 Receptacle with setae; all florets hermaphrodite .................... {\b 117. Carduus}
\par 
70 Receptacle with scales; outer florets usually sterile ............. {\b 124. Tyrimnus}
\par 
69 Inner involucral bracts with a pectinate, spinelike or
\par 
   semicircular to ovate appendage at apex
\par 
71 Perennial; florets blue or purple, all hermaphrodite ....... {\b 144. Carduncellus}
\par 
71 Annual; florets yellow, the outer very small, sterile ................. {\b 142. Cnicus}
\par 
63 At least some achenes with plumose pappus-hairs
\par 
72 Achenes hairy
\par 
73 Inner involucral bracts shiny, radiating when dry and
\par 
   simulating ligules ....................................................................... {\b 106. Carlina}
\par 
73 Inner involucral bracts not shiny, erect ................................ {\b 107. Atractylis}
\par 
72 Achenes glabrous
\par 
74 Receptacle densely hairy; outer florets much enlarged ....... {\b 123. Galactites}
\par 
74 Receptacle with scales; florets subequal
\par 
75 Receptacle fleshy ..................................................................... {\b 126. Cynara}
\par 
75 Receptacle not fleshy
\par 
76 Inner involucral bracts with a semicircular to ovate,
\par 
   lacerate to fimbriate apical appendage .................................... {\b 38. Centaurea}
\par 
76.Involucral bracts without an apical appendage
\par 
77 Leaves not spinulose on upper surface or margin 
\par 
   between the large marginal spines
\par 
78 Achenes oblong, compressed, with distinct margin and 
\par 
   central projection at apex .................................................... {\b 122. Lamyropsis}
\par 
78 Achenes obliquely obovoid, scarcely compressed, with
\par 
   a slight margin and no central projection at apex ............... {\b 121. Ptilostemon}
\par 
77 Leaves spinulose on upper surface or margin and 
\par 
   usually with spinose teeth or lobes
\par 
79 Leaves white-veined above; achenes obliquely obovoid-
\par 
   globose, without apical projection ......................................... {\b 120. Notobasis}
\par 
79 Leaves green above; achenes ± oblong, with apical projection
\par 
80 Involucral bracts with deflexed, pinnate apical spine ......... {\b 119. Picnomon}
\par 
80 Involucral bracts with simple apical spine or unarmed .......... {\b 118. Cirsium} 
\par 
62 Leaves unarmed
\par 
81 At least the inner involucral bracts with an apical appendage
\par 
82 Inner involucral bracts white or pink, simulating
\par 
   ligules .............................................................................. {\b 108. Xeranthemum}
\par 
82 Inner involucral bracts not white or pink
\par 
83 Pappus absent
\par 
84 Bracts without distinct veins on the dorsal surface ............. {\b 138. Centaurea}
\par 
84 Bracts with (3-)5-7 ± distinct veins on the dorsal surface
\par 
85 Stem simple or sparingly branched; leaves entire;
\par 
   middle involucral bracts with appendage decurrent 
\par 
   for half their length ......................................................... {\b 137. Phalacrachena}
\par 

\par 
104}
\par