{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 183 Capitula solitary or corymbose, rarely in dense clusters; 
\par     female florets usually few, the hermaphrodite usually 
\par     numerous; involucral bracts usually bright yellow, 
\par     white or red ........................................................................ {\b 24. Helichrysum}
\par 183 Capitula usually in dense clusters, very rarely solitary; 
\par     female florets usually numerous, the hermaphrodite usually few; 
\par     involucral bracts usually greenish or brownish
\par 184 Clusters of capitula not subtended by leaves;
\par     involucral bracts uniformly white to yellow ....................... {\b 23. Gnaphalium}
\par 184 Clusters of capitula subtended by leaves; involucral
\par     bracts mottled, brownish
\par 185 Perennial with non-flowering shoots; achenes 
\par     (0·7-)1-2 mm, not mucilaginous when wet ......................... {\b 20. Omalotheca}
\par 185 Annual, or perennial without non-flowering shoots;
\par     achenes 0·4-0·9 mm, mucilaginous when wet 
\par 186 Clusters of capitula each subtended by several leaves;
\par     pappus-hairs free, falling separately ...................................... {\b 22. Filaginella}
\par 186 Clusters of capitula each subtended by 1 leaf;
\par     pappus-hairs connate at base, falling as a unit ................... {\b 21. Gamochaeta} 
\par 161 Achenes without a pappus of numerous hairs 
\par 187 Leaves not pinnatifid to pinnatisect
\par 188 Capitula in 1 cluster subtended by leaves; dwarf, 
\par     lanate annual ......................................................................... {\b 19. Evacidium}
\par 188 Capitula solitary or in panicles or corymbs
\par 189 Upper leaves lyrate, with a large terminal lobe .............. {\b 4. Dichrocephala}
\par 189 Upper leaves not lyrate
\par 190 Capitula in large panicles; involucre not more than 3 mm  ..{\b 88. Artemisia}
\par 190 Capitula solitary or in corymbs; involucre usually 
\par     more than 3 mm
\par 191 Capitula sessile in the leaf-axils, or pedunculate 
\par     and subtended by an involucre of small leaves ..................... {\b 34. Carpesium}
\par 191 Capitula long-pedunculate, not subtended by an
\par     involucre of small leaves
\par 192 Achenes strongly compressed ................................................... {\b 83. Cotula}
\par 192 Achenes subterete or variously angled
\par 193 Small annual; achenes stipitate .................................. {\b 84. Chlamydophora}
\par 193 Usually perennial; achenes sessile
\par 194 Leaves strongly glandular-punctate; plant aromatic ............ {\b 71. Balsamita}
\par 194 Leaves not glandular-punctate; plant not aromatic 
\par 195 Capitula solitary, rarely 2-4, 2-4 cm in diameter ........ {\b 81. Leucanthemum} 
\par 195 Capitula in corymbs of 4-10, 1-2 cm in diameter .................... {\b 82. Plagius}
\par 187 At least some leaves pinnatifid to pinnatisect
\par 196 Plant often grey- or white-lanate or sericeous, at 
\par     least in part; inflorescence not corymbose; involucre
\par     usually less than 4 mm; corolla usually reddish- or 
\par     brownish-yellow ..................................................................... {\b 88. Artemisia}
\par 196 Plant not grey- or white-lanate or sericeous; inflorescence 
\par     corymbose or capitula solitary; involucre usually more 
\par     than 4 mm; corolla usually pure yellow
\par 197 Capitula sessile; style persistent in fruit
\par 198 Achenes villous at apex; wings thick ............................. {\b 87. Gymnostyles}
\par 198 Achenes glabrous; wings thin .................................................... {\b 86. Soliva}
\par 197 Capitula pedunculate; style deciduous in fruit
\par 199 Achenes strongly compressed, at least the outer stipitate ......... {\b 83. Cotula}
\par 199 Achenes subterete or variously angled, sessile
\par 200 At least some leaves 2- to 3-pinnatisect
\par 201 Cauline leaves usually less than 1 cm, 1-pinnatifid .......... {\b 69. Tanacetum}
\par 201 Cauline leaves usually more than 1 cm, mostly 2- to
\par     3-pinnatisect
\par 202 Capitula less than 5 mm in diameter .................................. {\b 69. Tanacetum}
\par 202 Capitula more than 5 mm in diameter
\par 203 Achenes with an oblique lateral attachment scar,
\par     weakly 3- to 5-ribbed, without apical resin-glands ............. {\b 61. Chamomilla}
\par 203 Achenes with a transverse basal attachment scar,
\par     strongly 3-ribbed, with apical resin glands ............................ {\b 60. Matricaria}
\par 200 All leaves 1-pinnatisect, or some simple
\par 204 Upper leaves lyrate, with a large terminal lobe .............. {\b 4. Dichrocephala}
\par 204 Upper leaves not lyrate
\par 205 Inflorescence corymbose ................................................... {\b 69. Tanacetum}
\par 205 Capitula solitary
\par 206 Achenes with a scarious corona or auricle ........................... {\b 57. Anthemis}
\par 206 Achenes without a corona or auricle .................................. {\b 85. Nananthea}
\par 149 Ligules present, though sometimes small
\par 207 Shrub; achenes 5-7 mm, globose, woody ............ {\b 101. Chrysanthemoides}
\par 207 Herb; achenes less than 5 mm, usually elongate, not woody
\par 208 Receptacular scales present
\par 209 Ligules white or purplish
\par 210 Capitula small, usually in corymbs ........................................ {\b 58. Achillea}
\par 210 Capitula medium, solitary
\par 211 Plant with multicellular hairs; pappus of long-
\par     aristate scales .......................................................................... {\b 54. Gaillardia}
\par 211 Plant glabrous or with unicellular hairs; pappus not
\par     of long-aristate scales
\par 212 At least the outer achenes strongly winged; tubular florets 
\par     often with 2 corolla-lobes longer than the others .................. {\b 63. Anacyclus}
\par 212 Achenes not winged; corolla-lobes of tubular florets equal
\par 213 Corolla of tubular florets saccate or spurred at base ... {\b 59. Chamaemelum}
\par 213 Corolla of tubular florets not saccate or spurred at base
\par 214 Achenes ± terete ................................................................... {\b 57. Anthemis}
\par 214 Achenes strongly compressed ................................................ {\b 58. Achillea}
\par 209 Ligules yellow
\par 215 Capitula small, usually in corymbs ........................................ {\b 58. Achillea}
\par 215 Capitula medium, usually solitary
\par 216 Pappus of long-aristate scales .............................................. {\b 54. Gaillardia}
\par 216 Pappus not of long-aristate scales
\par 217 At least some leaves pinnatisect
\par 218 Branches in a whorl below the primary capitulum;
\par     capitula sessile ...................................................................... {\b 62. Cladanthus}
\par 218 Branches not whorled; capitula pedunculate
\par 219 Plant softly hairy; outer involucral bracts broadly
\par     scarious ................................................................................... {\b 57. Anthemis}
\par 219 Plant usually scabrid; outer involucral bracts leaf-like ...... {\b 44. Rudbeckia}
\par 217 Leaves not pinnatisect
\par 220 Pappus of ligulate florets of 4 scales ........................... {\b 76. Lepidophorum}
\par 220 Pappus of numerous scales or a small corona
\par 221 Ligules in 2 rows; pappus of numerous small scales
\par 222 Corolla-tube of inner florets terete; outer achenes ±
\par     triquetrous .............................................................................. {\b 39. Asteriscus}
\par 222 Corolla-tube of inner florets compressed and sometimes winged; 
\par     outer achenes flat, winged ......................................................... {\b 38. Pallenis}
\par 221 Ligules in 1 row; pappus a small corona, denticulate 
\par     or with few longer teeth
\par 
\par 107}
\par