{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 cral bracts numerous, ovate to triangular, ciliate near the base, deeply toothed; teeth aristate. Calyx-teeth subulate, green, glabrous. Corolla blue. 2n = 12, 24. •{\i  W. & W.C. Europe, northwards to Luxembourg; Balkan peninsula, extending to S.W. Romania and S. Italy}. Al Be Bu Co Ga Ge Gr Hs It Ju Rm [Fe].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowering stems (15-)20-50 cm; cauline leaves (7-)12-30
\par 
2 Largest leaves not more than 3(-4) mm wide,
\par 
  linear-oblong ......................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b laevis} 
\par 
2 Largest leaves (4-)5-8 mm wide, oblanceolate ................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b rosularis} 
\par 
1 Flowering stems 5-15 cm; cauline leaves 2-10(-15)
\par 
3 Densely caespitose, with stout stock; cauline leaves
\par 
  8-15; bracts usually green .............................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b orbiculata}
\par 
3 Laxly caespitose, with slender stock; cauline leaves
\par 
  2-10; bracts usually purplish
\par 
4 Flowering stems 0·25-0·4 mm in diameter at apex, with
\par 
  2-3(-4) cauline leaves ...................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b carpetana}
\par 
4 Flowering stems 0·8-1 mm in diameter at apex, with
\par 
  (4-)5-10(-15) cauline leaves ................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b laevis}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b laevis}: Flowering stems usually 20-40 cm, c. 1 mm in diameter at apex, with (7-)12-17(-25) cauline leaves; leaves linear-oblong, ciliate, the largest not more than 3(-4) mm wide. Bracts usually green.{\i  Mountains of W. & W.C. Europe from Luxembourg to the E. Pyrenees}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b carpetana} (Boiss. & Reuter) Rivas Martínez, {\i Publ. Inst. Biol. Apl.} ({\i Barcelona}){\b  42}: 122 (1967): Flowering stems usually 10-15 cm, 0·25-0·4 mm in diameter at apex, with 2-3(-4) cauline leaves; leaves linear-oblanceolate, sparsely ciliate, the largest 1-2 mm wide. Bracts usually purplish.{\i  Mountains of C. Spain}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b orbiculata} (Griseb. ex Velen.) Tutin, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  70}: 18 (1975) ({\i J. orbiculata} Griseb. ex Velen.): Flowering stems usually 5-10 cm, 0·8-1 mm in diameter at apex, with 8-15 cauline leaves; leaves linear-oblanceolate, not or sparsely ciliate, the largest 1·5-3 mm wide. Bracts usually green.{\i  Balkan peninsula; Romania; S. Italy}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b rosularis} (Boiss. & Reuter) Tutin, {\i loc. cit.} (1973) ({\i J. rosularis} Boiss. & Reuter): Flowering stems (20-)30-50 cm, c. 1 mm in diameter at apex, with 20-30 cauline leaves; leaves oblanceolate, ciliate or not, the largest (4-)5-8 mm wide, those of the non-flowering shoots rosulate. Bracts usually green.{\i  S.W. Spain} ({\i Sierra Carbonera}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. J. bulgarica} Stoj. & Stefanov, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  70}: 105 (1921). Like {\b 6}({\b c}) but stems, leaves and involucral bracts glabrous; leaves oblanceolate; corolla bluish-lilac. {\i Mountain pastures and Pinus-scrub. • Bulgaria.} Bu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. J. heldreichii} Boiss. & Orph. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3 }({\b 6}): 120 (1859) (incl.{\i  J. jankae} Neilr.). Like {\b 6}({\b c}) but often biennial; outer involucral bracts lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, very deeply toothed. 2n = 12.{\i  Rocky places, usually on mountains. • Balkan peninsula, extending to S.W. Romania.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. J. foliosa} Cav.,{\i  Icon. Descr.}{\b  2}: 38 (1793). Glabrous perennial with a stout stock and tap-root. Stems up to 15 cm, leafy almost up to capitulum. Basal leaves 10-30 mm, rosulate, oblong-spathulate, remotely crenate-serrate, rarely entire, petiolate; cauline leaves c. 5 mm, sessile or subsessile, entire. Involucral bracts like the upper leaves. Pedicels longer than the calyx. Calyx-teeth lanceolate. Corolla deep violet.{\i  Rock-crevices on mountains. • S. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b foliosa}: Stems stout, ascending; cauline leaves linear-lanceolate.{\i  N.E. part of the range of the species.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b minuta} (Agardh ex Roemer & Schultes) Font Quer,{\i  Cavanillesia}{\b  7}: 78 (1935): Stems filiform, procumbent; cauline leaves spathulate.{\i  S.W. part of the range of the species}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b Subfam.    LOBELIOIDEAE}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers zygomorphic. Stamens connate by the anthers and by the filaments nearly to their base.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 14.             Lobelia}              L. 
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
 
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers in simple or branched racemes. Calyx 5-fid. Corolla-tube deeply split dorsally; limb 2-lipped, the upper 2 lobes rather smaller than the 3 lower. Stamens 5, 2 with setulose anthers. Style slender; stigma capitate, weakly 2-lobed. Capsule dehiscing by 2 apical valves.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  L. erinus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 932 (1753), a perennial species from South Africa with ascending stems c. 15 cm and blue (rarely pink or white) flowers, is commonly cultivated for ornament and may escape.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Terrestrial; stems leafy; leaves serrate ................................................. {\b 1. urens}
\par 
Aquatic; stems almost leafless; leaves entire, in a basal
\par 
 rosette .........................................................................................  {\b 2. dortmanna}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. urens} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 931 (1753). Nearly glabrous, erect perennial 20-60 cm. Stems solid, leafy. Leaves linear-lanceolate to oblong or oblong-obovate, remotely serrate, sessile. Raceme many-flowered, often branched. Bracts linear, about as long as or longer than the pedicels. Flowers 10-15 mm, erect or patent. Calyx-teeth narrowly triangular, acute, scabrid. Corolla blue or purplish.{\i  Damp grassy places. W. Europe, northwards to S. England and Belgium.} Az Be Br Ga Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. dortmanna} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 929 (1753). Glabrous, erect perennial 20-60 cm. Stems hollow, with few, very small leaves. Basal leaves in a rosette, oblong, obtuse, entire, sessile, with 2 longitudinal air-canals. Raceme few-flowered, simple. Bracts ovate, obtuse, much shorter than the pedicels. Flowers 15-20 mm, pendent. Calyx-teeth oblong, obtuse, smooth. Corolla pale lilac. 2n = 14.{\i  In still, usually acid waters. N. & N.C. Europe, extending locally to S.W. France and White Russia}. Be Br Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb Ho No Po Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 15.           Laurentia}             Adanson
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers solitary, axillary or terminal, long-pedicellate. Calyx 5-fid. Corolla-tube not or scarcely split dorsally; limb 2-lipped, the upper 2 lobes rather smaller than the 3 lower. Stamens 5; anthers unequal, the 2 smaller setulose at apex. Style slender; stigmas 2. Capsule dehiscing by 2 apical valves.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. gasparrinii} (Tineo) Strobl,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  66}: 547 (1883) ({\i L. michelii} A. DC.). Slender, glabrous or puberulent annual or perennial up to 25 cm. Leaves obovate to oblong-spathulate, crenulate or entire, in a basal rosette in perennial plants. Flowers 4-11 mm; pedicels with 1-2 bracteoles near the middle. Corolla blue, lilac or white.{\i  Mediterranean region, Portugal}. Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Annual and perennial plants have been regarded as different species, but none of the morphological differences between them seems to be constant. Perennial plants ({\b L. tenella} A. DC. in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  7}: 410 (1839)) are commoner in the eastern than in the western part of the range of the species, though both occur together on the islands.
\par 

\par 
102}
\par