{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 sparsely pubescent at least above, lacking basal rosettes at anthesis. Lower cauline leaves 1-3·5 cm, obovate to cuneate, shortly petiolate, usually 3-lobed, cuspidate; very short axillary shoots often present and leaves then appearing verticillate. Upper leaves narrowly elliptical, entire. Capitula towards the ends of the branches on peduncles 3-8 cm, forming a lax, leafy corymb. Involucral bracts 2-4 mm, linear-lanceolate, green with brown centre and scarious margin. Florets dimorphic; ligules white or lilac above, purple beneath. 2n = 36.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and widely naturalized on walls and rocks in S. & W. Europe.} [Az Bl Br Ga He Hs It Lu.] ({\i Mexico}.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Apomictic.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. E. acer} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 863 (1753). Annual, biennial or rarely perennial. Stem 10-60(-100) cm, usually with dense, grey crispate hairs. Basal leaves 2-10 × 0·3-1 cm, narrowly elliptical to obovate, petiolate, entire or rarely slightly serrate. Flowering stems usually erect and solitary, branched above, forming a corymbose or elongate panicle of up to 70 capitula, rarely with one capitulum; cauline leaves numerous, becoming lanceolate and sessile above; upper parts of stem and capitula with short, inconspicuous glandular hairs. Involucral bracts 5-7 mm, linear with brown centre and scarious margin. Florets trimorphic; ligules scarcely exceeding the tubular florets, lilac.{\i  Dry, stony or sandy places. Almost throughout Europe.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Sa Sb Si ?Tu.
\par 
\par  
\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable; at least five subspecies can be recognized.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves and involucral bracts usually with dense,
\par   crispate hairs ............................................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b acer}
\par 1 Leaves glabrous or subglabrous, involucral bracts 
\par   glabrous to moderately hairy
\par 2 Involucral bracts with sparse to moderately dense long 
\par   hairs ................................................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b angulosus}
\par 2 Involucral bracts glabrous or almost so
\par 3 Involucral bracts uniformly purplish ................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b politus}
\par 3 Involucral bracts green, with lilac apex
\par 4 Upper cauline leaves distinctly smaller than the basal-capitula 
\par   up to 30; ligules scarcely exceeding the involucral 
\par   bracts ....................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b droebachiensis}
\par 4 Upper cauline leaves not markedly smaller than the basal
\par   capitula usually 30-70; ligules distinctly longer than 
\par   the involucral bracts .................................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b macrophyllus}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b acer}: Whole plant usually with dense, crispate hairs. 2n = 18. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species.}
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b angulosus} (Gaudin) Vacc.,{\i  Cat. Rais. Pl. Vasc. Aoste }{\b 1}: 350 (1909): Leaves glabrous. Involucral bracts sparsely to moderately hairy, green with lilac apex.{\i  C. Europe}.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b droebachiensis} (O. F. Mueller) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} 340 (1882): Leaves glabrous. Upper cauline leaves appreciably smaller than the basal, not ciliate. Capitula up to 30. Involucral bracts glabrous or almost so, about equalling the ligules.{\i  N.C. Europe, extending northwards to S. Norway}.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b macrophyllus} (Herbich) Guterm., {\i Phyton }({\i Austria}) {\b 15}: 268 (1973): Leaves glabrous, the upper cauline not appreciably smaller than the basal, ciliate. Capitula usually 30-70. Involucral bracts glabrous or almost so, distinctly exceeding the ligules.{\i  Carpathians and E. Austria}.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b politus} (Fries) H. Lindb. fil.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Fennoscand. Or.} 56 (1901) ({\i E. elongatus} Ledeb., non Moench): Leaves glabrous, usually shiny. Involucral bracts with a few eglandular hairs at the base, purplish. 2n = 18. {\i Fennoscandia and U.S.S.R. southwards to N. Ukraine}.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from the C. Alps have a weak, ascending habit quite unlike the normal erect habit; their status is uncertain.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Two other subspecies have been reported from Finland and N. Russia: subsp.{\b  brachypetalus} (H. Lindb. fil.) Hiitonen,{\i  Ann. Bot. Fenn.}{\b  8}: 78 (1971), with small white capitula, and subsp.{\b  decoloratus} (H. Lindb. fil.) Hiitonen,{\i  op. cit.} 77 (1971), with white ligules. Both require further study.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   There are scattered records, chiefly from N.C. Europe, of the sterile hybrid with {\i Conyza canadensis} ({\i E. huelsenii} Vatke).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. E. orientalis} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3} ({\b 3}): 7 (1856). Like {\b 3}(a) but always perennial; basal leaves narrowly oblong-spathulate; capitula up to 2·5 cm wide; panicle larger, subcapitate; involucral bracts up to 8·5 mm; ligules up to 0·6 mm wide, distinctly exceeding the bracts, pink.{\i  Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i C. & S.W. Asia.})
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. E. atticus} Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  3}: 237 (1788). Robust perennial 15-50 cm. Whole plant with short, dense, glandular and longer scattered, eglandular hairs. Basal leaves up to 15(-25) × 2(-2·5) cm, obovate, narrowly petiolate, mucronulate. Flowering stems erect; capitula usually 3-10; panicle corymbose, branched in the upper 1/3; cauline leaves numerous. Involucre 1·75-3 cm wide; involucral bracts lilac distally; florets trimorphic; ligules purple. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain grassland and rocky places. • Alps, Carpathians, mountains of Jugoslavia and Bulgaria; E. Pyrenees}. Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. E. gaudinii} Brügger, {\i Jahresb. Naturf. Ges. Graubdndens}{\b  29}: 105 (1886) ({\i E. glandulosus} Hegetschw.). Like {\b 5} but flowering stems ascending, usually branched at or below the middle, with 1-5 capitula; involucre usually less than 2 cm wide. 2n = 18. •{\i  Alps, S.W. Germany} ({\i Schwarzwald}). Au Ga Ge He It.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Intermediates between this species and {\b 5} occur and hybrids have been reported with{\b  7}.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. E. alpinus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 864 (1753). Perennial up to 25-(35) cm. Basal leaves 3-8 × 0·3-1·2 cm, narrowly elliptical to spathulate, petiolate, more or less acute. Leaves ciliate and with dense crispate hairs on both surfaces; occasionally the oldest basal leaves glabrescent. Flowering stems ascending to erect, with 1-3(-10) capitula; cauline leaves up to 11(-16), lanceolate. Involucral bracts somewhat pubescent, lilac distally; florets trimorphic; ligules lilac. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain grassland and rocky places. Mountains of S. & C. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Variable, particularly in height, indumentum and number of capitula. Tall plants, mostly from the Alps, like {\b 5} in their numerous cauline leaves and several capitula are sometimes referred to subsp.{\b  intermedius} (Schleicher) Pawl., {\i Acta Bot. Croat.}{\b  28}: 285 (1969). Regional variants from the Pyrenees (with dwarf habit and narrow leaves) and from the Appennini (with dense indumentum) have also been recognized. In the Balkan peninsula other regional variants occur. In Srbija and Bulgaria rather densely hairy plants with solitary capitula are found; these have been called {\b E. rhodopaeus} (Vierh.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 587 (1931). In Greece more robust plants with large leaves and 2 or more capitula, resembling plants from Romania, occur, while in the mountains of Albania and Macedonia plants intermediate between {\b 7} and {\b 12} are found, though in this area the commonest species is {\b 8}.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\i  E. alpinus} has been confused with{\b  9} and {\b 12} and intermediates with both these occur. Like {\b 9} it is closely related to {\b 11}, from which it is best distinguished by the usually dense crispate indumentum and acute basal leaves. Records of {\b 7} from S. Spain (Sierra Nevada) mostly refer to{\b  13}.
\par 
\par 118}
\par