{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 4 Middle cauline leaves (6-)8-11 mm wide; capitula few,
\par 
  crowded ............................................................................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b illyricus}
\par 
4 Middle cauline leaves 1-4(-6) mm wide; inflorescence lax
\par 
5 Involucral bracts glabrous, not ciliate; capitula 
\par 
  several to many ................................................................. ({\b e}) subsp. {\b trinervis}
\par 
5 Involucral bracts ciliate; capitula few ..................... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b angustissimus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sedifolius} (incl. {\i A. punctatus }Waldst. & Kit., {\i Galatella punctata }(Waldst. & Kit.) Nees, {\i G. pastuchovii }(Kem.Nat.) Tzvelev): Leaves glandular-punctate, scabrid at least near the margin and often also on the surfaces. Involucral bracts glabrous, usually viscid-shining. Ligules 5-10. 2n = 36.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b dracunculoides} (Lam.) Merxm.,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  68}: 279 (1974) ({\i A. dracunculoides} Lam.,{\i  Galatella dracunculoides} (Lam.) Nees; incl. {\i G. biflora} (L.) Nees, {\i G. trinervifolia} (Less.) Novopokr.): Leaves glandular-punctate or more or less eglandular, scabrid to nearly smooth. Involucral bracts viscid-shining, the outer sometimes shortly hairy. Ligules 0-6.{\i  S. Russia to S.E Romania}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b canus} (Waldst. & Kit.) Merxm., {\i loc. cit.} (1974) ({\i A. canus} Waldst. & Kit.): Leaves grey, with arachnoid, often somewhat floccose indumentum, glandular-punctate and scabrid at least at the margin. Outer involucral bracts arachnoid-hairy, the inner often viscid-shining. Ligules 8-12. {\i • E.C. & S.E. Europe.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b illyricus} (Murb.) Merxm., {\i op. cit.} 280 (1974) ({\i A. illyricus} (Murb.) K. Malý,{\i  Galatella rigida }subsp.{\i  illyrica }Murb.): Leaves eglandular, scabrid at the margin and sometimes also on the veins, the lower with 3-5, the upper with 3 veins. Involucral bracts viscid-shining. Ligules 6-10. • {\i N.W. part of Balkan peninsula.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b trinervis} (Pers.) Thell., {\i Allgem. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  19}: 107 (1913) ({\i A. trinervis} (Pers.) Nees): Leaves eglandular, glabrous, with a weakly scabrid margin. Involucral bracts glabrous. Ligules 6-10. •{\i  Mountains of S. France and N. part of Iberian peninsula}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b angustissimus} (Tausch) Merxm., {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  68}: 279 (1974) ({\i A. angustissimus} Tausch,{\i  Galatella angustissima} (Tausch) Novopokr.): Leaves eglandular, scabrid beneath and at the margin. Involucral bracts distinctly ciliate. Ligules 5-10.{\i  C. & S.E. parts of U.S.S.R}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. A. albanicus} Degen, {\i Term.-Tud. Közl. }({\i Pótfüz.}){\b  5}: 219 (1901). Perennial 15-35 cm. Stem ascending to erect, arachnoid-floccose below. Leaves oblanceolate to spathulate, glandular and weakly arachnoid-hairy. Capitula in lax corymbs or solitary, long-pedunculate. Involucral bracts in 3 rows, the outer and middle linear-lanceolate, with subulate apex, the inner acute, with wide scarious margin. Ligules 12-14, violet. Pappus-hairs unequal. •{\i  Mountains on the border of Jugoslavia and Albania.} Al Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. A. kirghisorum} (Fischer ex Bieb.) Korsh.,{\i  Tent. Fl. Ross. Or.} 205 (1898) ({\i Galatella divaricata} (Fischer ex Bieb.) Novopokr.). Perennial 10-35 cm. Stem erect, arachnoid-hairy. Leaves lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, semiamplexicaul, eglandular, arachnoid-hairy. Capitula few, very long-pedunculate. Involucral bracts in 3-5 rows, the outer and middle with a long, subulate apex, the inner acute. Ligules 0-5, white or bright blue. Pappus-hairs unequal.{\i  S.E. part of U.S.S.R.} Rs (C, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. A. aragonensis} Asso,{\i  Syn. Stirp. Arag. }121 (1779). Perennial 10-50 cm. Stem slender, erect, arachnoid-floccose. Basal leaves oblanceolate to spathulate, glandular-punctate, entire or remotely and coarsely crenate; cauline acicular. Capitula in a lax corymb. Involucral bracts in up to 8 rows, arachnoid-hairy, the outer narrow, long-acute, the inner subacute to subobtuse. Ligules 6-8, bright blue or violet. Pappus-hairs unequal. 2n = 20. •{\i  E. & C. Spain; W.C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. A. creticus} (Gand.) Rech. fil.,{\i  Phyton }({\i Austria}) {\b 1}: 211 (1949). Perennial 15-40 cm. Stem decumbent to erect, rigid, arachnoid-floccose, subglabrous above, leafy up to the capitula. Leaves linear-lanceolate, rigid, mucronate, eglandular, 1-veined. Capitula in pairs or few. Involucral bracts in 2-3 rows, the outer lanceolate, acute, the inner oblong-linear, subacute, reddish. Ligules absent. Pappus-hairs nearly equal. •{\i  E. Kriti, Karpathos.} Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. A. linosyris} (L.) Bernh., {\i Syst. Verz. Erfurt }151 (1800) ({\i Linosyris vulgaris }Cass. ex DC.). Perennial 10-70 cm. Stem decumbent to erect, weakly scabrid, densely leafy. Leaves narrow, sessile, often glandular-punctate above, scabrid at margin, 1-veined. Capitula small, narrowly infundibuliform, in dense corymbs. Involucral bracts in several rows, long and narrow, the outer and middle often with curved apex, the inner acuminate, with a wide scarious margin. Ligules absent. Pappus-hairs unequal. 2n = 18, 36.{\i  Rocky places and open grassland. S. & S.C. Europe, extending locally northwards to England, S.E. Sweden and C. Russia}. Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K) Su Tu [Ho].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. A. oleifolius} (Lam.) Wagenitz,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  83}: 329 (1964) ({\i A. villosus} (L.) Schultz Bip., non Thunb.,{\i  Linosyris villosa} (L.) DC.). Perennial 15-35 cm. Stem erect, soon leafless and glabrous below, with oblanceolate, greyish-white-tomentose leaves above. Capitula shortly pedunculate, narrowly infundibuliform, in dense corymbs. Involucral bracts in several rows, subacute to subobtuse, long-ciliate, the outer tomentose, the inner somewhat lanate at the apex. Ligules absent. Pappus-hairs unequal.{\i  E. & E.C. Europe, from N. Hungary and S. Ural to Bulgaria and Krym.} Bu ?Cz Hu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. A. tarbagatensis} (C. Koch) Merxm.,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  68}: 280 (1974) ({\i Linosyris tarbagatensis} C. Koch, {\i L. tatarica} (Less.) C. A. Meyer). Perennial 10-35 cm. Stem erect or somewhat ascending. Leaves linear-lanceolate, 1-veined, glandular, scabrid and somewhat arachnoid-hairy. Capitula narrowly infundibuliform, in corymbs. Involucral bracts in several rows, somewhat lanate, ciliate, the outer triangular, acute, the inner broadly oblanceolate, obtuse or rounded. Ligules absent. Pappus-hairs unequal.{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 8.            Erigeron}                 L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  (incl.{\i  Stenactis} Cass.)
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By G. Halliday
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, biennial or perennial herbs. Flowering stems usually with long eglandular hairs, the pubescence increasing progressively from below upwards. Leaves usually entire, the basal obovate-spathulate, somewhat petiolate, the cauline lanceolate to linear-lanceolate. Flowering stems with 1 to several capitula in a lax, corymbiform or elongate panicle. Ligulate florets female, usually exceeding the involucre; tubular florets yellow, either all similar, hermaphrodite or the outer florets female, filiform, the inner hermaphrodite. Achenes pubescent, sometimes dimorphic; pappus of hairs, or of short scales in ligulate florets and an outer row of scales and an inner row of long hairs in tubular florets.
\par 

\par 
116}
\par