{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. A. danilewskiana} Basiner, {\i Bull. Phys.-Math. Acad. Pétersb.} {\b 2}: 202 (1844). Shoots glaucous. Stems 20-60 cm, erect to geniculate-ascending, often rough with short hairs below, subglabrous above; middle internodes 3-4 times as long as the leaves. Leaves 7-20(-24) × 0·8-1 mm, linear, acute, weakly falcate, usually glabrous, rarely shortly ciliate; midrib comprising less than ¾ of width of leaf; margin distinctly revolute. Bracts narrowly lanceolate, usually not exceeding the fruits, usually glabrous; pedicels 0-2·5 mm. Corolla (4·5-)5·5-6·5 mm, broadly hypocrateriform to narrowly infundibuliform, pale purplish to whitish, nearly glabrous; tube about twice as long as lobes; lobes distinctly appendiculate. Fruit 2·5-4·5 mm, densely covered with acute squamiform tubercles. {\i W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E). ({\i W.C. Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. A. laevissima} Klokov in Schischkin,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  23}: 708 (1958). Like {\b 33} but mostly glabrous (rarely more or less rough at base); middle internodes 1½-2 times as long as the leaves; leaves 10-40 × 0·5-1 mm, linear to acicular, glabrous, the margin more or less weakly revolute; pedicels not more than 1·5 mm; corolla 3-6 mm, the tube 1½-2 times as long as lobes, the lobes obscurely appendiculate; fruit (2·5-)3-4·5 mm, with more or less obtuse tubercles. •{\i  S.E. Russia, westwards to} 40° 30' {\i E. }Rs (C, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. A. graveolens} Bieb. ex Schultes & Schultes fil., {\i Mantissa}{\b  3}: 376 (1827). Shoots green. Stems 10-35 cm, geniculate-ascending, more or less weak, rough at the base, usually with conspicuous, short, non-flowering shoots at the nodes; middle internodes 1-3 times as long as the leaves. Leaves (15-)25-30(-40) × 0·4-1·2 mm, linear to acicular, acute, patent and falcate to recurved, usually shortly hairy; margin distinctly revolute. Bracts narrowly lanceolate, glabrous or ciliate, scarcely exceeding the fruits; pedicels 0-1·5(-3) mm. Corolla 3·5-4 mm, broadly hypocrateriform to narrowly infundibuliform; tube 1-1½ times as long as lobes; lobes distinctly appendiculate. Fruit (2-)3-4 mm, densely covered with squamiform tubercles. •{\i  E. Ukraine and S. Russia, from the Dnepr to E. of the Don.} Rs (C, W, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. A. diminuta} Klokov in Schischkin, {\i Fl. URSS}{\b  23}: 707 (1958). Like {\b 35} but shoots glaucous; stems 15-35 cm, usually glabrous and smooth throughout; leaves 6-20(-25) × 0·5-1·2 mm; pedicels not more than 1 mm; corolla 3·5-4·5 mm, the tube equalling the lobes; fruit with acute tubercles.{\i  N.W. coast of Caspian Sea.} Rs (E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. A. leiograveolens} M. Popov & Chrshan.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou} nov. ser.,{\b  50}({\b 5-6}): 96 (1945). Like {\b 35} but leaves 10-25 × 0·3-0·7 mm, glabrous; bracts glabrous; fruit 2-3 mm, almost without or with only a few, scattered squamiform tubercles. •{\i  C. Ukraine} ({\i along the middle course of the Dnepr}). Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. A. savranica} Klokov in Schischkin,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  23}: 707 (1958). Like {\b 35} but stems 12-25 cm, densely leafy, hispid; leaves 2-16 × 0·5-0·7 mm, more or less straight, thickish, shortly hispid; corolla 3-3·5 mm; fruit 1·7-3 mm. •{\i  W.C. Ukraine} ({\i around Savran'}). Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. A. setulosa} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 10}): 61 (1849). Stems 26-65 cm, procumbent to arcuate-ascending, scarcely rooting, robust, rigid, more or less densely and shortly hispid below, subglabrous above; flowering stems usually with fewer than 20 internodes, which are c. 3 times as long as the leaves. Leaves (9-)15-20 × (0·5-)0·7-0·8 mm, linear to acicular, acute, rigid, more or less patent; midrib comprising more than ¾ of width of leaf; margin distinctly revolute, scabrid. Bracts coarsely ciliate; pedicels 0-2 mm. Corolla 3·5-5 mm, infundibuliform, usually shortly hispid outside; tube about equalling lobes; lobes distinctly appendiculate. Fruit (2·5-)3-4 mm, densely covered with squamiform tubercles. •{\i  W. & N.W. coasts of Black Sea} ({\i rarely inland}). Bu Rm Rs (W, ?K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. A. littoralis} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 89 (1806). Like {\b 39} but stems 10-55 cm, procumbent and rooting at the base, almost always shortly hispid throughout; flowering stems usually with more than 25 internodes, which are 1-2 times as long as the leaves; leaves 3-10(-14) × 0·6-1·4 mm, more or less appressed, the margin weakly revolute; corolla 2-4 mm; fruit densely covered with short setae.{\i  Maritime sands. N. coast of Turkey-in-Europe. }Tu. ({\i N. Anatolia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. HEXAPHYLLA Ehrend. Perennial herbs, with or without subterranean stolons. Leaves in whorls of 6(7); cauline broadly lanceolate to linear, 1-veined, without a distinct hyaline apex. Inflorescence pyramidal to corymbiform; partial inflorescences more or less capitate and involucrate; flowers with short pedicels or subsessile. Corolla 4-merous, hypocrateriform to infundibuliform, purplish or lilac to pink and whitish, glabrous and smooth or hairy outside; anthers and stigma often exserted. Ovary and fruit ovoid, hairy or glabrous, somewhat granulate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. A. incana} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 88 (1806). Stems (7-)10-40(-45) cm, more or less woody at base, ascending, rigid, robust, more or less branched, more or less hairy; internodes usually more than 12, the upper distinctly longer. Leaves (3-)8-15(-20) × (0·5-)0·8-1·2 mm, linear, more or less acute, densely hairy, sometimes glabrescent, the margin distinctly revolute. Inflorescences with sessile to long-pedunculate capitula. Corolla hypocrateriform, reddish, shortly hairy, sometimes glabrescent; tube (4·5-)5-6·5(-8) mm; lobes 2-3 mm, ovate, acuminate and more or less patent. Fruit c. 1·5 mm, shortly hairy. 2n = 44. {\i Stony places from the coast to the montane zone. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. A. taygetea} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 10}): 60 (1849). Like {\b 41} but stems velutinous; leaves 5-10 × 0·8-1 mm, subobtuse, velutinous; corolla whitish, densely hairy outside; tube (2·5-)3-4(-4·5) mm; lobes 1·5-2 mm, linear, somewhat apiculate and incurved.{\i  Calcareous rocks from the coast to the subalpine zone. • S. Greece and S.W. Aegean region}. Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. A. rupestris} Tineo,{\i  Cat. Pl. Horti Panorm.} 276 (1827). Stems (10-)15-45(-50) cm, more or less woody at base, ascending, rigid, robust, usually glabrous, sometimes densely hairy; internodes usually more than 12, the upper distinctly longer. Leaves (10-)18-25(-30) × (1-)2-3 mm, oblanceolate, shortly acuminate, thickish, glabrous or hairy, blackening when dry. Inflorescences with one to several long-pedunculate capitula. Corolla narrowly infundibuliform, reddish, glabrous; tube 4-6(-8·5) mm; lobes 2-2·5 mm, ovate, more or less flat. Fruit 2-4 mm, glabrous.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • N.W. & S.E. Sicilia, Isole Egadi.} Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. A. hirsuta} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  1}: 127 (1798). Stems (10-)15-50 (-60) cm, erect, rigid, robust, branched, hairy below or often subglabrous; internodes usually more than 12, the upper distinctly longer. Leaves (10-)12-20 × (0·5-)0·8-1(-1·2) mm, lanceolate to linear, long-acuminate, thin, more or less hairy beneath, mostly subglabrous above, green when dry. Inflorescences usually with several long-pedunculate capitula. Corolla hypocrateriform, brownish-red to pale pink, shortly hairy or glabrous; tube 5-7(-9) mm; lobes 2-3(-4) mm, ovate, flat. Fruit (2-)3-4 mm, glabrous. 2n = 22, 44. {\i Stony places and roadsides}
\par 

\par 
11}
\par