{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  Most of the montane species ({\b 5-17}) have isolated local variants which do not appear to merit the specific or subspecific status accorded them in the past. Intermediates exist between many of the species recognized here; to what extent this is caused by hybridization is unknown. Much confusion has resulted from lack of attention to the pubescence and shape of the oldest basal leaves, and from a reluctance to search for the filiform female florets in trimorphic species. Considerable importance has been attached to this character, but it is not known whether plants of trimorphic species can occasionally produce dimorphic progeny, or{\i  vice versa}, nor how the character is inherited. Ligulate florets with the ligules broken off can be mistaken for filiform florets.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: F. Vierhapper,{\i  Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  19} ({\b 2}): 385-560 (1906).
\par 

\par 
 
\pard\f0\fs28 The following three perennial species from North America occasionally escape from cultivation:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  E. glaucus} Ker-Gawler,{\i  Bot. Reg.}{\b  1}: t. 10 (1815), has basal rosettes of somewhat fleshy, glabrescent leaves and ascending to erect flowering stems with 1-4 large capitula with lilac or white ligules. The flowering stems, cauline leaves and involucre have dense, long eglandular and short glandular hairs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  E. speciosus} (Lindley) DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  5}: 284 (1836) ({\i Stenactis speciosa} Lindley), lacks basal rosettes at anthesis and has tall, slender, glabrous, ridged stems with 1-4 large capitula with violet or blue ligules. The cauline leaves are ciliate, the lower oblanceolate, the upper lanceolate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  E. philadelphicus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 863 (1753) ({\i Stenactis philadelphica} (L.) Hayek), is similar to {\i E. speciosus} but often biennial; the stems and cauline leaves are pubescent, the upper cauline leaves are semi-amplexicaul and there are 4-15 capitula. The ligules are deep purplish, rarely white.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems procumbent to ascending; lower cauline leaves 
\par 
  usually 3-lobed ..................................................................... {\b 2. karvinskianus}
\par 
1 Stems erect; lower cauline leaves entire or serrate,
\par 
  not 3-lobed
\par 
2 Lower cauline leaves ovate-lanceolate, often serrate;
\par 
  ligules white or pale blue ................................................................ {\b 1. annuus}
\par 
2 Lower cauline leaves narrowly spathulate or almost 
\par 
  linear, entire; ligules lilac, less commonly white
\par 
3 Capitula without filiform female florets between the 
\par 
  tubular and ligulate florets (florets dimorphic)
\par 
4 Capitulum more than 2 cm wide; ligules 7-13 mm, remaining 
\par 
  flat on drying (N. Ural) ........................................................... {\b 17. silenifolius}
\par 
4 Capitulum less than 2 cm wide; ligules less than 8 mm,
\par 
  becoming involute on drying
\par 
5 Flowering stems and involucral bracts with dense, short
\par 
  glandular and longer eglandular hairs (Sierra Nevada) ................... {\b 13. major}
\par 
5 Indumentum variable but short glandular hairs absent
\par 
6 Involucral bracts sparsely pubescent to almost glabrous,
\par 
  usually green to the apex ........................................................... {\b 12. glabratus}
\par 
6 Involucral bracts usually densely pubescent; apex lilac
\par 
7 Basal rosettes densely caespitose; whole plant densely 
\par 
  pubescent; ligules deep lilac ........................................................ {\b 16. frigidus}
\par 
7 Basal rosettes laxly caespitose; basal leaves glabrous 
\par 
  to sparsely pubescent; ligules white or pale lilac
\par 
8 Involucral bracts with long white hairs; flowering stems
\par 
  usually well exserted from basal rosettes ................................... {\b 14. uniflorus}
\par 
8 Involucral bracts with purple hairs; flowering stems 
\par 
  often scarcely exserted from the basal rosettes ............................ {\b 15. humilis}
\par 
3 Capitula with filiform female florets between the 
\par 
  tubular and ligulate florets (florets trimorphic)
\par 
9 Flowering stems with conspicuous glandular hairs at 
\par 
  least above
\par 
10 Flowering stems erect, branched in the upper 1/3;
\par 
   capitula 3-10 .................................................................................... {\b 5. atticus}
\par 
10 Flowering stems ascending, branched at or below the 
\par 
   middle; capitula 1-5 ...................................................................... {\b 6. gaudinii} 
\par 
9 Flowering stems without conspicuous glandular hairs
\par 
11 Annual or short-lived perennial; basal rosette usually
\par 
   absent at anthesis; cauline leaves usually more than 10;
\par 
   capitula usually more than 8
\par 
12 Ligules 1-1½ times as long as the involucral bracts ......................... {\b 3. acer}
\par 
12 Ligules 1½-2 times as long as involucral bracts ...................... {\b 4. orientalis}
\par 
11 Perennial; basal rosette present at anthesis; cauline 
\par 
   leaves usually fewer than 10; capitula rarely more than 8
\par 
13 Basal leaves with usually short, dense, crispate hairs
\par 
14 Flowering stems usually more than 10 cm; capitula 1 to
\par 
   several ..................................................... {\b 7. alpinus}
\par 
14 Flowering stems usually less than 10 cm; capitula solitary...... {\b 8. epiroticus}
\par 
13 Basal leaves ciliate, otherwise glabrous or very 
\par 
   sparsely pubescent
\par 
15 Flowering stems not stiffly erect; youngest basal 
\par 
   leaves sparsely pubescent ........................................................... {\b 11. borealis}
\par 
15 Flowering stems stiffly erect; basal leaves ciliate,
\par 
   otherwise glabrous or almost so
\par 
16 Basal leaves usually less than 6 mm wide; involucral 
\par 
   bracts up to 1 mm wide, moderately pubescent ......................... {\b 9. neglectus}
\par 
16 Basal leaves up to 14 mm wide; involucral bracts 
\par 
   usually more than 1 mm wide, densely pubescent ......................... {\b 10. nanus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. annuus} (L.) Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 431 (1807) ({\i Stenactis annua} (L.) Less.). Annual, biennial or perennial, glabrous or pubescent. Stem up to 80(-150) cm, erect, leafy, lacking basal rosettes at anthesis. Basal leaves up to 6 × 2·5 cm, broadly ovate or obovate, narrowly petiolate, dentate or subentire, usually with sparse, appressed hairs; lower cauline ovate-lanceolate, the upper lanceolate. Flowering stems branched above, with 3 to many capitula in a corymbiform panicle. Capitula medium-sized; florets dimorphic; ligules twice as long as the involucral bracts, white or pale blue. 2n = 26, 27, 36. {\i Waste places and disturbed ground. Formerly cultivated for ornament; now widely naturalized, especially in C. Europe.} [Au Be Cz Da Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W).] ({\i North America}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  A very variable apomictic species. European taxonomists have distinguished three subspecies, and subsp. ({\b c}) has often been given specific status.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem with short, appressed hairs ..................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b strigosus}
\par 
1 Stem with patent hairs, at least below, or glabrous
\par 
2 Middle and lower cauline leaves strongly dentate; ligules
\par 
  usually pale blue ............................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b annuus}
\par 
2 Middle and lower cauline leaves entire or weakly dentate;
\par 
  ligules white ........................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b septentrionalis}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b annuus}: Middle and lower cauline leaves strongly dentate. Stem, except for the panicle, with long, sparse, patent hairs. Ligules c. 8 mm, pale blue, rarely white.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b septentrionalis} (Fernald & Wieg.) Wagenitz in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.} ed. 2,{\b  6} ({\b 3}): 96 (1965): Middle and lower cauline leaves entire or very weakly toothed. Stem, except for the panicle, with sparse, patent hairs or glabrous. Ligules c. 6 mm, white.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b strigosus} (Muhl. ex Willd.) Wagenitz, {\i loc. cit.} (1965): Middle cauline leaves entire or very weakly toothed. Stem with short, appressed hairs. Ligules c. 6 mm, usually white.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  The distribution of the three subspecies is obscure but ({\b b}) appears to be the commonest and ({\b c}) the rarest.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. karvinskianus} DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  5}: 285 (1836). Perennial. Stems 15-50 cm, woody below, procumbent to ascending,
\par 

\par 
117}
\par