{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. squamatus} (Sprengel) Hieron.,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  29}: 19 (1900). Annual or biennial 30-100 cm. Stem erect or ascending, glabrous. Leaves mostly linear or linear-lanceolate, entire. Capitula in symmetrical panicles. Involucral bracts in 3 rows, oblong to oblanceolate, tapered near the purplish, serrulate apex to an acute or mucronate point, appressed, the longest 5-6 mm. Ligules violet-blue, about as long as the pappus, more numerous than the tubular florets. 2n = 20.{\i  Near the sea, usually on saline soil. Widely naturalized in S.W. Europe; recently also in C. & E. Mediterranean region, and still spreading.} [Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa.] ({\i Central and South America; widely naturalized elsewhere}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Recently recorded from Sicilia, and likely to become established there.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. A. sibiricus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 872 (1753) (incl.{\i  A. subintegerrimus} (Trautv.) Ostenf. & T. Resvoll). Perennial (5-)20-40 cm. Stem erect or ascending, often purplish. Leaves ovate-lanceolate to oblong, the lower often panduriform or narrowed into a petiole, nearly glabrous above, setulose beneath and on the margin, more or less serrate-dentate; the upper somewhat auriculate and semiamplexicaul. Capitula in very lax corymbs or solitary. Involucral bracts in 3 rows, acute, often purplish. Ligules 15-30, violet. Pappus-hairs unequal.{\i  N. Russia; one station in Norway.} No Rs (N, C). ({\i Siberia and E. Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. pyrenaeus} Desf. ex DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr}. ed. 3,{\b  4}: 146 (1805). Perennial 40-90 cm. Stem stout, erect. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, sessile, distinctly auriculate at base, setulose on the surfaces and margin, remotely and coarsely toothed. Capitula in lax corymbs or few or solitary. Involucral bracts in 2 rows, equal or subequal. Ligules 20-30, bluish-lilac. Pappus-hairs unequal. 2n = 18. •{\i  W. & C. Pyrenees.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. A. amellus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 873 (1753) (incl. {\i A. amelloides} Besser). Perennial 10-70 cm. Stem erect, often decumbent at base. Basal and lower cauline leaves broadly lanceolate to obovate, narrowed into a petiole, sometimes remotely crenate; middle and upper cauline leaves oblong to lanceolate, narrowed at base, sessile. Capitula in corymbs, rarely solitary. Involucral bracts in c. 3 rows, the outer short and subspathulate. Ligules 10-40, blue, rarely red or white. Pappus-hairs unequal. 2n = 18, 36, 54.{\i  Scrub and wood-margins. From N.C. France and Lithuania southwards to N. Italy and Macedonia.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge ?Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  A polymorphic species in need of further investigation.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. A. willkommii} Schultz Bip., {\i Flora }({\i Regensb}.) {\b 34}: 742 (1851). Densely greyish-setulose and glandular perennial 5-45 cm. Basal and lower cauline leaves lanceolate-spathulate, entire petiolate, the upper sessile. Capitula in lax corymbs or panicles or solitary. Involucral bracts in 3 rows, the outer more shortly acute than the inner. Ligules 10-20, violet, sometimes absent. Pappus-hairs unequal. •{\i  Mountains of E. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Less hairy plants from the N. part of the range, which have numerous capitula, have been separated as{\b  A. catalaunicus} Willk. & Costa,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  30}: 104 (1859), but they are connected by intermediates with typical {\i A. willkommii} with 1 or few capitula.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. A. alpinus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 872 (1753) (incl. {\i A. korshinskyi} Tamamsch.). Perennial 5-20(-50) cm. Stem ascending or erect, appressed-pubescent to lanate or subglabrous. Leaves entire, the basal and lower cauline spathulate to nearly elliptical, narrowed into a wide petiole; middle and upper cauline oblong-lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, sessile. Involucral bracts in 2(-3) indistinct rows, about equal in length, acute to obtuse, glabrous or hairy, fimbriate or ciliate. Ligules 20-40, violet-blue, very rarely pink or white, sometimes absent. Pappus-hairs unequal. 2n = 18, 36.{\i  Mountains of Europe from C. Germany southwards; also at lower altitudes in E. Russia.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, C, W, ?E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   The range of variation is considerable, but appears not to be correlated with geographical distribution.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. A. bellidiastrum} (L.) Scop.,{\i  Annus Hist.-Nat.}{\b  2}: 64 (1769) ({\i Bellidiastrum michelii} Cass.). Scapose perennial 10-30 cm. Stem erect, crispate-pubescent, rarely subglabrous. Leaves suborbicular, spathulate, obovate or elliptical, entire or coarsely crenate distally, petiolate, sparsely hairy above, more densely hairy, particularly on the veins, beneath. Capitula solitary; receptacle conical. Involucral bracts in 2 equal rows, narrow, long-acute, sparsely hairy. Ligules up to 50, white or pink. Pappus-hairs unequal. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain regions of C. & S. Europe, from the Jura and W. Carpathians to S.E. France, S.E. Italy and Albania.} Al Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po ?Rm [Hu].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. A. tripolium} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 872 (1753) ({\i Tripolium vulgare} Nees). Annual or short-lived perennial (5-)20-60(-115) cm. Stem erect or ascending, branched from the base upwards, often reddish, glabrous or nearly so. Leaves lanceolate to linear, moderately to strongly succulent and then more or less terete, the lower narrowed into a long petiole and semiamplexicaul, the upper sessile, with a wide base. Capitula in corymbs or panicles. Involucral bracts in 2-3 rows, oblong, subobtuse to rounded, ciliate or not. Ligules 10-30, bright blue or lilac, often absent. Pappus elongating strongly after anthesis; hairs nearly equal.{\i  Sea-coasts and saline places inland. Most of Europe.} All except Az Fa He Is Sb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tripolium}: Plant usually rather strongly succulent. Ligules sometimes absent. Achenes of outer florets as long as those of the inner. 2n = 18.{\i  Coasts of N. & W. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pannonicus} (Jacq.) Soó,{\i  Bot. Közl.}{\b  22}: 64 (1925): Plant moderately succulent. Ligules always present. Achenes of outer florets shorter and thicker than those of the inner. 2n = 18.{\i  S., C. & E. Europe}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. A. sedifolius} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 874 (1753) ({\i A. acris} L.). Perennial or rarely annual 25-120 cm. Stem erect, scabrid. Leaves sessile, entire, narrowly linear to broadly lanceolate or elliptical, the lower usually 3-veined, the upper usually 1-veined. Capitula in corymbs or panicles, rarely solitary. Involucral bracts in 3-5 rows, subacute, the inner sometimes more or less obtuse to nearly rounded. Ligules blue to pinkish-lilac, sometimes few or absent. Pappus-hairs unequal.{\i  S., E.C. & E. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   A very variable species in which there does not appear to be any clear correlation of characters; the separation at specific rank of a western taxon ({\i A. sedifolius}) from an eastern one ({\i A. punctatus} Waldst. & Kit.) is scarcely feasible. The following is a provisional attempt to account for the main variants at subspecific level.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Capitula usually with 6-15 florets; ligules few or 
\par 
  absent; leaves ± glandular-punctate ...................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b dracunculoides} 
\par 
1 Capitula usually with 15-30 florets; ligules always present
\par 
2 Leaves glandular-punctate
\par 
3 Leaves scabrid, setulose ................................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b sedifolius}
\par 
3 Leaves densely arachnoid-hairy .......................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b canus}
\par 
2 Leaves eglandular, usually subglabrous
\par 

\par 
115}
\par