{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min10}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min11}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1006}{\nofchars5739}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 8. E. epiroticus}{\fs28  (Vierh.) Hal\'e1csy, }{\i\fs28 Consp. Fl. Graec., Suppl. }{\fs28 53 (1908). Like }{\b\fs28 7 }{\fs28 but usually less than 10 cm; capitula solitary; ligules purplish; involucral bracts strongly pubescent; filiform female florets rather few. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S.W. part of Balkan peninsula; C. Appennini.}{\fs28  Al Gr It Ju.
\par 
\par  Plants occur in Italy which apparently intergrade with }{\b\fs28 7}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 9. E. neglectus}{\fs28  A. Kerner, }{\i\fs28 \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  21}{\fs28 : 253 (1871). Perennial up to 20(-25) cm. Basal leaves 2\'b75-5 \'d7 0\'b74-0\'b76(-0\'b78) cm, narrowly spathulate, petiolate, rounded at the apex, ciliate, otherwise nearly or quite glabrous. Flowering stems stiffly erect; cauline leaves 5-10, lanceolate, sparsely pubescent. Capitula solitary; involucral bracts 0\'b77-1 mm wide, pubescent, lilac distally. Florets trimorphic; ligules lilac.}{\i\fs28  Base-rich, stony ground above}{\fs28  1800 }{\i\fs28 m. \bullet  Alps, eastwards to}{\fs28  c. 13\'b0}{\i\fs28  E. in Austria.}{\fs28  Au Ga Ge He It.
\par 
\par  Records of this species from the Carpathians probably refer to }{\b\fs28 10}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 10. E. nanus}{\fs28  Schur, }{\i\fs28 Enum. Pl. Transs. }{\fs28 309 (1866). Like }{\b\fs28 9 }{\fs28 but usually not more than 15 cm; basal leaves 0\'b76-1\'b74 cm wide, spathulate; capitula very occasionally 2(-3); involucral bracts often more than 1 mm wide, usually densely pubescent. 2n = 18. }{\i\fs28 Rocks and mountain grassland,}{\fs28  1400-2100 }{\i\fs28 m; calcicole. Carpathians.}{\fs28  Cz Po Rm.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 11. E. borealis}{\fs28  (Vierh.) Simmons,}{\i\fs28  Lunds Univ. Arsskr.}{\fs28  nov. ser., }{\i\fs28 9}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 19}{\fs28 ): 127 (1913). Like }{\b\fs28 9 }{\fs28 but sometimes up to 30 cm; the oldest basal leaves glabrous, the younger very sparsely hairy; flowering stems less robust, erect or slightly flexuous; capitula usually solitary but sometimes 2 or 3, rarely more; involucral bracts usually more densely hairy. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Meadows and stony ground, mainly in the mountains; calcicole. N. Europe southwards to C. Scotland.}{\fs28  Br Fe Is No Rs (N) Su.
\par 
\par  Somewhat intermediate between }{\b\fs28 7}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 9}{\fs28 , and often scarcely distinguishable from }{\b\fs28 9}{\fs28 , it might perhaps best be treated as a subspecies.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 12. E. glabratus}{\fs28  Hoppe & Hornsch. ex Bluff & Fingerh.,}{\i\fs28  Comp. Fl. Germ.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 364 (1825) (}{\i\fs28 E. polymorphus}{\fs28  Scop. pro parte). Perennial up to 20(-35) cm. Basal leaves up to 5(-7) \'d7 0\'b76(-0\'b78) cm, narrowly spathulate with an attenuate petiole, sparsely ciliate but otherwise glabrous or almost so. Flowering stems ascending to erect, often weak; cauline leaves up to 10. Capitula 1-2(-7). Involucral bracts rarely more than 0\'b77 mm wide, with a sparse indumentum, usually green with a brown centre, rarely lilac distally. Florets dimorphic; ligules usually lilac, rarely white. 2n = 18. }{\i\fs28 Mountain grassland and rocks. Mountains of S. & C. Europe.}{\fs28  Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Po Rm.
\par 
\par  Variable but usually readily recognizable. Plants from the S. part of the Balkan peninsula usually have densely pubescent and purplish involucral bracts and occasionally trimorphic florets. They have been called }{\b\fs28 E. polymorphus}{\fs28  subsp. }{\b\fs28 graecus}{\fs28  Vierh.,}{\i\fs28  Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b\fs28  19}{\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 488 (1906). It is possible that they arise from hybridization with }{\b\fs28 7}{\fs28 , as also may problematical plants from the Pyrenees.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 13. E. major}{\fs28  (Boiss.) Vierh., }{\i\fs28 Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b\fs28  19}{\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 489 (1906). Pubescent perennial up to 15(-30) cm. Basal leaves narrowly spathulate. Flowering stems and involucral bracts with dense, short glandular and long eglandular hairs. Flowering stems ascending, slender. Capitula 1-4. Florets dimorphic. Ligules violet. }{\i\fs28 Mountain grassland and rocks. S. Spain }{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 Sierra Nevada}{\fs28 ). Hs.
\par 
\par   Small, densely hairy, eglandular plants, apparently occurring over the same altitudinal range, and with solitary capitula up to 10 mm wide, have been called}{\i\fs28  E. alpinus }{\fs28 var. }{\i\fs28 'nevadensis'}{\fs28 . Intermediates are common and the question whether there is one single polymorphic taxon (}{\i\fs28 E. major}{\fs28 ) or two cannot at present be answered.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 14. E. uniflorus}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  864 (1753). Perennial not more than 15 cm. Basal leaves 2-5 \'d7 0\'b74-0\'b79 cm, spathulate, narrowly petiolate, rounded at the apex, ciliate, sparsely pubescent when young. Flowering stems ascending to erect; cauline leaves 2-5(-8). Capitula solitary. Involucral bracts moderately to densely pubescent, lilac distally, sometimes slightly recurved. Florets dimorphic; ligules white or pale lilac. 2n = 18. }{\i\fs28 Snow patches, stony slopes and alpine pastures. Arctic and subarctic Europe and W. Fennoscandia; mountains of C. & S. Europe southwards to the Pyrenees, C. Appennini and S. Carpathians; S.W. Bulgaria}{\fs28 . Au Bu Co Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par 
\par   Very variable. The plants from Bulgaria (Pirin Planina) have been described as }{\b\fs28 E. vichrenensis}{\fs28  Pawl, }{\i\fs28 Acta Bot. Croat.}{\b\fs28  28}{\fs28 : 287 (1969). They have densely pubescent and purplish involucral bracts and purple ligules. The most distinct regional taxon is}{\b\fs28  E. uniflorus}{\fs28  subsp. }{\b\fs28 eriocephalus}{\fs28  (J. Vahl) Cronq.,}{\i\fs28  Brittonia}{\b\fs28  6}{\fs28 : 236 (1947). It has densely hairy involucral bracts, with hairs up to 2 mm, the outer bracts being distinctly recurved, and has 2n = 18. It occurs here and there with subsp. uniflorus in the mountains of N. Fennoscandia and Iceland and largely replaces it in the Arctic. It is, however, difficult to distinguish it from certain plants from S. and C. Europe.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28   E. aragonensis}{\fs28  Vierh.,}{\i\fs28  Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b\fs28  19}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 518 (1906), from the Pyrenees, which similarly has densely hairy involucral bracts but also narrow basal leaves (up to 0\'b73 cm wide) and ligules (4-)5-8 mm, is possibly worthy of specific rank. It has 2n = 18. Long ligules are also characteristic of plants from Corse.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 E. candidus}{\fs28  Widder,}{\i\fs28  Ber. Deutsch. Bot. Ges.}{\b\fs28  50}{\fs28 : 77 (1932), described from S.E. Austria (Koralpe), is of uncertain status. It resembles both }{\b\fs28 12}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 14}{\fs28 , which are absent from this area, and is distinguished from both mainly by having larger, wider leaves more densely pubescent flowering stems, solitary capitula and always white ligules.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 15. E. humilis}{\fs28  R. C. Graham,}{\i\fs28  Edinb. New Philos. Jour.}{\b\fs28  6}{\fs28 : 175 (1829). Perennial up to 12 cm but usually much less, with flowering stems scarcely emerging from the basal leaves. Basal leaves 1\'b75-3\'b75 \'d7 0\'b73-0\'b76 cm, spathulate, narrowly petiolate, rounded at the apex, ciliate, sparsely pubescent when young. Cauline leaves 1-4. Upper part of flowering stem and involucre with dense, long, patent, deep purple hairs. Capitula solitary; involucral bracts deep purple. Florets dimorphic; ligules white to purplish. 2n = 36. }{\i\fs28 Damp, stony hillsides and tundra. Arctic and subarctic Europe, eastwards to N.W. Finland}{\fs28 . Fe Is No Sb Su.
\par 
\par   While this species is usually quite distinct from }{\b\fs28 14}{\fs28  when fresh, the contraction to the cell walls of the pigment in the involucral hairs on drying can lead to misidentification. The base of the involucre is said to be cuneate (truncate in }{\b\fs28 14}{\fs28 ), but this character is unreliable. Sterile triploid hybrids between }{\b\fs28 14}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 15}{\fs28  are common in N. Norway and Sweden; they are most readily recognized by their failure to produce pollen.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 16. E. frigidus}{\fs28  Boiss. ex DC., }{\i\fs28 Prodr. }{\b\fs28 7}{\fs28 : 274 (1838). Densely caespitose, densely pubescent perennial up to 7 cm, with a shortly creeping branched stock. Basal leaves up to 2\'b75(-3\'b75) \'d7 0\'b74(-0\'b76)
\par 
\par 119}
\par }