{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min9}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min9}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages5}{\nofwords1121}{\nofchars6392}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 (1932). R. von So\'f3, }{\i\fs28 Bot. K\'f6zl.}{\b\fs28  22}{\fs28 : 56-64 (1925). A. Thellung,}{\i\fs28  Allgem. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  19}{\fs28 : 87-89, 101-112, 132-140 (1913). F. N. Williams,}{\i\fs28  Jour. Bot.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 London}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  43}{\fs28 : 78-89 (1905).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Ligules absent
\par 2 Leaves and outer involucral bracts densely grey-tomentose .... }{\b\fs28 26. oleifolius}{\fs28 
\par 2 Leaves not densely grey-tomentose
\par 3 Leaves glandular-punctate
\par 4 Lower leaves petiolate, plant densely greyish-setulose ........ }{\b\fs28 16. willkommii}{\fs28 
\par 4 All leaves sessile; plant glabrous, scabrid or arachnoid-hairy
\par 5 Inner involucral bracts acuminate .............................................. }{\b\fs28 25. linosyris}{\fs28 
\par 5 Inner involucral bracts subacute to rounded
\par 6 Involucral bracts glabrous, viscid-shining; leaves 
\par   distinctly 3-veined at least near the base ................................... }{\b\fs28 20. sedifolius}{\fs28 
\par 6 Outer involucral bracts lanate; leaves 1-veined .................. }{\b\fs28 27. tarbagatensis}{\fs28 
\par 3 Leaves eglandular
\par 7 Inner involucral bracts subobtuse to rounded; stem 
\par   glabrous; leaves \'b1 succulent, the lower long-petiolate .............. }{\b\fs28 19. tripolium}{\fs28 
\par 7 Inner involucral bracts subacute to acuminate; leaves
\par   not succulent, all sessile
\par 8 Leaves 1-veined, acicular or linear to linear-lanceolate
\par 9 Capitula solitary or few; stem floccose ....................................... }{\b\fs28 24. creticus}{\fs28 
\par 9 Capitula numerous, in dense corymbs; stem weakly scabrid .... }{\b\fs28 25. linosyris}{\fs28 
\par 8 Leaves conspicuously 3-veined at least near the base,
\par   linear-lanceolate to lanceolate
\par 10 Outer and middle involucral bracts abruptly contracted
\par    into a long subulate apex, somewhat lanate; leaves
\par    arachnoid-hairy .................................................................... }{\b\fs28 22. kirghisorum}{\fs28 
\par 10 Outer and middle involucral bracts subacute; leaves 
\par    scabrid ...................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 20. sedifolius}{\fs28 
\par 1  Ligules present
\par 11 Stems leafless ................................................................... }{\b\fs28 18. bellidiastrum}{\fs28 
\par 11 Stems leafy, at least in the lower half
\par 12 Ligules sterile, with undivided styles usually shorter
\par    than the corolla-tube
\par 13 Involucral bracts in up to 8 rows; leaves strongly
\par    dimorphic, the basal oblanceolate to spathulate, the
\par    cauline acicular ..................................................................... }{\b\fs28 23. aragonensis}{\fs28 
\par 13 Involucral bracts in 3-5 rows; leaves not strongly dimorphic
\par 14 Leaves glandular-punctate at least above
\par 15 Lower leaves petiolate; outer and middle involucral
\par    bracts with a subulate apex ....................................................... }{\b\fs28 21. albanicus}{\fs28 
\par 15 All leaves sessile; involucral bracts all subacute or
\par    the inner obtuse ........................................................................ }{\b\fs28 20. sedifolius}{\fs28 
\par 14 Leaves eglandular
\par 16 Outer and middle involucral bracts abruptly contracted
\par    into a long, subulate apex; leaves arachnoid-hairy .............. }{\b\fs28 22. kirghisorum}{\fs28 
\par 16 Involucral bracts all subacute or the inner obtuse;
\par    leaves scabrid to subglabrous ................................................... }{\b\fs28 20. sedifolius}{\fs28 
\par 12 Ligules female, fertile, with 2 style-branches; styles
\par    always exceeding the corolla-tube
\par 17 Involucral bracts in 2(-3) indistinct rows, all nearly equal
\par 18 Basal and lower cauline leaves petiolate, the upper 
\par    sessile, entire ................................................................................ }{\b\fs28 17. alpinus}{\fs28 
\par 18 All leaves sessile, auriculate at base, remotely and 
\par    coarsely toothed ....................................................................... }{\b\fs28 14. pyrenaeus}{\fs28 
\par 17 Involucral bracts in (2-)3-5 rows, often very unequal
\par 19 Basal and usually some of the cauline leaves petiolate
\par    and with the base of the lamina cordate to subcordate
\par 20 Inflorescence glandular-puberulent ................................... }{\b\fs28 1. macrophyllus}{\fs28 
\par 20 Inflorescence eglandular
\par 21 Lower leaves 6-14 cm wide; outer involucral bracts 
\par    more than 1 mm wide ................................................................. }{\b\fs28 2. schreberi}{\fs28 
\par 21 Lower leaves 3-6(-7) cm wide; outer involucral bracts
\par    not more than 1 mm wide ......................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. divaricatus}{\fs28 
\par 19 Basal and lower cauline leaves petiolate and with the
\par    base of the lamina not cordate, or sometimes sessile
\par 22 Capitula usually 10 or fewer
\par 23 Plant with numerous sessile glands; leaves entire .............. }{\b\fs28 16. willkommii}{\fs28 
\par 23 Plant eglandular, or with a few scattered glands;
\par    leaves toothed or entire
\par 24 Outer involucral bracts subobtuse to rounded, subspathulate; 
\par    middle and upper cauline leaves narrowed at base ..................... }{\b\fs28 15. amellus}{\fs28 
\par 24 All involucral bracts acute; cauline leaves somewhat
\par    auriculate, semiamplexicaul ....................................................... }{\b\fs28 13. sibiricus}{\fs28  
\par 22 Capitula more than 10
\par 25 Ligules about as long as pappus; annual or biennial ............ }{\b\fs28 12. squamatus}{\fs28 
\par 25 Ligules much longer than pappus; usually perennial
\par 26 Involucral bracts subobtuse to rounded
\par 27 Leaves glabrous and \'b1 succulent ............................................ }{\b\fs28 19. tripolium}{\fs28 
\par 27 Leaves hairy, not succulent ....................................................... }{\b\fs28 15. amellus}{\fs28 
\par 26 Involucral bracts acute or rarely mucronate
\par 28 Inflorescence glandular
\par 29 Leaves auriculate ............................................................... }{\b\fs28 4. novae-angliae}{\fs28 
\par 29 Leaves not auriculate ........................................................... }{\b\fs28 16. willkommii}{\fs28 
\par 28 Inflorescence eglandular
\par 30 Most cauline leaves not more than 1 cm wide
\par 31 Outer involucral bracts with subulate, green apex ..................... }{\b\fs28 11. pilosus}{\fs28 
\par 31 Outer involucral bracts without subulate, green apex ......... }{\b\fs28 10. lanceolatus}{\fs28 
\par 30 Most cauline leaves more than 1 cm wide
\par 32 Leaf-bases not auriculate or semiamplexicaul; longest
\par    involucral bracts 4-5\'b75 mm; ligules usually white ................. }{\b\fs28 10. lanceolatus}{\fs28 
\par 32 Leaf-bases auriculate or semiamplexicaul; longest 
\par    involucral bracts 5-12 mm; ligules violet-blue
\par 33 Leaves glaucous above; involucral bracts very unequal,
\par    appressed, green only in the middle ................................................. }{\b\fs28 6. laevis}{\fs28 
\par 33 Leaves not glaucous above; outer involucral bracts 
\par    about as long as inner, with lax or recurved apex, 
\par    green throughout
\par 34 Stem uniformly hispid, except sometimes at base .................... }{\b\fs28 5. puniceus}{\fs28 
\par 34 Stem glabrous or with hairs in longitudinal bands  (}{\b\fs28 7-9}{\fs28 ). }{\b\fs28 novi-belgii}{\fs28  group
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. A. macrophyllus}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  ed. 2, 1232 (1763). Perennial 30-80 cm, with non-flowering rosettes. Stem glandular-puberulent above, green or purple-tinged. Lower leaves petiolate, the lamina 6-14 cm wide, cordate; upper leaves ovate. Capitula in corymbs. Involucral bracts in several rows, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, acute or the outer obtuse, the longest 6-10 mm, the outer 1\'b725-1\'b775 mm wide, much shorter than the inner, the apex with green zone fading gradually below, appressed. Ligules 9-20, pale violet, sometimes fading to white.}{\i\fs28  Locally naturalized in N. Europe.}{\fs28  [Ge Ho Po.] (}{\i\fs28 North America}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. A. schreberi}{\fs28  Nees, }{\i\fs28 Syn. Spec. Gen. Aster. Herb.}{\fs28  16 (1818). Like }{\b\fs28 1 }{\fs28 but eglandular; basal leaves tending to have a wide rectangular sinus; inner row of involucral bracts usually much longer than the others; ligules white.}{\i\fs28  Naturalized in Scotland}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Lochside Station, Renfrewshire}{\fs28 ). [Br.] (}{\i\fs28 North America.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. A. divaricatus}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  873 (1753). Perennial 20-60 cm, without non-flowering rosettes. Stem eglandular, flexuous above, blackish-purple. Lower leaves petiolate, the lamina 4-6 cm wide, cordate to cordate-ovate; upper leaves cordate-ovate to narrowly triangular. Capitula in a cyme. Involucral bracts in c. 3 rows, elliptic-oblong to oblong, obtuse to subacute, the longest 5-8 mm, the outer 0\'b775-1 mm wide, the apex with green
\par 
\par 113}
\par }