{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 3.           Solidago}              L.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. McNeill.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs with rhizome or short stock. Stems simple up to the inflorescence; non-flowering leaf-rosettes often present. Leaves alternate, often toothed. Inflorescence fasciculate, thyrsoid, or forming scorpioid or sometimes corymbose panicles; capitula usually numerous, small; florets yellow. Involucre more or less cylindrical, with many rows of imbricate bracts. Ligules 3-20(-25), female; tubular florets hermaphrodite. Achenes many-veined, subterete or angled; pappus-hairs in 1-2 rows, more or less equal, shortly ciliate.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Species of Subgen.{\i  Solidago} from North America have been grown extensively in gardens and some of these, in addition to those given below, have been reported as naturalized.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: J. R. Beaudry,{\i  Naturaliste Canad.}{\b  97}: 35-42 (1970). J. R. Beaudry & D. L. Chabot,{\i  Contr. Inst. Bot. Univ. Montreal}{\b  70}: 65-72 (1957). B. M. Kapoor & J. R. Beaudry, {\i Canad. Jour. Genet. Cytol.}{\b  8}: 422 443 (1966). G. E. Schultz,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 10}: 248-257 (1973).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves rather fleshy, the lower ± amplexicaul; leaf-
\par   margins not ciliate, smooth or very minutely scabrid ........... {\b 2. sempervirens}
\par 1 Leaves not fleshy and amplexicaul; leaf-margins ciliate
\par   or prominently scabrid
\par 2 All but the lowermost capitula sessile or subsessile in
\par   terminal clusters, forming corymbose panicles; receptacular 
\par   pits minutely fimbriate ........................................................... {\b 5. graminifolia}
\par 2 All capitula with peduncles at least 1/2 as long as the
\par   involucre, not forming corymbose panicles; receptacular
\par   pits not fimbriate
\par 3 Inflorescence thyrsoid or a terminal panicle with 
\par   ascending branches; capitula not secund; involucre 
\par   4·5-8 mm; leaves with numerous divergent, often 
\par   indistinct, lateral veins ................................................................. {\b 1. virgaurea}
\par 3 Inflorescence a terminal panicle with patent branches;
\par   capitula secund; involucre 2-4,(-5) mm; leaves with two
\par   lateral veins running almost parallel to the midrib for
\par   most of its length and distinct beneath
\par 4 Stems densely pubescent or scabrid at least in the 
\par   upper 1/2; involucre 2-2·8 mm .................................................... {\b 3. canadensis}
\par 4 Stems glabrous, often glaucous except in the inflor-
\par   escence; involucre 3·2-5 mm ........................................................ {\b 4. gigantea}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Solidago}. Inflorescence fasciculate, thyrsoid or paniculate, with all capitula pedunculate. Ligules usually fewer than tubular florets. Filaments becoming free within the corolla-tube. Receptacular pits not fimbriate.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. virgaurea} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }880 (1753) (incl.{\i  S. taurica} Juz.). Stems 5-100 cm, arising from a short, stout stock, glabrous or pubescent. Leaves glabrous above, usually pubescent beneath, usually serrate; basal 2-10 cm, oblanceolate to obovate; cauline 5-30, decreasing in size upwards, linear-lanceolate to elliptical acute. Inflorescence thyrsoid, or a panicle with ascending racemose branches. Capitula not secund. Involucre 4·5-8 mm, greenish. Ligules 6-12, 4-9 mm. Tubular florets 10-30. Achenes c. 3 mm, pubescent; pappus c. 5 mm. 2n = 18. {\i Almost throughout Europe}. All except Az Cr Fa Is Sb Si.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  The variant known as subsp.{\b  minuta} (L.) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} 339 (1882) (subsp.{\i  alpestris} (Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd.) Hayek, {\i S. lapponica} With., {\i S. jailarum} Juz.), from the Arctic, the mountains of E., C. & N. Europe and some coastal localities in W. Europe, is 5-20 cm, with usually glabrous, rather coriaceous leaves and few large capitula usually in compact, spike-like racemes with the involucre 6-8 mm; it has 2n = 18.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b S. macrorrhiza} Lange in Willk. & Lange, {\i Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  2}: 39 (1865), from coastal localities in S.W. France and N.W. Spain may also be referable to this subspecies.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Plants known as {\b S. litoralis} Savi,{\i  Due Cent. Piante Etrusc. }182 (1804), from Italy, and{\b  S. virgaurea} subsp.{\b  centiflora} Velen.,{\i  Fl. Bulg.} 278 (1891), from N. Bulgaria, have a dense, appressed, greyish indumentum and thick leaves. The status of these and other variants has yet to be satisfactorily resolved.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. sempervirens} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 878 (1753). Stems 30-200 cm, arising from a short stock. Leaves somewhat fleshy, entire obtuse, apiculate; basal 10-30 × 2-6 cm, elliptic-lanceolate to ovate, with wide petioles; cauline 10-35, largest in the middle of the stem, linear-lanceolate to ovate, sessile, more or less amplexicaul; margins smooth, rarely very minutely scabrid. Panicle thyrsoid or the lower branches patent with more or less secund capitula, glabrous. Involucre 3-5 mm. Ligules 7-11, 3-5 mm. Tubular florets 12-40; corolla 4-5·5 mm. Achenes 2·2-3·5 mm, sparsely pubescent; pappus 3·5-5·5 mm. {\i Açores.} *Az. ({\i E. North America.})
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  The description applies to the plants from the Açores, which appear to be referable to var.{\i  sempervirens}, although the basal leaves are often wider and the capitula smaller than in the American plants; they have been called var.{\i  azorica }(Hochst.) St John.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. canadensis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 878 (1753). Rhizomatous. Stems 30-150 cm, glabrous at the base, pubescent or scabrid at least in the upper 1/2, with 40-110 leaves scarcely decreasing in size upwards. Leaves lanceolate, long-attenuate, pubescent or scabrid on the margin and veins beneath or occasionally throughout, sharply serrate, with 2 prominent lateral veins; basal soon deciduous; middle cauline 6-13 × 0·5-1·8 cm. Panicle broadly pyramidal, the branches patent, with strongly secund capitula. Involucre 2-2·8 mm. Ligules 10-17, 1-1·5 mm. Tubular florets usually fewer than the ligules; corolla 2·4-2·8 mm. Achenes 0·9-1·2 mm, shortly pubescent; pappus 2-2·5 mm.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and widely naturalized in Europe.} [Au Be Br ?Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W).] ({\i North America.})
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  The plants naturalized in Europe all appear to be referable to var.{\i  canadensis}; the very similar{\b  S. altissima} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 878 (1753) ({\i S. canadensis} var.{\i  scabra }Torrey & A. Gray) is cultivated and may also be naturalized. It is 70-200 cm, has more hairy leaves and stem, and larger capitula with involucre 3·2-5 mm and corolla of tubular florets 3-4 mm.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. gigantea} Aiton, {\i Hort. Kew.}{\b  3}: 211 (1789). Like {\b 3} but stems 50-250 cm, glabrous, often glaucous except in the inflorescence; leaves usually glabrous; involucre usually 3·5-5 mm. 2n = 36.{\i  Naturalized from gardens throughout much of Europe.} [Au Az Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W) Su.] ({\i North America.})
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  The naturalized plants in Europe are mostly referable to subsp.{\b  serotina} (O. Kuntze) McNeill, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  67}: 280 (1973), which is said always to be tetraploid, but the diploid subsp.{\b  gigantea}, with the leaves pubescent on the veins beneath the involucre 3·2-4 mm, and the achenes usually glabrous, may also occur.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Euthamia} Nutt. Inflorescence corymbose, with all but the lowest capitula sessile. Ligules always more numerous than tubular florets. Filaments becoming free only at apex of corolla-tube. Receptacular pits minutely fimbriate.
\par 
\par 110}
\par