{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo10\dy28\hr14\min45}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min9}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1022}{\nofchars5828}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 1-3 obtuse teeth on each side; peduncles 1-6 cm, very slender; capitula not more than 12 mm in diameter; involucral bracts 2-3 mm; ligules 4-6 mm; achenes 1 mm, glabrous. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Damp, grassy places. \bullet  Mountains of Corse.}{\fs28  Co.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. B. azorica}{\fs28  Hochst. in Seub., }{\i\fs28 Fl. Azor.}{\fs28  31 (1844). Like }{\b\fs28 2 }{\fs28 but with decumbent to ascending, leafy stems up to 15 cm; capitula not more than 13 mm in diameter; receptacle nearly flat, irregularly tuberculate between the florets; involucral bracts 3-4 mm, acute or obtuse; ligules 5-6 mm, not more than 1\'bd times as long as bracts; achenes subglabrous, but with numerous subsessile glands.}{\i\fs28  Mountain pastures. \bullet  A\'e7ores.}{\fs28  Az.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. B. longifolia}{\fs28  Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., }{\i\fs28 Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 11}{\fs28 ): 1 (1849). Scapose perennial. Leaves 30-50 \'d7 6-12 mm, oblong-oblanceolate, narrowed very gradually to a scarcely distinct petiole shorter than the lamina, 1-veined, conspicuously crenate-serrate with 4-5 teeth on each side, appressed-pubescent. Peduncles 5-20 cm, slender. Capitula 12-18 mm in diameter. Involucral bracts 4-6 mm, obtuse. Ligules 6-8 mm. Achenes glabrous.}{\i\fs28  Mountain rocks. \bullet  Kriti.}{\fs28  Cr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. B. sylvestris}{\fs28  Cyr., }{\i\fs28 Pl. Rar. Neap.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 22 (1792). Perennial, usually scapose. Leaves (15-)30-180 \'d7 5-25 mm, linear-oblong to narrowly obovate, remotely serrate to subentire, appressed-pubescent at least when young, dark green, 3-veined, narrowed very gradually to a short, scarcely distinct petiole. Peduncles 10-45 cm, stout. Capitula 20-40 mm in diameter; receptacle conical to hemispherical. Involucral bracts (5-)7-12 mm, oblong-lanceolate, more or less acute. Ligules 8-14 mm, tinged with purplish-red beneath and often also above. Achenes pubescent, sometimes with a rudimentary pappus of short bristles. 2n = 36, 54. }{\i\fs28 Grassland. S. Europe}{\fs28 . Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par  No single character can be relied on to distinguish this species with certainty from }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 , and by some authors it is treated as a subspecies. The distinctive facies of the great majority of plants, however, seems to make specific status more appropriate.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 7. B. rotundifolia}{\fs28  (Desf.) Boiss. & Reuter,}{\i\fs28  Pugillus}{\fs28  55 (1852) (}{\i\fs28 B. cordifolia}{\fs28  (G. Kunze) Willk.). Scapose perennial. Leaves 25-90 \'d7 18-110 mm, orbicular-reniform to broadly oblong-ovate, sinuate-crenate, cordate, truncate or rarely cuneate at the base, appressed-pubescent; petiole up to 18 cm, usually 2-5 times as long as lamina. Peduncles 15-50 cm, stout. Capitula 25-40 mm in diameter. Involucral bracts 7-10 mm, lanceolate, obtuse, villous. Ligules 8-17 mm, usually tinged with purplish-red. Achenes with glabrous faces but ciliate on the margins and with a pappus of bristles about \'bc as long as the achene.}{\i\fs28  Damp or shady places. S.W. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs. (}{\i\fs28 N.W. Africa.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28  6.         Bellium}{\fs28           L.
\par }{\fs24 By D.A. Webb.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Small, annual or perennial herbs. Leaves basal, alternate or subverticillate, petiolate, entire. Capitula small, solitary, pedunculate. Involucral bracts in one row, herbaceous or partly scarious. Receptacle hemispherical to conical; scales absent. Outer florets ligulate, female; ligules entire or subentire, white, sometimes tinged with red beneath. Inner florets 4- or 5-lobed, yellow; corolla-tube campanulate. Achenes slightly compressed, pubescent; pappus of an outer ring of 4-6(-10) hyaline scales \'bc-\'bd as long as the achene and an inner ring of the same number of bristles as long as the achene or longer.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Scapose annual; capitula with 7-10 involucral bracts ................. }{\b\fs28 2. minutum}{\fs28  
\par 1 Perennial, usually with leafy stems or epigeal stolons;
\par   capitula with more than 10 involucral bracts
\par 2 Stoloniferous; all leaves basal; involucral bracts c. 3 mm ..... }{\b\fs28 1. bellidioides}{\fs28 
\par 2 Not stoloniferous; cauline leaves usually present;
\par   involucral bracts 5-6 mm ........................................................ }{\b\fs28 3. crassifolium}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. B. bellidioides}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Mantissa Alt.}{\fs28  285 (1771). Pubescent to subglabrous perennial with leafless, filiform, epigeal stolons. Leaves 6-12 \'d7 3-7 mm, all basal, elliptical, narrowed to a petiole usually much longer than the lamina. Peduncles 2-14 cm, very slender. Capitula 9-15 mm in diameter, with 11-14(-20) involucral bracts and ligules. Involucral bracts 3 mm, obtuse or subacute, hairy. Ligules 3-4 mm, often tinged with red beneath. Achenes c. 0\'b78 mm. 2n = 18. }{\i\fs28 Damp or shady, open habitats. Islands of W. Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  Bl Co Sa.
\par  Records for Spain are erroneous.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. B. minutum}{\fs28  (L.) L., }{\i\fs28 op. cit.}{\fs28  286 (1771). Sparsely pubescent, scapose annual. Leaves 5-8 \'d7 3-5 mm, elliptic-obovate; petiole about as long as the lamina. Peduncles 2-5 cm, very slender, numerous. Capitula 6-7 mm in diameter, with 7-10 involucral bracts and ligules. Involucral bracts 2-2\'b75 mm, elliptic-oblong, acute. Ligules scarcely exceeding the bracts.}{\i\fs28  Maritime rocks. Mediterranean islands, westwards to Lampedusa; very local.}{\fs28  Cr Gr Si.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. B. crassifolium}{\fs28  Moris, }{\i\fs28 Stirp. Sard.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 26 (1827). Perennial. Stem 0-10 cm, rather woody, decumbent to suberect, sparingly branched. Leaves 9-15 mm, alternate or subverticillate, orbicular to elliptic-spathulate, fleshy, glabrous or pubescent; petiole 15-40 mm. Capitula 15-20 mm in diameter, terminal or pseudoterminal, usually with 20-30 involucral bracts and ligules. Peduncles 5-18 cm, stout. Involucral bracts 5-6 mm, subacute. Ligules 4-6 mm.}{\i\fs28  Maritime rocks. Sardegna.}{\fs28  Sa.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 7.          Aster }{\fs28             L.   
\par }{\fs24 Native species by H. Merxm\'fcller & A. Schreiber;
\par naturalized  species by P. F. Yeo.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs24  }{\fs28 Herbs, usually perennial. Leaves alternate or basal, simple. Capitula small to medium, solitary or in corymbs or panicles. Involucral bracts in 2 nearly equal rows, or imbricate in 3-several rows with the outer much shorter than the inner. Receptacle flat or convex. Outer florets ligulate, female or sterile, in 1 row; ligules blue, violet, purple, pink or white, sometimes absent. Inner florets tubular, hermaphrodite, yellow, often becoming purple. Achenes oblong, usually compressed, more or less hairy and often glandular. Pappus-hairs scabrid, whitish to yellowish or reddish, often unequal, in 1-2 indistinct rows.
\par 
\par   The recognition as a separate genus of Sect. }{\i\fs28 Galatella}{\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 20-23}{\fs28 ), possibly also including Sect.}{\i\fs28  Aegaeaster}{\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 24}{\fs28 ) and }{\i\fs28 Linosyris }{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 25-27}{\fs28 ), though probably desirable, requires thorough investigation of the whole genus.
\par 
\par   Many species have been introduced into cultivation in Europe from North America. From European gardens some of the original introductions and their accidental or deliberately raised hybrids have escaped, and continue to do so. Such escapes have long been established on river-banks or in fens, where they are fully naturalized and may form quite uniform populations, though not necessarily easily matched with North American species. Populations on waste ground, railway-banks etc. are often much more variable and here the delimitation of taxa is necessarily arbitrary and the identification of specimens sometimes impossible.
\par 
\par   Literature: I. Novopokrovsky,}{\i\fs28  Not. Syst.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Leningrad}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 11}{\fs28 : 211-233 (1949). M. Onno,}{\i\fs28  Biblioth. Bot.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Stuttgart}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 106}{\fs28 : 1-83
\par 
\par 112}
\par }