{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 zone fading gradually below, appressed. Ligules 5-10(-12), white.{\i  Naturalized in the Netherlands.} [Ho.] ({\i North America}.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. novae-angliae} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 875 (1753). Perennial 30-200 cm. Stem hairy, glandular above. Leaves lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, auriculate, entire. Capitula in corymbs. Involucral bracts in c. 3 rows, glandular-hairy, the inner aristate, the outer acute, nearly as long as the inner, lax or recurved.{\i  Waste ground and river-banks. Widely naturalized, mainly in C. Europe.} [Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Po Rm.] ({\i North America.})
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. puniceus} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 875 (1753). Perennial 40 130 cm. Stem hispid all round except sometimes at the base, purplish-red. Leaves ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, at least 1 cm wide, scabrid, auriculate at base, with apically directed teeth. Capitula in a divaricately branched panicle. Involucral bracts in several rows, acute, the longest 6-12 mm, the outer as long as the inner, mainly herbaceous, with a recurved attenuate apex. Ligules violet-blue, c. 1·5 mm wide.{\i  Locally naturalized in N. Europe.} [Br Po.] ({\i North America}.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. laevis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 876 (1753). Perennial 30-100 cm. Stem glabrous or nearly so, reddish-purple. Leaves ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, the lower petiolate, glabrous, glaucous, auriculate at base, entire or obscurely toothed, sometimes scabrid. Capitula in a long panicle. Involucral bracts in several rows, acute, very unequal, the longest 5-7 mm, with appressed, shortly tapered apex and a rhombic to lanceolate green patch in the centre. Ligules violet-blue, c. 2 mm wide. {\i Scrub, damp woods and river-banks. Naturalized, mainly in N. & C. Europe.} [Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge Ho Ju No Po Rm.] ({\i North America}.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b 7-9}). {\b A. novi-belgii} group. Perennial 20-200 cm. Stem erect, often purplish, glabrous or with hairs in longitudinal bands. Leaves ovate to linear-lanceolate, with auriculate base, remotely toothed. Involucral bracts in several rows, acute. Ligules at least 1·5 mm wide.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Because of the hybrid origin of some members of this group, certain identification is often impossible.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Middle cauline leaves 21/2-5 times as long as wide;
\par   branches of each order in the inflorescence usually 
\par   with a long series of nearly equal leaves ................................. {\b 9.} × {\b versicolor}
\par 1 Middle cauline leaves mostly 4-10 times as long as wide;
\par   branches of each order in the inflorescence with few 
\par   nearly equal leaves
\par 2 Outer involucral bracts tapered only near the apex,
\par   mainly green .............................................................................. {\b 7. novi-belgii}
\par 2 Outer involucral bracts tapered for most of their 
\par   length, often scarious at the sides towards the base ................... {\b 8.} × {\b salignus}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. non-belgii} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 877 (1753) ({\i A. brumalis} Nees). Stem 40-120 cm. Leaves ovate-lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, (3-)4-10 times as long as wide, auriculate at base, remotely toothed. Capitula in a symmetrical, sometimes corymbiform, panicle. Involucral bracts acute, the longest 5·5-7 mm, the outer as long as the inner and largely herbaceous, lax or with a recurved apex, shortly tapered. Ligules at least 1·5 mm wide, violet-blue or (in cultivars) white, violet or purple.{\i  In fens and on river-banks and railway-banks; also occurring on waste ground. Widely naturalized in C. & N.W. Europe.} [Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm ?Rs Su.] ({\i North America}.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. dumosus} × {\b non-belgii}, of garden origin, has stems usually 20-40 cm and unequal involucral bracts with short green apex. It may occur in the same area as {\b 7}.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A.} × {\b salignus} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 2040 (1803) ({\i A. lanceolatus} × {\i novi-belgii}). Like {\b 7} but the leaves sometimes not or scarcely auriculate; outer involucral bracts not, or less distinctly, lax, enlarged and herbaceous; ligules light violet-blue. {\i River-banks, railway-banks and waste places. Widely naturalized, mainly in N. & C. Europe.} [Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.] ({\i Garden origin}.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 9. A.} × {\b versicolor} Willd., op. cit. 2045 (1803) (A. laevis × novibelgii; ? an A. novi-belgii subsp. laevigatus (Lam.) Thell. pro parte). Stem 100-200 cm. Leaves subglaucous beneath, the middle mostly ovate, 2 1/2-5 times as long as wide, the lowest more or less petiolate, with auriculate base. Capitula on more or less elongated peduncles with numerous uniform bracts. Involucral bracts sometimes more unequal than in 7 and with more sharply defined green apex and scarious base. Ligules violet-blue. Locally naturalized. [Au Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Po Rm.] (Garden origin.)
\par 
\par    {\b 10. A. lanceolatus} Willd., {\i op. cit.} 2050 (1803) (incl. {\i A. tradescantii} auct. eur., non L.). Perennial 50-130 cm. Stem green, sometimes tinged with purple. Leaves lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, glabrous, not auriculate at base, entire or obscurely toothed. Capitula in a rather narrow panicle, often arranged unilaterally on the branches. Involucral bracts in several rows, the longest 4-5·5 mm, the outer shorter than the inner, not mostly herbaceous, appressed. Ligules white or sometimes violet-blue, not more than 1 mm wide.{\i  River-banks and waste ground. Naturalized in C. & W. Europe.} [Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm.] ({\i North America}.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable in habit; variants with numerous small leaves in the inflorescence and small capitula have often been incorrectly assigned to {\i A. tradescantii }L.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  The following two species from North America, closely related to {\b 10}, have been reported to occur in France but are perhaps not established: {\b A. lateriflorus} (L.) Britton, {\i Trans. New York Acad. Sci.}{\b  9}; 11 (1889), with patent or recurved inflorescence-branches and very unequal involucral bracts; and{\b  A. dumosus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 873 (1753), with a much-branched inflorescence and the longest involucral bracts 3·5-5 mm.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. patulus} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 308 (1783), said to be like {\b 7} but with the leaves entire, not amplexicaul, and the involucral bracts as in {\b 10}, is also reported as doubtfully established in France. It is presumably derived from species from North America.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. pilosus} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 2025 (1803). Perennial 30-60 cm. Stem erect or oblique, branched from near the base, glabrous to densely hirsute. Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate, the lowest petiolate and sometimes lanceolate, glabrous to hirsute, not auriculate at base, entire or obscurely toothed. Capitula in a wide panicle, on long peduncles with linear leaves, sometimes arranged unilaterally along the branches. Involucral bracts in several rows, acute, the largest 4·5-7 mm, the outer shorter than the inner, lax, with a subulate, green apex inrolled at the margin. Ligules white, often becoming purplish, c. 1·5 mm wide.{\i  Locally naturalized}. [Ho Hs It.] ({\i North America.})
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  This has often been mistaken for {\b A. ericoides} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }875 (1753), which is similar in habit but has smaller, more oblong leaves in the inflorescence, the longest involucral bracts only 3-5 mm and the outer involucral bracts spinulose-mucronate and recurved. A native of North America, it is probably nowhere established in Europe.
\par 
\par 114}
\par