{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min7}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min8}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1022}{\nofchars5828}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 5. S. graminifolia}{\fs28  (L.) Salisb.,}{\i\fs28  Prodr.}{\fs28  199 (1796). Rhizomatous. Stems 30-150 cm, glabrous to sparsely pubescent. Leaves linear-lanceolate, entire, scabrid on the margins and usually on the veins beneath, with 2 or 4 lateral veins more or less parallel to the midrib; lower soon deciduous; cauline 4-15 \'d7 0\'b74-1\'b72 cm. Panicle corymbose. Involucre 2\'b75-5 mm, yellowish. Ligules 15-25, 0\'b78-1 mm. Tubular florets 5-10. Achenes 0\'b75-0\'b77 mm, pubescent; pappus c. 2\'b75 mm. }{\i\fs28 Cultivated for ornament and occasionally naturalized, mainly in C. Europe}{\fs28 . [Au Br Cz Ga Ge He Po Rm Rs (W).] (}{\i\fs28 North America}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 4.         Dichrocephala}{\fs28             L'Her. ex D C.
\par }{\fs24 By \'86T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Annual herbs. Leaves alternate, toothed, lyrate or pinnatifid. Inflorescence paniculate, with several small capitula. Involucral bracts in 1-2 rows. Receptacle raised, contracted at base and flat above, without scales. Florets all tubular, the outer female, the inner hermaphrodite. Achenes compressed, with marginal veins; pappus absent, rarely of 2 small setae in hermaphrodite flowers.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. D. integrifolia}{\fs28  (L. fil.) O. Kuntze,}{\i\fs28  Revis. Gen. }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 333 (1891) (}{\i\fs28 D. latifolia}{\fs28  DC.). 20-40 cm, shortly papillose-pubescent. Leaves very variable, the lower often ovate-cordate, petiolate, the upper usually lyrate, with an ovate, toothed terminal lobe. Capitula globose; involucral bracts c. 5 mm, lanceolate, erectopatent; florets yellow, the female very slender, sometimes green and persistent. Achenes c. 1 mm. 2n = 18. }{\i\fs28 Naturalized in Italy and Turkey-in-Europe.}{\fs28  [It Tu.] (}{\i\fs28 Tropical and subtropical Asia and Africa.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 5.           Bellis}{\fs28                 L.
\par }{\fs24 By D.A. Webb.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Small annual or perennial herbs, often scapose. Leaves alternate or basal, entire to serrate-crenate. Capitula solitary, pedunculate. Involucral bracts in 2 rows, subequal, herbaceous. Receptacle conical to nearly flat; scales absent. Outer florets ligulate, female; ligules entire or subentire, patent, white, often tinged with purplish-crimson. Inner florets 4- or 5-lobed, yellow; corolla-tube campanulate. Achenes compressed, with thickened margin; pappus absent, rarely represented by a ring of very short bristles.
\par 
\par  In several species the development of the stem varies greatly with environmental conditions; normally scapose species can show well-developed leafy stems in damp, shady habitats, and the opposite tendency can be seen under the influence of drought or heavy grazing.
\par 
\par  Literature: E. Caramo & V. Bambacioni,}{\i\fs28  Ann. Bot.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Roma}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 16}{\fs28 : 9-70 (1926).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Annual, usually with leafy stems; roots very slender ...................... }{\b\fs28 1. annua}{\fs28 
\par 1 Perennial; roots fleshy
\par 2 Stems up to 15 cm, leafy, decumbent to ascending;
\par   receptacle nearly flat; achenes glandular ........................................ }{\b\fs28 4. azorica}{\fs28  
\par 2 Plant normally scapose; receptacle conical; achenes not
\par   glandular
\par 3 Lamina cordate, truncate or shortly cuneare at base,
\par   passing \'b1 abruptly into a distinct petiole
\par 4 Leaves reniform-orbicular to broadly oblong-ovate;
\par   petiole 4-18 cm, usually much longer than lamina .................. }{\b\fs28 7. rotundifolia}{\fs28 
\par 4 Leaves oblanceolate to broadly obovate-spathulate;
\par   petiole not more than 3\'b75 cm, usually equalling or 
\par   shorter than lamina
\par 5 Leaves not more than 10 \'d7 6 mm, usually entire;
\par   peduncles 1-6 cm; achenes glabrous ............................................. }{\b\fs28 3. bernardi}{\fs28 
\par 5 Leaves 10-60 \'d7 4-25 mm; peduncles 4-15(-25) cm;
\par   achenes pubescent ......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. perennis}{\fs28 
\par 3 Lamina cuneate, passing gradually into a scarcely 
\par   distinct petiole
\par 6 Leaves up to 25 mm wide, dark green, 3-veined; involucral 
\par   bracts (5-)7-12 mm, \'b1 acute ........................................................ }{\b\fs28 6. sylvestris}{\fs28 
\par 6 Leaves not more than 15 mm wide, bright green, 1-veined;
\par   involucral bracts 3-6 mm, usually obtuse
\par 7 Leaves conspicuously crenate-serrate; achenes glabrous .......... }{\b\fs28 5. longifolia}{\fs28 
\par 7 Leaves subentire to obscurely crenate-serrate; achenes
\par   pubescent ...................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. perennis}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. B. annua}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  887 (1753). Subglabrous to hispid annual (2\'b75-)5-12(-20) cm. Stem usually apparent, ascending or suberect. Leaves 6-25(-50) \'d7 3-15(-20) mm, oblanceolate-lingulate to broadly obovate-spathulate, crenate-serrate to entire petiole usually distinct in lower leaves, less so in the upper. Peduncles 1\'b75-10 cm, slender. Capitula 5-15(-20) mm in diameter. Involucral bracts 2\'b75-3\'b75 mm, subacute. Ligules 4\'b75-8 mm, often tinged with purplish-red beneath. Achenes pubescent. }{\i\fs28 Mediterranean region, Portugal, Bulgaria.}{\fs28  Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 annua}{\fs28 : Leaves not more than 25 \'d7 15 mm; capitula not more than 15 mm in diameter. 2n = 18. }{\i\fs28 Dry, open habitats. Mediterranean region, Portugal}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 vandasii}{\fs28  (Velen.) D. A. Webb,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  70}{\fs28 : 18 (1975) (}{\i\fs28 B. vandasii}{\fs28  Velen.): Leaves up to 50 \'d7 20 mm; capitula 12-20 mm in diameter.}{\i\fs28  Damp, shady places. C. Bulgaria}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Stara Planina}{\fs28 ).
\par 
\par  Variants with entire leaves, capitula 5-10 mm in diameter and acute, usually hispid involucral bracts, have been distinguished as}{\b\fs28  B. microcephala}{\fs28  Lange, }{\i\fs28 Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kj\'f8benhavn}{\b\fs28  1861}{\fs28 : 66 (1861) (}{\i\fs28 B. annua}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  microcephala}{\fs28  (Lange) Nyman). In S. & S.E. Spain they are fairly distinct, but elsewhere in S. Europe intermediates are found which show only one of these distinctive characters.
\par 
\par  In the Islas Baleares plants occur whose ligules turn blue on drying. Such plants have been confused with}{\b\fs28  B. caerulescens}{\fs28  Cosson ex Ball, }{\i\fs28 Jour. Linn. Soc. London}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Bot}{\fs28 .)}{\b\fs28  16}{\fs28 : 495 (1878), a perennial species endemic to Morocco.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. B. perennis}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  886 (1753). Perennial, usually scapose, spreading by short stolons. Leaves 10-60 \'d7 4-25 mm, oblanceolate to broadly obovate-spathulate, subentire to crenate-serrate, appressed-pubescent at least when young, 1-veined, bright green, narrowed usually rather abruptly to a petiole usually about as long as lamina. Peduncles 4-15(-25) cm, slender, thickened below the capitulum. Capitula usually 15-30 mm in diameter; receptacle conical. Involucral bracts 3-5(-7) mm, oblong usually obtuse. Ligules 4-8(-11) mm, often purplish-red beneath. Achenes 1-1\'b75 mm, pubescent. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Pastures, roadsides and other grassy habitats. S., W. & C. Europe, extending northwards to Denmark and eastwards to White Russia and Krym; naturalized or casual further north.}{\fs28  All except Bl Rs (N, E) Sb, but only naturalized in Fa Fe Is and perhaps also in Az No Su and Rs (B).
\par 
\par  Very variable, some variants being difficult to distinguish from }{\b\fs28 6}{\fs28 . A robust variant, }{\b\fs28 B. hybrida}{\fs28  Ten.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Nap.}{\b\fs28  5}{\fs28 : 233 (1835-1838) (}{\i\fs28 B. perennis}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  hybrida}{\fs28  (Ten.) Nyman), usually with leafy stem, from the mountains of S. Europe, has been variously interpreted as a hybrid between }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 6}{\fs28  or as a distinct species but is probably best treated as an ecotype or environmental variant of }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. B. bernardii}{\fs28  Boiss. & Reuter,}{\i\fs28  Pugillus}{\fs28  56 (1852). Like }{\b\fs28 2 }{\fs28 but leaves not more than 10 \'d7 6 mm glabrous, entire or rarely with
\par 
\par 111}
\par }