{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i from the mediterranean to the montane zone. S. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  A rather variable species, in which the relationship between morphological, cytological and eco-geographical differentiation is not yet understood.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. A. taurica} Pacz., {\i Zap. Novoross. Obsc. Estestv.}{\b  15}({\b 1}): 76 (1890) ({\i A. cretacea} auct., non Willd.). Stems (5-)10-20(-25) cm, densely caespitose, more or less erect, moderately robust; internodes usually fewer than 12. Leaves (10-)13-20(-25) × (1-)1·5-2 mm, linear, glabrous, the margin somewhat scabridulous. Inflorescences ovoid, more or less densely branched; partial inflorescences capitate; pedicels (1-)2-5(-7) mm. Corolla more or less infundibuliform, white or pale purplish, glabrous; tube 2-3 mm; lobes 1·5-2 mm, ovate, flat. Style shorter than corolla tube. Fruit 1·5-2 mm, glabrous.{\i  Calcareous rocky slopes. S. Krym.} Rs (K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. A. arcadiensis} Sims, {\i Bot. Mag. }{\b 47}: t. 2146 (1820). Stems (4-)8-15(-18) cm, pulvinate-caespitose, slender, woody at base, hairy. Leaves (4-)8-10(-12) × (1·2-)1·5-2·5(-3) mm, more or less broadly lanceolate, densely grey-hairy, the margin weakly revolute. Flowers sessile, in terminal, involucrate, few-flowered capitula. Corolla narrowly infundibuliform, pink, glabrous; tube 8-10(-12) mm; lobes (1·5-)2-3 mm, lanceolate, more or less incurved. Fruit c. 2 mm, glabrous. 2n = 22.{\i  Calcareous mountain rocks. • S. Greece} ({\i Peloponnisos}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. A. doerfleri} Wettst.,{\i  Biblioth. Bot. }({\i Stuttgart}) {\b 26}: 59 (1892). Stems (1·5-)3-9(-10) cm, caespitose, glabrous or sometimes hairy at the base. Leaves 5-8 × 1-2 mm, lanceolate, sparsely patent-hairy especially on margin and midrib, the margin weakly revolute. Peduncles of capitula usually only half as long as the subtending leaves. Corolla broadly tubular-infundibuliform, pink; tube 2-3·5 mm; lobes 1-2 mm, hairy or glabrous, somewhat incurved. Fruit c. 2 mm, glabrous. 2n = 22. {\i Alpine screes and mountain pastures; calcicole. • Crna Gora, N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. A. hirta} Ramond, {\i Bull Soc. Philom. Paris}{\b  2}: 131 (1800). Stems (5-)8-12(-15) cm, laxly caespitose, erect, slender, glabrous or hairy. Leaves (6-)9-15 × 1-2 mm, lanceolate, patent-hairy on margin and midrib, the margin weakly revolute. Peduncles of capitula 1-3 times as long as the subtending leaves. Corolla weakly infundibuliform, pink to whitish, glabrous; tube 3-4·5 (-5) mm; lobes 2-3 mm, flat. Fruit 2-2·5 mm, glabrous or sometimes hairy. 2n = 22. {\i Calcareous mountain rocks. • C. & W. Pyrenees}. Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. A. hercegovina} Degen,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  40}: 15 (1890). Stems (4-)8-16(-20) cm, laxly caespitose, ascending to erect, slender, glabrous or hairy. Leaves (13-)15-20(-25) × (1·2-)1·5-2 mm, narrowly lanceolate, glabrous or more or less hairy, the margin weakly revolute. Peduncles of capitula 2-3 times as long as the subtending leaves; flowers more or less sessile. Corolla hypocrateriform, purplish-lilac, glabrous; tube (2·5-)3-4 mm; lobes 1·5-2·5 mm, oblong, more or less flat. Fruit c. 1·5 mm, glabrous.{\i  Subalpine calcareous rocks. • Mountains of Hercegovina and S. Bosnia.} Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. pilosa} Degen,{\i  loc. cit.} (1890), described from the Prenj Planina (N. of Mostar), is a more or less strongly hairy variant of {\b 49}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. A. capitata} Kit. ex Schultes,{\i  Österreichs Fl.} ed. 2,{\b  1}: 312 (1814). Like {\b 49} but stems (5-)10-20(-35) cm, shortly hairy only at base; leaves (15-)18-25(-30) × (0·5-)1-1·5 mm, linear-lanceolate, the lowest shortly hairy, the upper glabrous, the margin distinctly revolute; corolla more or less infundibuliform. 2n = 22. {\i Calcareous mountain rocks. • S. & E. Carpathians; C. Bulgaria.} Bu Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. A. hexaphylla} All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem. }{\b 1}: 12 (1785). Like {\b 49} but stems glabrous; leaves 14-25 × 1-1·5 mm, linear-lanceolate,glabrous, the margin scabridulous; pedicels 0·5-1·5(-3) mm; corolla-tube 5-6 mm; lobes 2-3 mm, more or less incurved. 2n = 22. {\i Calcareous mountain rocks. • S.W. Alps, northwards to} c. 45°{\i  N}. Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. GLABELLA Griseb. Perennial herbs, often with rhizomes and subterranean stolons. Leaves in whorls of 4-6(-7), ovate lanceolate or linear, 1- or 3-veined, rounded or very shortly acute, with cartilaginous apex. Inflorescence pyramidal to corymbiform; partial inflorescences cymose to capitate, bracteate to involucrate. Corolla 3- to 4-merous, narrowly to broadly infundibuliform, white or yellowish, sometimes tinged with pink, smooth outside, fragrant; tube 1½-4 times as long as the acute lobes; anthers and stigma included or exserted. Ovary and fruit ovoid, glabrous, smooth or weakly granulate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. A. taurina} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 103 (1753) (incl.{\i  A. caucasica} Pobed.,{\i  A. propinqua }Pobed.). Stock with orange, more or less horizontal subterranean stolons. Stems (10-)20-50 cm, erect, stout, distinctly 4-angled, more or less patent-hairy. Leaves in whorls of 4, 30-60 × 10-25 cm, lanceolate to ovate, abruptly narrowed at base, pale beneath, with 3 main veins and distinct reticulate venation, patent-hairy especially on the veins and margin. Flowers in dense capitula, surrounded by involucral leaves and by long-ciliate bracts. Flowers 4-merous; corolla 10-14 mm, tubular to narrowly infundibuliform, white or pale yellowish; tube 6·5-10·5 mm; lobes 2-3·5 mm, much longer than wide. Filaments 2-3 mm; anthers 1·3-1·5 mm, oblong. Fruit 1-3 mm, glabrous and smooth. 2n = 22.{\i  Deciduous woods and scrub up to the montane zone. S. & S.C. Europe.} Al Au Bu Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (K) [Br Da Ge].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b taurina}: Corolla grey-brown or brown when dry. Anthers pale lilac to violet. {\i Throughout the range of the species except Hungary and Romania, and possibly Albania and Bulgaria}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b leucanthera} (G. Beck) Hayek in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  6}({\b 1}): 201 (1914): Corolla yellowish when dry. Anthers white to pale yellowish. •{\i  N. part of Balkan peninsula, extending to Hungary and W. Romania; doubtfully elsewhere}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  The density of the indumentum on various parts of the plant varies greatly throughout the range of the species, and it is not possible to differentiate species on this basis.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. A. involucrata} Wahlenb. in Jakob Berggren,{\i  Res. Eur. Österländ.}{\b  2}: 21 (1827). Stock with more or less slender stolons. Stems (10-)15-50 cm, erect, branched from the base, 4-angled, shortly hairy below, glabrous above. Leaves in whorls of 4,10-25(-30) × (2-)3-6(-6·5) mm, broadly elliptical to oblanceolate, obtuse, narrowed into a petiole-like base, thin, with 1 main vein and a distinct reticulate venation, glabrous but the lowest usually shortly hairy. Partial inflorescences capitate, terminal and lateral; bracts lanceolate, glabrous, smooth; pedicels 0-1·5 mm. Flowers 4-merous; corolla 4-6(-6·5) mm, infundibuliform, white, glabrous; tube 3-4 mm; lobes 1-2 mm, about as long as wide. Filaments 0·8-0·9 mm; anthers 0·6-0·7 mm, oblong yellowish. Fruit 0·8-1·3 mm, glabrous, weakly granulate.{\i  Deciduous woods. S.E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 54. A. laevigata} L.,{\i  Mantissa} 38 (1767). Stock with slender stolons. Stems 15-80 cm, ascending to erect, more or less weak,
\par 

\par 
12}
\par