{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 2 Lower leaves not in a rosette, not persistent when dead;
\par 
  lateral branches patent to suberect
\par 
3 Plant light green; stems glabrous below; dense, white-lanate
\par 
   indumentum restricted to bases of clusters of capitula ..... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b sibirica}
\par 
3 Plant greyish or whitish; stems usually lanate ± 
\par 
  throughout; indumentum of the bases of clusters of capitula
\par 
   similar to that of the other parts of the plant .................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b uliginosa}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b uliginosa}: stem usually much-branched; branches divaricate, patent, the plant normally orbicular to ovate in outline. All clusters similar in size. {\i Throughout the range of the species, except the S. part of U.S.S.R}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sibirica} (Kirp.) J. Holub,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 271 (1976) ({\i Gnaphalium sibiricum} Kirp.): stem usually branched from the base; branches divaricate, patent to suberect, the plant ovate, cylindrical or obovate in outline. Terminal cluster much larger than other clusters. Capitula sometimes very dark coloured.{\i  N. & N.E. Russia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b kasachstanica} (Kirp.) J. Holub, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i Gnaphalium kasachstanicum} Kirp.): stem greyish-tomentose; branches ascending to erect, more or less parallel to the main stem, the plant cylindrical in outline.{\i  W. Kazakhstan.} ({\i Kazakhstan.})
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b rossica} (Kirp.) J. Holub,{\i  loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i Gnaphalium rossicum} Kirp.): stem usually much-branched; branches divaricate, patent, the plant orbicular to ovate in outline. {\i S. part of U.S.S.R., E.C. Europe}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp. ({\b a}) is a very polymorphic taxon, with mostly phenotypic variation. Plants with hairy achenes have been called{\b  Gnaphalium uliginosum} subsp.{\b  pilulare} (Wahlenb.) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 382 (1879), but this character seems not to be correlated with any other. Glabrous plants with glabrous achenes and smaller capitula have been called subsp.{\b  nudum} (Hoffm.) Nyman,{\i  loc. cit.} (1879). Their status requires further investigation.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 23.              Gnaphalium}               L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Holub.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Tomentose annuals without non-flowering shoots. Leaves alternate, semiamplexicaul. Clusters of capitula without subtending leaves, in a terminal corymbose to paniculate or cymose inflorescence. Capitula ovoid to cylindrical. Receptacle flat, without scales. Involucral bracts imbricate, scarious, entirely white or yellow, shining; indurated middle portion of the inner bracts sulcate. Florets tubular, the outer female, in 2-4 rows, the inner hermaphrodite. Achenes short, subterete; pappus-hairs filiform, fragile, free, ciliate at the base, falling in small groups. Pollen grains with narrow, shallow furrows, ovate pores and short, broadly conical spinules.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: M. E. Kirpicznikov & L. A. Kuprianova, {\i Acta Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS} ({\i Ser. }1) {\b 9}: 7-37 (1950).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves not decurrent, white-tomentose on both surfaces,
\par 
  not asperous above; stem 8-40 cm ........................................... {\b 1. luteo-album}
\par 
Leaves decurrent, green and asperous above, white-
\par 
  tomentose beneath; stem 30-80 cm ............................................ {\b 2. undulatum}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. luteo-album} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 851 (1753). Stem 8-40(-50) cm, erect or ascending, simple or branched. Cauline leaves (1-)2-5(-7) cm, oblong to linear, not decurrent, white-tomentose on both surfaces, the lower obtuse. Corymb small, dense. Capitula sessile, ovoid, in semiglobose clusters of 4-12. Involucral bracts yellowish, glabrous, obtuse, the outer broadly ovate, the inner oblong. Florets c. 3 mm, yellowish, reddish above, the hermaphrodite 4-7(-10). Achenes 0·5 mm, tuberculate, glabrous or hairy; pappus 2-2·5 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Damp, usually sandy places. Europe, northwards to S. England, S. Sweden and Latvia.} Au Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. G. undulatum} L., {\i Sp.Pl.} 852 (1753). Stem (20-)30-80(-90) cm, robust, erect, branched; branches divaricate or erect. Leaves 2-5 cm, oblong-lanceolate, decurrent, acute, green and asperous above, white-tomentose beneath. Corymb large, lax, sometimes paniculate. Capitula lanate at the base, white or yellow, subsessile, in often globose clusters. Involucral bracts white, glabrous, obtuse. Florets c. 3 mm. Achenes 0·5-0·6 mm, minutely papillose; pappus c. 3 mm. {\i Roadsides and waste places. Naturalized in N.W. France, Channel Islands and S. Italy.} [Ga It.] ({\i South Africa.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 24.            Helichrysum}            Miller
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.R. Clapham.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or dwarf shrubs, often lanate or tomentose. Leaves alternate, simple, entire. Capitula small to medium, solitary or aggregated into compound corymbs. Involucre cylindrical-campanulate to hemispherical; involucral bracts numerous, imbricate, scarious, white or coloured at least distally. Florets yellow, all tubular, the outer usually female, the inner hermaphrodite, more numerous; rarely all hermaphrodite. Pappus of scabrid or shortly plumose hairs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  The distinction from {\b Gnaphalium}, in which female florets outnumber the hermaphrodite, is not clear-cut.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucre about equalling the florets, remaining erect
\par 
  or nearly so throughout anthesis
\par 
2 All or most of the leaves with revolute margins
\par 
3 Herbaceous perennial; upper leaves narrowly linear ............... {\b 13. arenarium}
\par 
3 Dwarf shrub .............................................................. ({\b 5-10}). {\b stoechas} group
\par 
2 All or most of the leaves flat, their margins not  revolute
\par 
4 Involucre 7-10 mm in diameter ................................................. {\b 11. orientale}
\par 
4 Involucre 4-5 mm in diameter
\par 
5 Stem and leaves densely glandular ............................................ {\b 12. plicatum}
\par 
5 Stem and leaves eglandular
\par 
6 Indumentum of leaves and stems appressed-tomentose,
\par 
  greyish-white; all florets hermaphrodite .................................. {\b 13. arenarium}
\par 
6 Indumentum often yellowish-green, sparsely to densely
\par 
  villous-lanate; outer florets female .......................................... {\b 14. graveolens}
\par 
1 Involucre greatly exceeding the florets, becoming patent
\par 
7 Annual or biennial herb
\par 
8 Cauline leaves sessile, amplexicaul, white-tomentose 
\par 
  beneath; capitula clustered ......................................................... {\b 15. foetidum}
\par 
8 Cauline leaves shortly petiolate, green beneath;
\par 
  capitula solitary ....................................................................... {\b 16. bracteatum}
\par 
7 Caespitose or woody perennial
\par 
9 Involucre yellow ........................................................................ {\b 11. orientale}
\par 
9 Involucre white
\par 
10 Leaves not more than 5 mm, all linear-oblong, closely
\par 
   imbricate ....................................................................................... {\b 4. frigidum}
\par 
10 Some leaves more than 15 mm, oblong-spathulate to 
\par 
   narrowly oblanceolate
\par 
11 Flowering stems 10-30 cm; capitula at least 5 ...................... {\b 1. amorginum}
\par 
11 Flowering stems 5-10 cm; capitula 1-4
\par 
12 Rosette-leaves and lower cauline leaves 15-60 × 5-10 mm ...... {\b 2. sibthorpii}
\par 
12 Rosette-leaves 5-10(-15) mm; lower cauline leaves
\par 
   20-30 × 2-4 mm ............................................................................ {\b 3. doerfleri}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. VIRGINEA (DC.) Fiori. Capitula solitary, terminal, or in a more or less compact corymb; involucre much exceeding the florets; bracts white, at first erecto-patent, then patent, the middle usually the longest.
\par 

\par 
128}
\par