{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pygmaea}: Lateral branches short, ascending; indumentum whitish; rosette-leaves somewhat rigid. Achenes 1·2-1·4 mm, dark brown, glabrous. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ramosissima} (Mariz) R. Fernandes & Nogueira,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2, {\b 45}: 323 (1971): Lateral branches long procumbent, then ascending; indumentum greyish; rosette leaves soft. Achenes 0·7-1 mm, greenish-brown to pale brown, sometimes sparsely hairy.{\i  S.E. Portugal, S. Spain}.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. contracta} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2} ({\b 11}): 3 (1849). Appressed-greyish-tomentose. Stem 1-4 cm. Rosette-leaves 15-30 × 3-5 mm, oblong- to oblanceolate-spathulate, acute, gradually narrowed and sheathing at base, erect, c. 4 times as long as the cluster. Clusters of capitula 5-15 mm wide, compact, rigid, embraced by narrow bases of rosette-leaves. Involucral bracts c. 3 × 1·2 mm, obovate or oblong-ovate, nearly straight on the back, subglabrous, brownish-yellow, cuspidate, with arista 0·5 mm. Achenes 1·1 × 0·5 mm, obovoid, pale brown, densely papillose.{\i  S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr. ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia.})
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. E. asterisciflora} (Lam.) Pers., {\i Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 422 (1807). Stem 3-13 cm, rigid, simple or branched. Cauline leaves 12-25 × 4-5 mm, linear-oblong to oblanceolate, spathulate, subopposite; rosette-leaves 15-40 × 3-7 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, subcoriaceous, appressed-hairy, c. 4 times as long as the cluster. Capitula numerous, in clusters 12-28 mm wide. Involucral bracts c. 3·5 × 1 mm, ovate-lanceolate, subglabrous, brownish-yellow, cuspidate or somewhat acuminate, with recurved arista c. 1 mm. Achenes c. 1 × 0·3 mm, narrowly obovoid, sparsely hairy, brown, emarginate at apex. {\i W. Mediterranean region, extending eastwards to S.E. Italy}. Hs It Sa Si. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  This species has been so very often confused with others that the geographical data in the literature are unreliable.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. E. carpetana} Lange,{\i  Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kjøbenhavn }{\b 1861}: 69 (1861). Stem 0-7 cm, simple or with ascending lateral branches from the base. Cauline leaves 5-14 × 1-2·5 mm, lanceolate to oblong; rosette-leaves 7-18 × 1-2·5 mm, about twice as long as the cluster, linear-lanceolate to oblong-spathulate, subacute to acuminate, more or less rigid, whitish- to greyish-tomentose. Clusters of capitula 5-20 mm wide. Involucral bracts 4-4·5 mm, ovate-lanceolate to ovate, hairy on the back, stramineous, cuspidate, with arista 1·5-2 mm. Achenes c. 1 mm, oblong-obovoid, strongly compressed, more or less densely hairy with long, appressed hairs. •{\i  Spain and Portugal; one station in W. France.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. E. lusitanica} Samp.,{\i  Ann. Sci. Acad. Polyt. Porto}{\b  14}: 161 (1921). Very dwarf, greyish-tomentose. Rosette-leaves 15-18 × 7-8 mm, broadly obovate-spathulate, rounded at apex, mucronate or emarginate, patent, much longer than the cluster. Cluster of capitula 8-16 mm wide, compact; individual capitula 4-5 mm, not distinct. Involucral bracts c. 4 mm, obovate, stramineous, hairy, with a green spot on the back below the apex, cuspidate, with arista 1·5-2 mm. Achenes c. 1 mm, patent-villous, brown. {\i S. Spain, S.E. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. E. rotundata} Moris, {\i Atti Riun. Sci. Ital.}{\b  3}: 481 (1841). Stem 1-4 cm, usually with procumbent lateral branches spreading in a circle. Rosette-leaves in several rows, broadly obovate to suborbicular, slightly overtopping the cluster. Cluster of capitula 2-8 mm wide. Involucral bracts c. 3 × 0·6 mm, curved on the back, densely lanate above with only the very shortly pointed apex protruding. Achenes 0·8 × 0·3 mm, obovoid, pale brown, smooth or sparsely papillose. 2n = 26. {\i Maritime sands. • Corse, Sardegna.} Co Sa.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. E. perpusilla} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3} ({\b 3}): 18 (1856). Lanate. Stem 0·5-2 cm, simple or branched from the base. Cauline leaves very few, crowded or absent; rosette-leaves 7-10 × 2·5-3 mm, oblong to ovate-lanceolate, about as long as the cluster. Capitula densely crowded, pyramidal-conical, in clusters 7-12 mm wide. Involucral bracts 15-20, 3-3·5 × 1-1·5 mm, oblong to lanceolate-obovate, patent-lanate with only the brownish apex protruding. Achenes 1·4 × 0·5-0·6 mm, oblong to obovoid, brown, long-papillose. •{\i  Mountains of S. & C. Greece.} Gr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. E. nevadensis} Boiss., {\i Fl. Or.}{\b  3}: 245 (1875) ({\i E. micropodioides} (Willk.) Willk.). Like {\b 7} but stem 1-5 cm, simple or branched-cauline leaves several, not crowded; rosette-leaves oblong to obovate; involucral bracts more or less appressed-tomentose achenes densely papillose. •{\i  Mountains of S. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 17.         Bombycilaena}          (DC.) Smolj.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Holub.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Lanate annuals. Leaves alternate, narrowed to the apex. Capitula 2-3, aggregated in terminal or axillary clusters, subglobose. Receptacle cylindrical. Bracts in 2(-3) rows, the outer small, the inner saccate, strongly compressed laterally, densely patent-lanate, coriaceous in fruit, each enclosing one female floret and falling together with the achene. Female florets with a filiform, 2-dentate corolla attached laterally to the ovary; inner florets sterile, with 5-dentate, broadly tubular corolla. Achenes obovoid, compressed; pappus absent.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: L. A. Smoljaninova,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 17}: 447-454 (1955)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  The two species have been very often confused; both grow in dry, open habitats.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Clusters of capitula 8-10 mm wide, greyish-white-lanate,
\par   usually overtopped by subtending leaves; inner bracts
\par   5-8, 2-3 mm in fruit; leaves 1·4-2·5 mm wide, ± undulate ................ {\b 1. erecta} 
\par Clusters of capitula 10-16 mm wide, brownish-lanate,
\par   usually not overtopped by subtending leaves; inner 
\par   bracts 4-5, 3-4 mm in fruit; leaves 2-5 mm wide, flat .................... {\b 2. discolor}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. erecta} (L.) Smolj.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 17}: 450 (1955) ({\i Micropus erectus} L.). Plant greyish-white. Stems (1-)5-20 (-30) cm. Leaves 10-18 × 1·4-2·5(-3) mm, linear to oblong-lanceolate, more or less undulate at margin. Clusters of capitula 8-10 mm wide, subglobose, usually overtopped by subtending leaves. Inner bracts 5-8, 2-3 mm in fruit. Hermaphrodite florets 3-5. Achenes 1·3 × 1 mm, pale brown to grey. {\i Europe, southwards from N.C. France, S. Czechoslovakia and S. Moldavia.} ?Al Au Bu ?Cr Cz Ga ?Gr He Hs Hu It Ju *Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. discolor} (Pers.) Laínz,{\i  Bol. Inst. Estud. Astur. }({\i Supl. Ci.}){\b  16}: 194 (1973) ({\i Micropus discolor} Pers., {\i M. bombicinus} Lag.). Plant whitish, except for the brownish clusters of capitula. Stem 5-20 cm. Leaves 12-17 × 2-5 mm, linear-oblong to oblong, flat. Clusters of capitula 10-16 mm wide, globose, not overtopped by subtending leaves. Inner bracts (2-)4-5(-6), 3-4 mm in fruit. Hermaphrodite florets 1-3. Achenes 1·5 × 1 mm, greenish.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Bl Ga Gr Hs It.
\par 
\par 125}
\par