{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves (6-)10-20 × 1-4 mm, oblong to linear-lanceolate. Capitula 2·5-6 × 2·5-5 mm, broadly ovoid, terete, in clusters of (1-)3-12 in a racemose or paniculate inflorescence, not overtopped by subtending leaves. Involucral bracts only slightly saccate at the base, with a short, glabrous, hyaline apex. Inner female florets 15-18; hermaphrodite c. 3. Pappus 2·5-3·5 mm. Achenes 0·6-1·1 × 0.2-0·3 mm, pale brown, the outer obliquely oblong, the inner oblong-obovoid. 2n = 28.{\i  Most of Europe}. Al Au Be Bu Co Cr Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Si Su Tu [Br].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants with denser and more patent indumentum (especially on the bracts), sparingly branched stem, larger capitula and bracts with more acute apex, occurring on mountains in the Mediterranean region, have been called{\b  Filago arvensis} subsp.{\b  lagopus} (Stephan ex Willd.) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 385 (1879); their taxonomic status and name require further investigation.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. minima} (Sm.) Dumort.,{\i  Fl. Belg.} 68 (1827) ({\i Filago minima} (Sm.) Pers.). Plant greyish. Stem 5-15(-30) cm, furcate. Leaves 4-10 × 0·5-1·2 mm, oblong-linear to linear, flat. Capitula 2·5-3·5 × 1·5-2 mm, pyramidal-ovoid, 5-angled, in clusters of 3-7, terminal and in the forks of the stem, not overtopped by subtending leaves. Middle involucral bracts 2·5-3·5 × 0·8-1 mm, glabrous above, slightly saccate at base. Inner female florets many, 1·8-2·5 mm; hermaphrodite 3-5, 2·2-2·5 mm. Achenes of the outer florets 0·8-0·9 mm, those of the inner florets 0·5-0·6 mm; pappus 2 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Much of Europe but absent from most of the north and east.} Al Au *Az Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Sa Si Su
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. clementei} (Willk.) J. Holub,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 271 (1976) ({\i Filago clementei} Willk.). Plant greyish. Stem 2-10 cm, furcate. Lower leaves 6-10 × 0·6-2 mm, linear-lanceolate, the upper 4-5 × 1·2-2 mm, oblong-lanceolate. Capitula 3 × 2 mm, pyramidal-ovoid, in clusters of 2-5. Outer involucral bracts c. 1 mm, the middle 2·5 mm, tomentose below, membranous above. Inner female florets 4-7, c. 1·5 mm; hermaphrodite 3-5, 1·7-2 mm. Achenes of the outer florets 0·9 × 0·4 mm, those of the inner florets 0·6-0·7 × 0·2-0·3 mm, oblong to oblong-ovoid, pale brown. {\i S. Spain.} Hs. ({\i Morocco}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. gallica} (L.) Cosson & Germ., {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 2, {\b 20}: 291 (1843) ({\i Filago gallica} L.; incl. {\i Logfia tenuifolia} (C. Presl) Coste). Plant greyish. Stem 2-25 cm, furcate. Leaves 15-25 × 0·8-1·5 mm, linear to filiform, acute, usually with slightly involute margin. Capitula 2·5-4 × 2-2·5 mm, pyramidal-ovoid, 5-angled, in clusters of 2-14; subtending leaves linear-lanceolate, usually longer than clusters. Middle involucral bracts 3 × 0·7 mm, strongly saccate at base. Inner female florets 8-12, 1·8-2·5 mm; hermaphrodite 2-3, 2·2-2·5 mm. Achenes of the outer florets 0·8-0·9 × 0·4 mm, those of the inner florets c. 0·6 × 0·25 mm; pappus 2-2·5 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  S., W. & W.C. Europe, northwards to S. England.} Al Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable, especially in the southern part of its range.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. neglecta} (Soyer-Willemet) J. Holub,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 271 (1976) ({\i Gnaphalium neglectum} Soyer-Willemet,{\i  Filago neglecta} (Soyer-Willemet) DC.). Stem 5-15 cm, usually branched from the base. Leaves 10-30 × 0·8-2 mm, linear-lanceolate. Capitula c. 4 × 3 mm, broadly cylindrical, brownish, in clusters of 2-6; clusters 8-10 mm wide, terminal and in forks of the stem, overtopped by subtending leaves. Involucral bracts more or less equal, the middle c. 4 × 0·7 mm, linear-lanceolate, subglabrous, obtuse. Inner female florets many; hermaphrodite 5-6, reddish-brown above. Achenes 0·8-0·9 × 0·3 mm, oblong-obovoid, pale brown; pappus 2-5 mm. •{\i  France, Belgium, Corse}. Be Co Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Very probably the hybrid{\i  Filaginella uliginosa }×{\i  Logfia gallica} and not recently collected.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 16.             Evax}               Gaertner
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Holub.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Filago} but clusters of capitula usually pulvinate; involucral bracts usually very numerous; inner florets functionally male; achenes dorsally compressed; pappus always absent.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   All species grow in dry, open habitats.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: J. Chrtek & J. Holub,{\i  Preslia }{\b 35}: 1-17 (1963). G. Wagenitz,{\i  Willdenowia }{\b 5}: 395-444 (1969). R. B. Fernandes & I. Nogueira,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot}. ser. 2,{\b  45}: 317-347 (1971).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucral bracts 15-20, acute, not acuminate or cuspidate; 
\par 
  receptacle short
\par 
2 Stem 0·5-2 cm; cauline leaves very few and crowded or
\par 
  absent ........................................................................................... {\b 7. perpusilla}
\par 
2 Stem 1-5 cm; cauline leaves several, remote ............................ {\b 8. nevadensis} 
\par 
1 Involucral bracts more than 30, acuminate or cuspidate,
\par 
  rarely acute, receptacle elongated
\par 
3 Achenes papillose to smooth, rarely with short hairs at the base
\par 
4 Rosette-leaves very broadly obovate to suborbicular;
\par 
  lamina about as long as wide; involucral bracts very 
\par 
  shortly pointed, not cuspidate, curved on the back ...................... {\b 6. rotundata}
\par 
4 Rosette-leaves oblanceolate- to obovate-spathulate;
\par 
  lamina distinctly longer than wide; involucral bracts
\par 
  long-acuminate or cuspidate, ± straight on the back
\par 
5 Rosette-leaves 15-30 mm, narrowed into a long, sheathing
\par 
  petiole, erect, c. 4 times as long as the clusters of
\par 
  capitula; involucral bracts 3 mm, with arista 0·5 mm .................. {\b 2. contracta}
\par 
5 Rosette-leaves 5-16 mm, not narrowed into a long, sheathing
\par 
   petiole, patent, 2-3 times as long as the clusters of capitula;
\par 
   involucral bracts 3-4·3 mm, with arista 1-1·5 mm ...................... {\b 1. pygmaea}
\par 
3 Achenes hairy (sometimes only sparsely)
\par 
6 Stem very short or absent
\par 
7 Rosette-leaves 7-8 mm wide, rounded at apex, greyish-green  {\b 5. lusitanica}
\par 
7 Rosette-leaves 1-2·5 mm wide, subacute to acuminate,
\par 
  whitish .......................................................................................... {\b 4. carpetana}
\par 
6 Stem distinct
\par 
8 Rosette-leaves 15-40 × 3-7 mm, oblong-lanceolate, c. 4
\par 
  times as long as the cluster of capitula ................................... {\b 3. asterisciflora}
\par 
8 Rosette-leaves 5-15 × 1-5 mm, linear-lanceolate to oblong-
\par 
  obovate, about twice as long as the cluster of capitula
\par 
9 Rosette-leaves 1-2·5 mm wide, whitish to greyish, ± 
\par 
  firm; achenes ± densely hairy ...................................................... {\b 4. carpetana}
\par 
9 Rosette-leaves 2-5 mm wide, greyish-green, soft;
\par 
  achenes sparsely hairy or subglabrous .......................................... {\b 1. pygmaea}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. pygmaea} (L.) Brot.,{\i  Fl. Lusit. }{\b 1}: 363 (1804). Stem 2-4(-5) cm. Cauline leaves 7-10 × 3 mm; rosette-leaves 5-15 × 2-5 mm, 2-3 times as long as the cluster, oblong-obovate, rounded, obtuse or shortly acute, patent. Clusters of capitula 5-35 mm wide, very compact, subglabrous. Involucral bracts (3-)4-4·3 × 1·5-1·8 mm, lanceolate-obovate to obovate, straight on the back, glabrous, brownish-yellow, cuspidate, with arista c. 1 mm. Achenes obovoid, papillose, rarely sparsely hairy.{\i  Mediterranean region, S.E. Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 
124}
\par