{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 neous, distinctly keeled at the apex, shortly aristate. Inner female florets 10-20; hermaphrodite 2-4. Achenes 0·5-0·8 mm, oblong-obovoid, brownish. 2n = 28.{\i  Mediterranean region, eastwards from France.} Al Co Cr Ga Gr It Ju Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. F. aegaea} Wagenitz, {\i Willdenowia}{\b  6}: 126 (1970). Plant greyish-white. Stem up to 6 cm. Capitula ovoid, subterete, in clusters of 5-15; clusters 7-10 × 8-12 mm, not or scarcely overtopped by subtending leaves. Involucral bracts ovate-lanceolate, more or less rigid, completely tomentose in the upper part, curved obliquely inwards in fruit. Female florets 12-15, all but 0-5 marginal, the hermaphrodite 5-8. Achenes 0·7-0·9 × 0·4 mm, brown. Pappus 1·5 mm.{\i  Ionioi Nisoi; S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b aegaea}: Stem very short. Leaves spathulate to suborbicular. Involucral bracts acute or with an arista 0·2-0·5 mm. 2n = 28. •{\i  S. Aegean region}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b aristata} Wagenitz, {\i op. cit.} 129 (1970): Stem 1-6 cm. Leaves oblanceolate to spathulate. Involucral bracts with an arista 0·5-1 mm. 2n = 28. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. F. cretensis} Gand., {\i Fl. Cret.} 58 (1916). Stem up to 6(-12) cm. Leaves 10-15 × 1-3·5 mm, oblanceolate to spathulate, glabrescent above, the lower petiolate. Capitula subterete, in terminal clusters of 5-7; clusters 4-6 mm wide, more or less overtopped by several subtending leaves. Involucral bracts ovate-lanceolate, soft, purplish to brownish, suberect or slightly divergent in fruit. Inner female florets 8-12; hermaphrodite 3-6(-8). Achenes c. 0·7 mm, brown. Pappus 1-1·2 mm.{\i  S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cretensis}: Stem usually 2-6 cm. Involucral bracts with wide glabrous margins, and with an arista 0·5-1 mm. 2n = 28. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cyclydum} Wagenitz, {\i Willdenowia}{\b  6}: 124 (1970): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but stem very short; involucral bracts more densely tomentose, acute or with an arista 0·1-0·4 mm. 2n = 28. •{\i  Kikhlades}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. F. lutescens} Jordan, {\i Obs. Pl. Crit. }{\b 3}: 201 (1846) ({\i F. apiculata} G. E. Sm. ex Bab.,{\i  F. germanica} auct., non L., nec Hudson). Stem 10-25 cm, rather irregularly branched. Leaves 15-20 × 3-6 mm, oblong-lanceolate to spathulate. Capitula 5 × 2·5 mm, conical-ovoid, weakly 5-angled, in clusters of 10-25; clusters overtopped by 1-2 subtending leaves. Involucral bracts c. 4·2 × 1·3 mm, 3(-4) in each vertical row, oblong-ovate to lanceolate, with a straight arista 1·5 mm. Inner florets c. 3 mm, the female 12-20, the hermaphrodite (2-)3-4(-5). Achenes oblong-cylindrical. 2n = 28. {\i From S.E. England and S. Sweden southwards to C. Spain, Sicilia and Bulgaria.} Al Au Az Be Br Bu ?Co Cz Da Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Si Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b lutescens}: Plant yellowish-green. Clusters of capitula (8-)10-14 mm wide; involucral bracts yellowish, reddish-purple before anthesis.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except the Açores}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b atlantica} Wagenitz, {\i Willdenowia }{\b 5}: 56 (1968): Plant whitish. Clusters of capitula 6-9(-10) mm wide; involucral bracts purplish at base only or entirely yellow, with the arista yellow before anthesis. {\i Portugal, Açores}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. F. fuscescens} Pomel, {\i Nouv. Mat. Fl. Atl.} 44 (1874). Plant greyish. Stem 5-12(-15) cm. Leaves 10-15 × 2·5-3·5 mm, oblong-obovate. Capitula 4-4·5 × 2·5 mm, shortly pyramidal-ovoid, 5-angled, in clusters of 3-8(-10); clusters 7-8 × 6-7 mm, not overtopped by subtending leaves. Involucral bracts c. 4 × 1·5 mm, 3(-4) in each vertical row, ovate-lanceolate, patent-lanate in the upper half, brownish, with a purple spot below the apex, with a straight, often reddish-purple arista 1·5 mm. Inner female florets 15-20; hermaphrodite 4-7. Achenes 0·8 × 0·3 mm, obovoid, pale brown. {\i S.E. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. F. pyramidata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1199, [1230] (1753). Plant greyish-white. Stem (2-)5-30(-40) cm. Leaves (5-)10-15 mm, linear-oblong to spathulate. Capitula 3·5-6 × 2-2·5 mm, pyramidal, sharply 5-angled, in clusters of 5-20; clusters 5-12 mm wide, sometimes overtopped by subtending leaves. Involucral bracts 2·5-4·5 × 1-1·3 mm, 4-6 in each vertical row, keeled, stramineous, without reddish colouration, softly lanate on the back, distinctly divergent in fruit, with a recurved arista 1-1·5 mm. Inner female florets (0-)5-7; hermaphrodite 4-7. Achenes 0·5-0·8 mm, cylindrical to oblong-ovoid. 2n = 28. {\i S. & W. Europe, northwards to S. England}. Al ?Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Rs (K) Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Polymorphic. Several variants have been described at specific rank, but intermediates occur and much of the variation seems to be phenotypic. Three fairly well-marked variants, var.{\i  prostrata} (Fiori) Wagenitz, var.{\i  gussonei} (Nyman) Wagenitz and var. {\i obovata} (Pomel) Wagenitz, are perhaps worth subspecific rank (see Wagenitz,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  5}: 404-406 (1969)).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. F. desertorum} Pomel, {\i Nouv. Mat. Fl. Atl.} 46 (1874). Stem with procumbent or obliquely ascending branches from the base. Leaves oblong-spathulate to narrowly lanceolate, those subtending the clusters about as long as the clusters. Capitula 4-5 mm, slightly 5-angled, in clusters of 6-12. Involucral bracts with long stiff hairs on margin and in the upper part, otherwise glabrous, with a more or less recurved arista 1-1·5 mm; inner bracts long-ciliate on margin, strongly divergent, rigid and purplish-brown in fruit. Hermaphrodite florets (3-)5-7(-8). Achenes 0·8 mm. Pappus 2-2·5 mm.{\i  S. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. F. ramosissima} Lange, {\i Ind. Sem. Horto Haun.}{\b  1855}: 24 (1855). Stem 5-10 cm, with slender branches. Leaves greyish-tomentose, the lower ovate-lanceolate, the upper obovate. Capitula 2·5-3 mm, ovoid-cylindrical, 5-angled, solitary below, in clusters of 2-5 above; clusters 6 mm wide, not or only slightly overtopped by 3-5 subtending leaves. Involucral bracts 3(-4) in each vertical row, aristate, stramineous. Inner female florets several, the hermaphrodite (3-)4-7(-8). Achenes obovoid-conical.{\i  S.E. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. F. congesta} Guss. ex DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 248 (1838). Stem 10-16 cm, usually procumbent or ascending, with many clusters of capitula. Leaves 8-16 × 1·5-2 mm, lanceolate- to linear-spathulate. Capitula 5-6 × 2·5 mm, pyramidal, sharply 5-angled, hairy only in the furrows, in clusters of (2-)3-6(-18). Involucral bracts 4-5 × 1·3 mm, closely appressed in 5 very distinct rows, hairy only on margin, with an arista 0·5-1·2 mm; middle bracts not longer than the inner, the inner obtuse. Hermaphrodite florets 4-6, without pappus or with 1-4 hairs. Achenes 1-1·2 × 0·4-0·5 mm.{\i  W. Mediterranean region.} Bl Ga Hs It Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. F. duriaei} Cosson ex Lange,{\i  Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kjøbenhavn}{\b  1861}: 70 (1861). Stem (2-)3-8(-12) cm, erect, rigid. Leaves 5-10 × 0·6-3·5 mm, linear-lanceolate to -spathulate, those subtending the clusters about as long as clusters. Capitula 5 × 3 mm, pyramidal-ovoid, 5-angled, hairy all over, clearly distinct, in clusters of 8-10. Involucral bracts c. 4 × 1·3 mm, densely appressed-tomentose on the back, often purplish at the apex, acute, the inner subobtuse. Female florets 2·6-2·7 mm;
\par 

\par 
122}
\par