{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 12.            Karelinia}            Less.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.N. Tikhomirov.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Leaves simple, alternate. Capitula 2-9 in a corymbose inflorescence. Involucral bracts imbricate, rigid, in many rows. Receptacle flat, with long hairs. Florets tubular, the outer female, filiform, in many rows, with 4-dentate corolla, the 10-20 innermost hermaphrodite, with 5-dentate corolla. Achenes cylindrical, 3- to 4-ribbed. Pappus-hairs numerous, in 1 row, denticulate, c. 6 times as long as the achene.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. K. caspia} (Pallas) Less., {\i Linnaea}{\b  9}: 187 (1834). Erect, scabrid perennial up to 1·5 m. Leaves sessile, oblong, the upper semiamplexicaul. Capitula 8-20 mm in diameter; involucre c. 10 mm in diameter, cylindric-campanulate; bracts brownish, the outer ovate, the inner nearly linear, with short, appressed hairs, ciliate. Florets pink, slightly exceeding the involucre. Achenes 1·5-2 mm, nearly cylindrical, narrowed to the base, slightly curved. {\i Saline or sandy soils. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E). ({\i C. Asia}.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 13.             Filago}              L.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Holub.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Tomentose to lanate annuals. Leaves alternate. Capitula in axillary and terminal or basal subglobose clusters, very rarely solitary. Involucral bracts usually 15-25, often acuminate or aristate. Florets all tubular, the outer and sometimes some of the inner female, filiform, some or all of the inner hermaphrodite, or sometimes functionally male. Achenes slightly compressed laterally, the outer subtended by but not enclosed in bracts; pappus usually present.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: J. Holub & J. Chrtek,{\i  Taxon}{\b  11}: 195-201 (1962). J. Chrtek & J. Holub,{\i  Preslia}{\b  35}: 1-17 (1963). G. Buchheim & G. Wagenitz, {\i Regn. Veg. }{\b 34}: 61-62 (1964). G. Wagenitz, {\i Willdenowia}{\b  4}: 37-59 (1965); 283-298 (1968);{\b  5}: 55-66 (1968); 395 444 (1969); {\b 6}: 115-138 (1970);{\i  Ber. Deutsch. Bot. Ges.}{\b  79}: 336-342 (1966);{\i  Israel Jour. Bot.}{\b  19}: 260-265 (1970);{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  81}: 107-117 (1970). P. Myrzakulov,{\i  Not. Syst. Herb. Inst. Bot. Acad. Kasachst.}{\b  5}: 31-41 (1968).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Descriptions of bracts refer to the middle bracts, unless otherwise stated. Dwarf variants occur in some species; they have not been included in the key and descriptions. Hybrids between some taxa of {\i Filago} L. and {\i Logfia} Cass. occur, though very rarely.
\par 
\par  Most species grow in dry, open habitats, such as cultivated fields, open grassland, roadsides and sand-dunes.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Receptacle flat ........................................................................... {\b 16. hispanica}
\par 1 Receptacle conical to filiform
\par 2 Pappus absent; receptacle conical
\par 3 Stem 4-13 cm, erect, with fewer than 10 clusters of 
\par   capitula; achenes shortly hairy ............................................... {\b 14. filaginoides}
\par 3 Stem very short, much-branched, with more than 10 
\par   clusters of capitula; achenes slightly papillose ....................... {\b 15. eriosphaera} 
\par 2 Pappus present, sometimes only of 1-5 hairs, rarely completely 
\par   absent; receptacle filiform
\par 4 Capitula solitary, forming ± unilateral spikes .......................... {\b 13. mareotica}
\par 4 Capitula usually in clusters, very rarely solitary in 
\par   lower part of plant
\par 5 Some capitula solitary, some in clusters of 2-5 in the
\par   upper part of plant ................................................................... {\b 9. ramosissima}
\par 5 All capitula in clusters of 3-60
\par 6 Inner involucral bracts ciliate, rigid and strongly 
\par   divergent in fruit ........................................................................ {\b 8. desertorum}
\par 6 Inner involucral bracts not ciliate, not very rigid, 
\par   and not strongly divergent in fruit
\par 7 Inner florets hermaphrodite or functionally male;
\par   pappus absent or of 1-5 caducous hairs
\par 8 Outer and middle involucral bracts aristate, the middle
\par   glabrous on the back, long-hairy only on margin;
\par   capitula hairy only in the furrows ................................................ {\b 10. congesta}
\par 8 Outer and middle involucral bracts acute, not aristate,
\par   the middle hairy on the back; capitula hairy all over
\par 9 Involucral bracts appressed-tomentose; capitula distinct .............. {\b 11. duriaei}
\par 9 Involucral bracts patent-lanate; capitula almost covered
\par   by the indumentum, not distinct; bracts with only the 
\par   apex protruding ................................................................. {\b 12. micropodioides}
\par 7 Inner florets female and hermaphrodite, very rarely all
\par   hermaphrodite, all fertile and with well-developed  pappus or in 
\par 10 Leaves linear- to oblong-lanceolate, widest at the base
\par    the lower half; capitula in dense clusters of (15-)20-50(-60)
\par 11 Outer and middle involucral bracts 4-4·5 mm, long-aristate, 
\par    the inner nearly always reddish-tinged on margin;
\par    capitula in globose clusters of (15-)20-35(-40) ............................. {\b 1. vulgaris}
\par 11 Involucral bracts 3 mm, acute, without a long arista
\par    and reddish colouration; capitula in ovoid or oblong 
\par    clusters of (20-)30-50(-60) ....................................................... {\b 2. eriocephala}
\par 10 Leaves linear-oblong to broadly obovate, widest in the
\par    upper half; capitula in ± lax clusters of 3-30
\par 12 Involucral bracts not in 5 distinct rows; capitula ± 
\par    terete (Aegean region)
\par 13 Involucral bracts ± rigid, the middle ones tomentose 
\par    all over, incurved in fruit ................................................................. {\b 3. aegaea}
\par 13 Bracts not rigid, the middle ones tomentose, with glabrous
\par     margins, diverging or ± erect in fruit, not incurved .................... {\b 4. cretensis}
\par 12 Bracts in 5 distinct vertical rows; capitula ± 5-angled
\par 14 Bracts 4-6 in each vertical row, not reddish, with 
\par    recurved apex; hermaphrodite florets 4-10; inner 
\par    female florets (0-)5-7 ................................................................ {\b 7. pyramidata}
\par 14 Bracts 3(-4) in each vertical row, usually reddish-
\par    tinged, with a straight arista; hermaphrodite florets
\par    (2-)3-4(-7); inner female florets 12-20
\par 15 Capitula in clusters of 10-25, overtopped by a single
\par    subtending leaf; bracts yellowish to yellow ................................ {\b 5. lutescens}
\par 15 Capitula in clusters of 3-8(-10), not overtopped by 
\par    subtending leaves; bracts brownish ........................................... {\b 6. fuscescens}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. vulgaris} Lam.,{\i  Fl. Fr. }{\b 2}: 61 (1779) ({\i F. germanica} L., non Hudson, {\i F. canescens} Jordan,{\i  F. eriocephala} auct., non Guss.). Plant greyish-white. Stem 5-35(40) cm, erect, more or less regularly branched above the middle. Leaves 12-20(-30) × 1-3 (-4) mm, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, more or less undulate. Capitula 5 × 1·6 mm, more or less terete, in dense, globose clusters of (15-)20-35(-40); clusters 10-12 mm wide, not overtopped by subtending leaves. Involucral bracts 4-4·5 × 1·1 mm, lanceolate, straight in fruit, yellowish, usually red-tinged, with a long yellow arista. Inner female florets 20-25; hermaphrodite (1-)2-3(-4). Achene 0·5-0·8 × 0·2 mm, oblong to ovoid, brown.{\i  S., W. & C. Europe, extending north-eastwards to S. Sweden and White Russia.} All except Fa Fe Hb Is Lu No Rs (N, B, E) Sb; casual in some of these.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. F. eriocephala} Guss., {\i Pl. Rar.} 344 (1826). Plant greyish-white. Stem (5-)10-20(-35) cm, erect or rarely procumbent, usually branched above the middle. Leaves 8-24 × 2-5(-8) mm. Capitula 4 × 2 mm, the upper half protruding from the lanate indumentum, in very dense ovoid to oblong clusters of (20-)30-50(-60); clusters 9-17 × 10-12 mm, not overtopped by subtending leaves. Involucral bracts 3 × 1 mm, broadly lanceolate, strami-
\par 
\par 121}
\par