{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 18.         Micropus}          L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Holub.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Bombycilaena} but sericeous-tomentose; leaves opposite, widest near the apex; capitula solitary in the leaf-axils; bracts in 2 rows, the outer small, the inner saccate, connate at the base, crested on the keel.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. supinus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 927 (1753). Stem 2-20 cm, procumbent or ascending, rigid. Leaves 12-20 × 4-11 mm, oblong-obovate to obovate-spathulate, rounded to subacute at apex, flat. Capitula 5-7 mm wide. Outer bracts 1-1·2 mm, membranous, the inner 4-5, 5-8 mm in fruit, densely appressed-hairy. Female florets 4-5; hermaphrodite florets purplish, glabrous above. Achenes 2·3-2·5 × 1-1·3 mm, obliquely obovoid, pale brown, glabrous, shining. {\i Dry, open habitats. C. & S. Spain, S.E. Portugal; casual elsewhere in the Mediterranean region.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 19.             Evacidium}            Pomel
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Holub.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Dwarf, tomentose annuals. Leaves alternate to subopposite. Capitula in terminal clusters subtended by leaves, immersed for  ¾ of their length in lanate indumentum, pyramidal-conical, 5-angled. Receptacle obconical, convex at apex. Involucral bracts in 3 rows, keeled, the outer acute, the inner obtuse to emarginate at the apex. Florets not subtended by scales, the female filiform, in several rows at the margin, the functionally male few, in the middle of the receptacle. Achenes slightly compressed; pappus absent.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. discolor} (DC.) Maire,{\i  Bull. Soc. Sci. Nat. Maroc}{\b  11}: 101 (1931) ({\i Evax discolor} DC., {\i E. heldreichii} Parl.). Stems 1-3 cm, simple or branched from the base; branches ascending or erect. Cauline leaves 5-8 × 1·5-2 mm, linear-oblanceolate, greyish; leaves subtending the cluster about as long as the cluster, oblanceolate to obovate-spathulate, subacute. Cluster of capitula 7-15 mm wide, lanate, not dense. Involucral bracts 4·5-5 × 1 mm, rigid, dark green on the back, brownish and whitish at the apex. Achenes c. 1·4 × 0·6 mm, oblong-obovoid, greyish-brown, shining, minutely papillose. {\i Dry places. N. Sicilia} ({\i Madonie}). Si. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 20.             Omalotheca}          Cass.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Holub.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Tomentose perennials with non-flowering shoots. Leaves alternate. Capitula in a racemose or spicate terminal inflorescence, very rarely solitary. Receptacle without scales. Involucral bracts mottled, usually brownish; indurated tissue of the inner bracts entire. Florets tubular, fertile, the outer female, the inner hermaphrodite; hermaphrodite florets reddish-purple at apex. Achenes 1-2 mm, with imbricate papillae and hairs 6-7 times as long as wide, not emitting mucilage in water; pappus present. Pollen-grains with broad furrows, orbicular pores and slender spinules.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: vide{\i  Gnaphalium.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Inflorescence with 10-150 capitula; stem 15-50 cm;
\par 
  pappus-hairs connate at base, falling as a unit
\par 
2 Plant sericeous-tomentose; cauline leaves 1-veined 
\par 
  lanceolate to linear, diminishing steadily in size 
\par 
  upwards the lower 3-8 mm wide, the upper 2-3 mm wide;
\par 
  bracts brownish or stramineous ..................................................... {\b 1. sylvatica}
\par 
2 Plant ± floccose-tomentose; cauline leaves 3-veined,
\par 
  lanceolate, not diminishing in size until well above 
\par 
  the middle of the stem, the lower 8-18 mm wide, the 
\par 
  upper 4-8 mm wide; bracts dark brown ....................................... {\b 2. norvegica}
\par 
1 Inflorescence with (1-)2-10(-12) capitula; stem 2-20 cm;
\par 
  pappus-hairs free, falling separately
\par 
3 Outer bracts 1/2-2/3 as long as the involucre; involucre
\par 
  broadly campanulate, with 2(-3) rows of bracts; hairs 
\par 
  on achene 2-fid at apex ..................................................................... {\b 6. supina}
\par 
3 Outer bracts 1/3(1/2) as long as the involucre;
\par 
  involucre broadly ovoid, with 3 rows of bracts; hairs 
\par 
  on achene rounded at apex
\par 
4 Involucral bracts not stellate in fruit; lobes of the 
\par 
  corolla in hermaphrodite florets little longer than wide;
\par 
  achenes sparsely patent-hairy, the hairs not covering 
\par 
  the base of the pappus .................................................................. {\b 3. hoppeana}
\par 
4 Involucral bracts stellate in fruit; lobes of the corolla in
\par 
   hermaphrodite florets much longer than wide; achenes
\par 
   densely appressed-hairy, the hairs covering the base of the pappus
\par 
5 Cauline leaves ± abruptly tapered to the apex; inflorescence 
\par 
  rather compact; peduncles not longer than capitula; 
\par 
  involucral bracts rounded above ....................................................... {\b 4. roeseri}
\par 
5 Cauline leaves very gradually tapered to the apex;
\par 
  inflorescence very lax; peduncles of lower capitula 
\par 
  longer than the capitula; involucral bracts subacute ....................... {\b 5. pichleri}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\i Gamochaetiopsis} F. W. Schultz. Inflorescence with 10-150 capitula. Female florets in several rows. Achenes cylindrical; pappus-hairs slender, connate at base, falling as a unit.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. sylvatica} (L.) Schultz Bip. & F. W. Schultz in F. W. Schultz, {\i Arch. Fl. Jour. Bot.} 311 (1861) ({\i Gnaphalium sylvaticum} L.). Plant greyish-sericeous-tomentose, with several non-flowering shoots. Stem (5-)20-50(-70) cm, densely leafy. Leaves 2-8 × 0·2-0·8 cm, lanceolate to linear, 1 (or indistinctly 3)-veined, diminishing steadily in size up the stem, tomentose beneath, glabrescent above, erecto-patent. Inflorescence occupying 1/3-5/6 of the length of the stem, lax, interrupted below. Capitula 5-7 × 1·5-2 mm. Involucral bracts 5-5·5 mm, linear-oblong, the inner about equalling the florets. Florets 3·5 mm, the female c. 70, the hermaphrodite 3-4. Achenes 1·5 mm, hispid; pappus 3·5-3·8 mm, reddish. 2n = 56.{\i  Open woods, heaths and grassland; somewhat calcifuge. Most of Europe except many of the islands}. Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Mountain variants with short stems, wider, shorter leaves, dense and short inflorescences, dark brown involucral bracts and leaves tomentose on both surfaces resemble{\b  2}, but differ in the basal leaves with petiole shorter than the lamina, the cauline 1-veined, gradually diminishing in size up the stem, several non-flowering shoots, etc.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. O. norvegica} (Gunn.) Schultz Bip. & F. W. Schultz,{\i  loc. cit.} (1861) ({\i Gnaphalium norvegicum} Gunn.). Plant more or less whitish-floccose-tomentose, usually with 1 non-flowering shoot. Stem (5-)15-30(-40) cm. Leaves 5-12 × 0·4-1·8 cm, lanceolate, few, 3(-5)-veined, patent, tomentose on both surfaces, the basal with petiole about as long as the lamina. Inflorescence occupying 1/10-1/4 of the length of the stem, compact, its subtending leaves as long as or longer than the inflorescence. Capitula 6-7 mm. Involucral bracts subelliptical, the inner shorter than the florets. Florets 3·5 mm, the female 35-45. Achenes 1·5 mm, hispid; pappus up to 4 mm, white. 2n = 56.{\i  Woods, heaths and grassland; only on mountains except in the north. Europe, southwards to the Pyrenees, Alps, Bulgaria and C. Ural.} Al Au Br Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, C, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Omalotheca.} Inflorescence with 1-10 capitula. Female florets in 1(-2) rows. Achenes obovoid, compressed; pappus-hairs stout, free, falling separately.
\par 

\par 
126}
\par