{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. amorginum} Boiss. & Orph. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 5}): 110 (1856). Perennial 10-30 cm. Stems white-tomentose, erect or ascending from the branched woody stock. Leaves white-tomentose, flat, or the uppermost with revolute margins; lower 20-40 mm, crowded, oblong-spathulate; upper distant, smaller, linear, subsessile, suberect or arcuate. Inflorescence 3-5 cm across, compact; involucre 10-15 mm in diameter; bracts white, ovate-oblong, rounded at the apex, laxly imbricate.{\i  Cliffs. • Kikladhes} ({\i Amorgos}). Gr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   H. taenari} Rothm.,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  73}: 443 (1944), described from near the southernmost point of Greece (Akr. Tainaron), is like {\b 1} but has narrower leaves which are sparsely hairy and dark green and smaller capitula. It is probably not specifically distinct.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. sibthorpii} Rouy,{\i  Ill. Pl. Eur. Rar.}{\b  13}: 103 (1900) ({\i H. virgineum} (Sibth. & Sm.) Griseb., non DC.). Caespitose perennial 5-10 cm. Stems decumbent or ascending from the woody base, white-tomentose. Leaves white-tomentose; basal 15-60 × 5-10 mm, oblong-spathulate; upper shorter, linear-spathulate. Capitula 1-3, shortly pedunculate; involucre c. 15 mm in diameter; bracts white, ovate-oblong, obtuse, laxly imbricate.{\i  Mountain cliffs. • N.E. Greece }({\i Athos}). Gr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. doerfleri} Rech. fil.,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  33}: 15 (1934). Like {\b 2} but more densely pulvinate-caespitose, with flowering stems not more than 8 cm, often much less; basal leaves 5-10(-15) × 2-3 mm; cauline leaves numerous, the lower 20-30 × 2-4 mm, oblanceolate-spathulate, acute, the upper narrowly linear; capitula (1-)2-4; outer involucral bracts ovate, the inner lanceolate, becoming erose or lacerate at apex.{\i  Mountain cliffs. • E. Kriti. }Cr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. H. frigidum} (Labill.) Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 1908 (1803). Caespitose mat-forming perennial 5-15 cm, with numerous short non-flowering shoots and longer flowering stems, all decumbent or ascending. Leaves 2-5 mm, crowded, closely imbricate, linear-oblong, obtuse, flat, white-tomentose on both surfaces. Capitula solitary at the ends of main stems and branches; involucre 8-15 mm in diameter; bracts white, ovate-elliptical to oblong-lanceolate, subacute. Achenes sericeous. 2n = 28.{\i  Rock crevices. • Mountains of Corse and Sardegna.} Co Sa.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. HELICHRYSUM. Capitula in a more or less compact terminal corymb; involucre about equalling the florets; bracts yellow, rarely white, erect during anthesis, the innermost the longest.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 5-10}).{\b  H. stoechas} group. Woody perennials with more or less densely tomentose, erect, ascending or decumbent stems. Leaves linear, rarely spathulate; margins revolute. Inflorescence of 5 to many capitula in a more or less dense cluster. Involucre globose to cylindric-campanulate or cylindrical before anthesis, shining, yellow. Achenes dark brown.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucre cylindric-campanulate to cylindrical just 
\par   before anthesis; bracts closely and regularly imbricate,
\par   the outer ± coriaceous; aromatic
\par 2 Lower leaves usually less than 30 mm, linear-filiform;
\par   inner involucral bracts at least 5 times as long as the
\par   outer; involucre narrowly campanulate at anthesis ..................... {\b 10. italicum}
\par 2 Lower leaves 30-70 mm, linear to linear-spathulate;
\par   inner involucral bracts c. 3 times as long as the outer;
\par   involucre cylindric-campanulate at anthesis .................................. {\b 9. saxatile}
\par 1 Involucre ovoid to globose before anthesis; bracts 
\par   rather laxly imbricate, the outer entirely scarious
\par 3 Leaves usually less than 25 mm, linear to narrowly 
\par   spathulate, sometimes aromatic .................................................... {\b 5. stoechas}
\par 3 Leaves usually more than 30 mm, often much longer,
\par   linear to lanceolate or spathulate, not aromatic
\par 4 Involucre 3-4 mm in diameter; leaves linear ............................ {\b 7. heldreichii}
\par 4 Involucre 4-7 mm in diameter
\par 5 Lower leaves usually c. 7 mm wide, spathulate ....................... {\b 8. ambiguum}
\par 5 Lower leaves usually 2-3 mm wide, linear to lanceolate .............. {\b 6. rupestre}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. H. stoechas} (L.) Moench, {\i Meth.} 575 (1794). Stems (5-)10-50(-100) cm. Leaves (3-)10-25(-50) mm, narrowly linear to linear-spathulate, white-tomentose to lanate, sometimes glabrescent above, rarely also beneath. Inflorescence 1·5-3(-6) cm across; involucre 4-6 mm in diameter, globose to broadly ovoid bracts laxly imbricate, eglandular or nearly so; outer shortest and widest, scarious, glabrous or somewhat lanate at base; middle narrower and coriaceous in lower half, abruptly widened and scarious above; inner narrowest. Achenes with numerous shining white glands. 2n = 28. {\i Dry places. S. & W. Europe, northwards to N.W. France.} Al Bl Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable, from dwarf, caespitose, short-leaved to more or less erect, long-leaved variants up to 100 cm. Many local taxa have been described and named but for the most part they intergrade and seem not to merit subspecific rank. The following subspecies are recognized provisionally.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b stoechas}: Leaves usually more than 20 mm, narrowly linear, strongly aromatic. Inflorescence lax to compact. Inner involucral bracts usually at least 3 times as long as the obtuse outer bracts.{\i  From W. Jugoslavia westwards}.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   (b) Subsp.barrelieri(Ten.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 381 (1879) ({\i Gnaphalium barrelieri} Ten.; incl.{\i  H. siculum} (Sprengel) Boiss., non Jordan & Fourr.,{\i  H. scandens} Guss.): Leaves usually less than 20 mm, usually broadly linear to narrowly spathulate, not or scarcely aromatic. Inflorescence compact. Inner involucral bracts rarely more than twice as long as the acute outer bracts.{\i  From Sicilia eastwards to Turkey}.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Usually less robust and more densely tomentose than subsp. ({\b a}) and rarely more than 30 cm. Small caespitose variants from Kriti and Greece have spathulate lower leaves only 3-5 mm ({\i H. decumbens} var.{\i  spathulatum} Raulin). Plants from S. Spain, Islas Baleares and S. France which have been named{\b  H. decumbens} Camb., {\i Mém. Mus. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Paris}){\b  14}: 271 (1827), or{\b  H. cespitosum} DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 182 (1838), non (Lam.) DC., resemble subsp. ({\b b}) in not being aromatic and often also in their leaves and capitula. Their taxonomic status requires investigation.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. H. rupestre} (Rafin.) DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 182 (1838). Not aromatic. Stems 10-60 cm, angular. Basal leaves 30-80(-120) mm, linear to narrowly lanceolate or oblanceolate, rarely more than 3 mm wide, narrowest just above the base, white-tomentose on both surfaces. Inflorescence (2-)3-7 cm across; involucre 4-7 mm in diameter, broadly ovoid in bud, becoming patent; bracts laxly imbricate, glabrous, or sparsely lanate at base, the inner usually not more than twice as long as the outer, oblong, acute, scarious. Achenes minutely tuberculate.{\i  Calcareous cliffs and walls. W. & C. Mediterranean region.} Bl Hs It Sa Si.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   More robust and with longer leaves than {\b 5} but resembling subsp. ({\b b}) in the not very unequal involucral bracts and in not being aromatic. Local populations differing in the length and breadth of the leaves, the form of the inflorescence and the shape of the unopened capitula have often been given specific or subspecific rank. Among these are{\b  H. panormitanum} Tineo ex Guss., {\i Fl. Sic. Syn.}{\b  2}: 467 (1844), {\b H. nebrodense} Heldr., {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 27}: 67 (1844), {\b H. pendulum} (C. Presl) C. Presl,{\i  Fl. Sic.} xxix (1826),
\par 
\par 129}
\par