{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 cm, narrowly spathulate. Leaves strongly ciliate and with long, dense hairs and underlying short, glandular hairs. Flowering stems erect; cauline leaves small, linear-lanceolate. Capitula solitary, 1-1·3 cm wide; involucral bracts lilac distally; florets dimorphic; ligules 0·6-0·8 mm wide, lilac. 2n = 18.{\i  Screes, mostly above} 3000 {\i m. S. Spain }({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  A very distinct species; records from the Pyrenees probably refer to {\b 14}.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. E. silenifolius} (Turcz. ex DC.) Botsch.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 16}: 392 (1954). Robust perennial up to 15(-25) cm. Whole plant usually with long eglandular and short glandular hairs, rarely glabrous below. Basal leaves not more than 6(-12) × 0·3(-0·9) cm, linear-oblanceolate, with a long-attenuate petiole. Flowering stems stiffly erect; cauline leaves 3-11. Capitula 2-3(-3·5) cm wide, solitary. Involucral bracts linear-lanceolate, lilac distally, sometimes uniformly purplish. Florets dimorphic; ligules 7-13 × 0·9-1·7(-2·7) mm, with 2 or 3 small teeth at the apex, white or lilac.{\i  N. Ural} ({\i basin of Kozim river}). Rs (N). ({\i E. Siberia}.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  The European station is separated from the main area of the species by more than 1500 km.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 9.            Conyza}             Less.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A. Cronquist.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, rarely shrubs. Leaves alternate, simple. Involucral bracts imbricate, scarcely herbaceous. Receptacle flat, without scales. Female florets numerous, in several rows, with a slender, tubular-filiform corolla, which, in European members, is apically produced into a very short, narrow, white or rarely pinkish ligule up to 1 mm. Hermaphrodite florets few, fertile, mostly yellow. Achenes flattened, with 0-2 veins. Pappus of hairs.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  C. ivifolia(L.)Less.,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  6}: 138 (1831),a shrub up to 100 cm, sparsely scabrid-puberulent and densely covered with sessile glands, is more or less naturalized in C. Portugal (near Oeiras). It is native in S. Africa.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Female florets usually 25-45, the ligule 0·5-1 mm; involucre 
\par   glabrous or nearly so ................................................................... {\b 1. canadensis}
\par Female florets usually 50-120, the ligule not more than
\par   0·5 mm; involucre usually hirsute .............................................. {\b 2. bonariensis}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. canadensis} (L.) Cronq.,{\i  Bull. Torrey Bot. Club}{\b  70}: 632 (1943) ({\i Erigeron canadensis} L.). Annual 10-150 cm, patent-hirsute. Leaves numerous, narrow, the lower up to 10 × 1 cm, oblanceolate, petiolate, often deciduous, the others linear, at least the upper sessile Capitula less than 1 cm wide, generally numerous, in a long, paniculate inflorescence with a single axis. Involucre 3-4 mm, glabrous or nearly so. Female florets usually 25-45; ligules 0·5-1 mm, equalling or slightly exceeding the style and pappus. 2n = 18.{\i  Cultivated ground and waste places. Naturalized almost throughout Europe.} [All except Fa Hb Is Rs (N) Sb.] ({\i North America}.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. bonariensis} (L.) Cronq., {\i loc. cit.} (1943) ({\i C. ambigua} DC., {\i Erigeron bonariensis} L., {\i E. crispus} Pourret). Like {\b 1} but up to 250 cm, usually more densely hairy; inflorescence sometimes with elongate branches overtopping the main axis; capitula often 1 cm or more wide; involucre 4-6 mm, hirsute throughout, rarely glabrous or nearly so (var.{\i  leiotheca }(Blake) Cuatrec.); female florets 50-120 or more; ligules up to 0·5 mm, shorter than the style and usually also than the pappus. 2n = 36, 54.{\i  Cultivated ground and waste places. Naturalized in the Mediterranean region and S. W. Europe.} [Al Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.] ({\i Tropical America}.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  In Europe two variants are often recognized, one with a pyramidal inflorescence, dirty white to reddish-brown pappus and greyish-green involucral bracts, often with reddish apex, and the other with a more or less cylindrical inflorescence, yellowish pappus and greenish-brown involucral bracts. The latter is known as{\b  C. floribunda} Kunth in Humb., {\i Bonpl. & Kunth, Nov. Gen. Sp.}{\b  4}: 73 (1820) ({\i C. naudinii} Bonnet). Other variants have sometimes been interpreted as {\b 1} × {\b 2} and have been called {\b C.} ×{\b  flahaultiana} (Thell.) Sennen, {\i Bol. Soc. Aragon. Ci. Nat.}{\b  15}: 98 (1916). Study of native populations does not support the taxonomic recognition of these variants, even at subspecific rank, though they often form colonies of distinctive facies in Europe.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 10.               Nolletia}              Cass.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Leaves alternate. Capitula small, solitary at the ends of branches. Involucral bracts in 2-3 rows. Receptacle flat or slightly convex, without scales, alveolate; alveoles surrounded by a membranous rim. Outer florets filiform, female, the inner tubular, hermaphrodite. Achenes compressed; pappus hairs in 1 row, denticulate, caducous.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. chrysocomoides} (Desf.) Cass. ex Less.,{\i  Syn. Gen. Comp. }187 (1832). Appressed-grey-pubescent. Stems 15-30 cm, much-branched, leafy, woody below. Leaves 10-25 × c. 1 mm, entire, obtuse, sessile. Capitula hemispherical; involucre c. 6 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acuminate, the outer much shorter than the inner, all ultimately deflexed. Florets yellow. Achenes c. 1 mm, scabrid-puberulent.{\i  S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Bermeja}). Hs. ({\i N Africa}.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 11.              Baccharis}                 L.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Dioecious shrubs. Leaves alternate, simple. Capitula in panicles. Involucral bracts in many rows, more or less coriaceous. Receptacle flat or convex, without scales. Florets yellow, all tubular, the female very slender. Achenes ellipsoid, somewhat compressed, 10-ribbed; pappus of numerous slender setae.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. halimifolia} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 860 (1753). Glabrous, somewhat viscid shrub up to 3 m. Leaves up to 6 × 4 cm, rather thick, rhombic to oblanceolate, long-cuneate, remotely and coarsely dentate or the upper entire, shortly petiolate, minutely punctate beneath. Capitula c. 2 mm in diameter, numerous; involucre 3-6 mm, campanulate. Achenes c. 1 mm; pappus white, much longer than the involucre in female capitula.{\i  Naturalized near the coast in W. France and N.W. Spain}. [Ga Hs.] ({\i E. North America}.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe     {\b  Inuleae}        Cass.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves usually alternate, simple. Capitula with or without ligules; outer florets usually female, the inner hermaphrodite or male; ligules usually yellow. Receptacle with or without scales. Anthers sagittate and caudate at base. Style-branches flattened, rounded at apex, with stigmatic surface marginal and apical, or truncate to subacute, with marginal stigmatic surface only. Pappus usually of hairs.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Strongly divergent views are held about generic limits in genera {\b 13-23} and the treatment adopted here represents a compromise between these extremes. The rank of various taxa, especially in {\i Filago} and {\i Evax}, is also a subject of debate; these problems can only be solved by further biosystematic work.
\par 
\par 120}
\par