{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. O. hoppeana} (Koch) Schultz Bip. & F. W. Schultz,{\i  loc. cit.} (1861) ({\i Gnaphalium hoppeanum} Koch). Stem 3-15 cm. Leaves 2-4 mm wide, lanceolate-spathulate to linear-lanceolate, abruptly contracted at the apex, 1(-3)-veined. Capitula 5-7 mm, very shortly pedunculate. Involucre broadly ovoid at anthesis, campanulate in fruit; bracts in 3 rows, the outer 1/3(-1/2) as long as involucre. Florets 3·5 mm; lobes of the corolla in hermaphrodite florets little longer than wide. Achenes 1·5-2 mm, shortly and sparsely patent-hairy, the hairs rounded at apex and not covering the base of the pappus.{\i  Rocky and grassy places in the mountains; calcicole. • C. Europe, from the W. Alps and Jura to the W. Carpathians; Italy and N.W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. O. roeseri} (Boiss. & Heldr.) J. Holub,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 271 (1976) ({\i Gnaphalium roeseri} Boiss. & Heldr.). Stem 2-12 cm. Leaves oblong to linear-lanceolate, the cauline 30-60 × 2-5 mm, 3-veined, abruptly contracted at the apex. Inflorescence rather compact at anthesis. Capitula 3 mm, very shortly pedunculate. Involucral bracts obtuse, the outer 1/3 as long as the involucre, the inner sparsely tomentose on the back, stellate in fruit. Female florets few, the hermaphrodite 3-3·5 mm, many, with corolla lobes up to 0·5 mm. Achenes 1·5 mm, densely appressed-hairy, the hairs rounded at apex, covering the base of the pappus. {\i Mountain rocks. • C. & S. Greece.} Gr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. O. pichleri} (Murb.) J. Holub,{\i  loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i Gnaphalium pichleri} Murb.). Like {\b 4} but stem 5-20 cm; cauline leaves 40-100 × 2-4 mm, 1-veined, very gradually tapered to the apex; inflorescence very lax and interrupted; capitula 4 mm, the lower with peduncules longer than the capitulum; outer bracts acute, the inner densely tomentose on the back.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S.W. Jugoslavia and N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. O. supina} (L.) DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  6}: 245 (1838) ({\i Gnaphalium supinum} L.). Plant with numerous non-flowering shoots. Stem 2-12(-20) cm. Leaves 5-20(-25) × 1-3 mm, linear-oblanceolate to linear-lanceolate, 1-veined, greyish-tomentose. Capitula 5-6 × 7-8 mm, shortly pedunculate, broadly campanulate. Involucral bracts in 2(-3) rows, soon stellate-patent, the outer (1/2-)2/3 as long as involucre. Female florets c. 3·4 mm, few, in 1(-2) rows; hermaphrodite florets 3 mm, with short corolla-lobes. Achenes 1-1·5 mm, shortly hairy, the hairs 2-fid at apex, not covering the base of the pappus. 2n = 28.{\i  Snow-patches and other wet, open habitats; calcifuge. N. Europe and mountains of C. and S. Europe}. Al Au Br Bu Co Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, C, W) Sa Su.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from the southernmost part of the range of the species have a white-lanate, lax indumentum, often solitary capitula and less hairy, smaller achenes. They may represent a subspecies, but further investigation is required.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 21.             Gamochaeta}             Weddell
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Holub.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Appressed-tomentose annuals to perennials, without non-flowering shoots. Basal leaves in a rosette. Capitula in groups subtended by 1 leaf, forming a terminal, spicate, more or less leafy inflorescence. Receptacle without scales. Involucral bracts imbricate, brownish; indurated middle portion of the inner bracts not sulcate. Hermaphrodite florets reddish-purple at apex. Achenes 0·4-0·9 mm, smooth, without papillae, mucilaginous when wet; pappus-hairs not ciliate at base, connate in a basal ring, falling as a unit.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: D. G. Drury,{\i  New Zealand Jour. Bot.}{\b  9}: 157-185 (1971).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Dead basal leaves usually absent at anthesis; cauline 
\par   leaves ± equally hairy on both surfaces, the upper 
\par   folded and falcate; inflorescence occupying (1/3-)1/2
\par   of the length of the stem; capitula 3-3·5 mm .............................. {\b 1. subfalcata} 
\par Dead basal leaves persisting in a rosette at anthesis;
\par   cauline leaves subglabrous above, tomentose beneath,
\par   plane and straight; inflorescence occupying at most 
\par   1/4 of the length of the stem; capitula 4-5 mm ............................... {\b 2. purpurea}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. subfalcata} (Cabrera) Cabrera, {\i Bol. Soc. Argent. Bot.}{\b  9}: 383 (1961) ({\i Gnaphalium subfalcatum} Cabrera, {\i G. falcatum} auct. non Lam.). Stem 10-35 cm, branched only at base; branches ascending. Basal leaves oblanceolate, not persisting at anthesis; cauline leaves 1·5-5 × 0·3-1·2 cm, linear to linear-oblanceolate, the lower plane, the upper folded and falcate, all more or less equally hairy on both surfaces. Inflorescence interrupted below, occupying (1/3-)1/2 of the length of the stem. Capitula 3-3·5 × 2-2·5 mm, glabrescent. Outer involucral bracts ovate, acute. {\i Rice-fields and roadsides. Naturalized in C. & S. Portugal.} [Lu.] ({\i North & South America}.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. G. purpurea} (L.) Cabrera, {\i op. cit.} 377 (1961) ({\i Gnaphalium purpureum} L.). Stem 10 40 cm, erect, usually simple. Basal leaves spathulate to oblanceolate, dead but persisting at anthesis; cauline leaves 1-4 × 0*5-1*5 cm, plane and straight, lanceolate-spathulate, subglabrous above, tomentose beneath. Inflorescence c. 4 cm, occupying at most 1/4 of the length of the stem, sometimes interrupted below. Capitula 4-5 × 4-5 mm. Outer involucral bracts ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. 2n = 28. {\i Wet places. Naturalized in Açores and Portugal.} [Az Lu.] ({\i North America}.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 22.           Filaginella}            Opiz
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Holub.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals without non-flowering shoots. Leaves alternate. Clusters of capitula terminal and axillary, subtended by leaves. Receptacle without scales. Involucral bracts herbaceous and scarious, mottled; indurated tissue of inner bracts in irregular patches. All florets tubular, fertile. Achenes 0·4-0·7 mm, terete, not papillose, glabrous or hairy; hairs 2-4 times as long as wide, emitting mucilage in water. Pappus-hairs filiform, fragile, free not ciliate at base, falling separately. Pollen-grains with narrow shallow furrows, ovate pores and short, broadly conical spinules.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: vide{\i  Gnaphalium}.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. uliginosa} (L.) Opiz,{\i  Abh. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ser. 5,{\b  8} (Sitzungsber. Sect.): 52 (1854) ({\i Gnaphalium uliginosum} L.). Stem (1-)5-20 cm. Leaves 10-50 × 2-5(-8) mm, linear-lanceolate to oblong-obovate. Capitula 3-4 × 5 mm, sessile, in clusters of 3-10, overtopped by subtending leaves. Involucral bracts oblong to linear, brownish. Female florets 50-150, the hermaphrodite 5-8. Achene 0·5 mm, oblong-cylindrical; pappus 1·5 mm. 2n = 14. {\i Damp places. Most of Europe.} ?Al Au Be Br Bu ?Cr Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems 1-3 mm thick at base, with a dense, continuous,
\par    appressed white-lanate indumentum, often woody; leaves
\par    oblong-obovate to oblong-spathulate; female florets 
\par    more than 100 in each capitulum ....................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b rossica} 
\par 1 Stems 0·5-2 mm thick at base, rather patent-tomentose, ± 
\par   herbaceous; leaves linear-lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate; 
\par   female florets not more than 100 in each capitulum
\par 2 Lower leaves in a rosette, persistent when dead; lateral branches 
\par   ascending to erect, ± parallel to the main stem ........ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b kasachstanica}
\par 
\par 127}
\par