{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 hermaphrodite 2·5-2·6 mm, 3-5, without pappus or with 1-4 hairs. Achenes 1 × 0·25 mm.{\i  S. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. F. micropodioides} Lange, {\i op. cit.} 71 (1861). Plant much-branched, the main stem very short, branches procumbent or obliquely ascending. Leaves 12-15 × 2-2·5 mm, oblong- to linear-lanceolate, those subtending the clusters oblong-lanceolate, overtopping clusters. Clusters of capitula 6-9 mm wide, almost covered by brownish-grey indumentum, with 8-10 not clearly distinct capitula. Involucral bracts c. 3 × 1·2 mm, patent-lanate on the back, acute, with an arista 0·2 mm; inner bracts obtuse. Hermaphrodite florets 4-5; pappus of few hairs, caducous. Achene c. 0·9 mm.{\i  E. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  A rare plant resembling {\i Bombycilaena erecta.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. F. mareotica} Delile,{\i  Descr. Egypte, Hist. Nat.}{\b  2}: 274 (1813). Stem 3-15(-20) cm, simple or branched, appressed-lanate. Leaves 3-5 × 0·5-1 mm, linear-lanceolate; leaves subtending the capitula 3-3·5 × 0·6-1·2 mm, 3, oblong-lanceolate, shorter than the capitula. Capitula 3-4 × 1·5 mm, oblong-cylindrical, brownish. Involucral bracts 2·7 × 0·7 mm, in (4-)5 rows, parallel before flowering, hardening and slightly divergent in fruit, the middle lanceolate, acuminate. Female florets c. 1·4 mm; hermaphrodite 1·1-1·2 mm, (1-)3-5, with well-developed pappus. Achenes 0·7 × 0·25 mm, oblong-obovoid, greenish-brown.{\i  Saline soils. S.E. Spain}. Hs. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. F. filaginoides} (Kar. & Kir.) Wagenitz,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  5}: 417 (1969) ({\i Evax filaginoides} Kar. & Kir.). Stem 4-13(-17) cm, erect, simple or furcate above, with 1-8 clusters of capitula. Leaves 12-18 × 2-2·5(-3·5) mm, linear-lanceolate, those subtending the clusters up to as long as clusters, subacute. Clusters of capitula 8-10 mm wide, solitary. Involucral bracts 3 × 1 mm, with a straight or recurved arista 1 mm, the inner subacute. Achenes 1 × 0·3-0·5 mm, oblong-obovoid, shortly hairy.{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E). ({\i C. Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. F. eriosphaera} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Chrtek & J. Holub,{\i  Preslia }{\b 35}: 3 (1963) ({\i Evax exigua} auct., non (Sibth. & Sm.) DC.). Much-branched, caespitose, densely lanate cushion-plant with up to 50 clusters of capitula. Stem very short. Cauline leaves c. 6 × 1 mm, remote, those subtending the clusters oblong to obovate or spathulate, subobtuse, about as long as the clusters. Clusters of capitula 5-10 mm wide, often aggregated into secondary clusters. Involucral bracts c. 3 × 1 mm, with a short, slightly recurved arista. Achenes 0·8-1 × 0·3 mm, oblong-obovoid, slightly papillose.{\i  Kriti and Karpathos.} Cr. ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. F. hispanica} (Degen & Hervier) Chrtek & J. Holub,{\i  loc. cit. }(1963) ({\i Evax anatolica} forma{\i  hispanica} Degen & Hervier). Appressed-greyish-tomentose. Stem c. 1 cm, branched from the base; branches procumbent. Leaves oblong-spathulate, mucronate. Clusters of capitula overtopped by patent rosette-leaves. Capitula covered by the lanate indumentum. Involucral bracts contracted into a cucullate cartilaginous apex. Hermaphrodite florets 2-3. Achenes c. 1·5 mm, oblong, brown, papillose.{\i  Snow-patches. S.E. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Segura}). Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 14.             Ifloga}                Cass.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Holub.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Filago }but capitula solitary or in clusters of 2-5 in the leaf-axils throughout most of the stem and branches; female florets 4-6, without pappus; functionally male florets c. 12, with pappus; pappus-hairs plumose above, deciduous.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: R. Pampanini, {\i Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.} nov. ser.,{\b  36}: 242-248 (1929). J. Chrtek,{\i  Preslia}{\b  41}: 241-244 (1969).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. I. spicata} (Forskål) Schultz Bip. in Webb & Berth., {\i Phyt. Canar.}{\b  2}: 310 (1845). Stems 3-12 cm, with rigid, procumbent or ascending branches. Leaves (5-)8-14(-20) × 1-1·5 mm, filiform-subulate, patent, shiny green above, greyish-lanate beneath, longer than the clusters of capitula. Capitula 3-4 × c. 2 mm, subglobose to cylindrical. Involucral bracts c. 3 × 1·4 mm, reddish-brown, scarious, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, shortly acuminate. Functionally male florets 1·4 mm, yellowish-orange above. Achenes 0·8 × 0·3 mm, ovoid, glabrous, brownish-green.{\i  S.E. Spain} ({\i near Almeria}). Hs. ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Very polymorphic. The above description applies to subsp.{\b  spicata}, the only one found in Europe.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 15.              Logfia}                Cass.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Holub.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Filago} but capitula in small clusters or sometimes solitary; involucral bracts 15-20, subobtuse to acute, never acuminate, stellate in fruit; outer achenes usually enclosed in bracts and falling with them.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  All species occur in dry, open, often sandy habitats.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: vide{\i  Filago}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant racemosely branched; clusters of capitula and single
\par 
   capitula in a racemose, spicate or paniculate inflorescence
\par 
2 Clusters with 3-12 ± sessile capitula; middle involucral 
\par 
  bracts slightly saccate at base; plant usually whitish-lanate .......... {\b 2. arvensis}
\par 
2 Clusters with 2-5 capitula; some capitula solitary, pedunculate; 
\par 
  middle involucral bracts saccate at base; plant greyish-
\par 
  tomentose .................................................................................... {\b 1. heterantha} 
\par 
1 Plant furcately branched; clusters of capitula terminal
\par 
  and in the axils of the branches
\par 
3 Capitula broadly cylindrical; involucral bracts brownish,
\par 
  the outer similar in length and shape to the inner .......................... {\b 6. neglecta}
\par 
3 Capitula ovoid-pyramidal; involucral bracts pale, the outer 
\par 
  much shorter than and differing in shape from the inner
\par 
4 Lower leaves linear-lanceolate, the upper oblong-lanceolate;
\par 
   inner female florets c. 1·5 mm; hermaphrodite 
\par 
  florets 1·7-2 mm .......................................................................... {\b 4. clementei}
\par 
4 All leaves similar; inner female florets 1·8-2·5 mm;
\par 
  hermaphrodite florets 2·2-2·5 mm
\par 
5 Leaves 4-10 mm, oblong-linear to linear, flat; clusters
\par 
  of capitula longer than the subtending leaves; middle
\par 
  involucral bracts weakly saccate at base ......................................... {\b 3. minima}
\par 
5 Leaves 15-25 mm, linear to filiform, often with involute
\par 
  margin; clusters of capitula usually much shorter than 
\par 
  the subtending leaves; middle involucral bracts strongly
\par 
  saccate at base .................................................................................. {\b 5. gallica}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. heterantha} (Rafin.) J. Holub,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 71}: 271 (1976) ({\i Gnaphalium heteranthum} Rafin., {\i Filago heterantha} (Rafin.) Guss.). Plant greyish-tomentose. Stem 8-30 cm. Leaves 8-15 × 1-2·5 mm, oblong-lanceolate to linear. Capitula 4 × 3 mm, broadly ovoid, narrowed at apex, solitary below, in clusters of 2-5 above; some of the lower capitula pedunculate; peduncles very slender. Involucral bracts c. 4 × 1·4 mm, densely lanate, the outer very short, the middle saccate at the base, subacute. Inner female florets 10-15, the hermaphrodite 3-4. Achenes 0·8-0·9 × 0·2-0·3 mm, oblong-ovoid, pale brown. {\i C. & S. Italy, Sicilia, Sardegna.} It Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 2. L. arvensis} (L.) J. Holub,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  33}: 432 (1975) ({\i Filago arvensis} L., {\i F. montana }L. pro parte). Plant patent-lanate. Stem 5-70 cm, usually racemosely branched.
\par 

\par 
123}
\par