{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 cm, lanceolate to linear, with revolute margin, glabrescent above. Capitula numerous, crowded in terminal corymbs. Involucral bracts oblong, with rounded apex, pearly-white. Corolla yellowish. Achenes 0·5-1 mm, brown, papillose; pappus-hairs thickened near the apex in male florets. 2n = 28. {\i Cultivated for ornament and naturalized in waste places, damp woods and on river-banks, mainly in N. & C. Europe.} [Au Br Cz Da Ga Ge Ho No Po Rm Su.] ({\i North America, N.E. Asia.})
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 29.          Phagnalon}           Cass.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D. Bramwell.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Dwarf shrubs. Leaves simple, alternate; margins entire, erose or remotely toothed. Capitula usually solitary at the ends of branches. Involucral bracts imbricate, in up to 5 rows. Receptacle flat; scales absent. Florets yellowish, all tubular, the outer female, the inner hermaphrodite. Achenes cylindrical, somewhat compressed or angled, unbeaked, usually hairy. Pappus-hairs in 1-2 rows, simple, free.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Putative hybrids between {\b 1}, {\b 2} and {\b 5} have frequently been recorded and many of them have been given binomials. Occasional glabrous variants of all the species occur.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Capitula in clusters of 2-6 .......................................................... {\b 1. sordidum}
\par 1 Capitula solitary
\par 2 Leaves glabrous
\par 3 Leaves entire ............................................................................... {\b 6. pumilum}
\par 3 Leaves sinuate-dentate .............................................................. {\b 3. metlesicsii}
\par 2 Leaves densely lanate, at least beneath
\par 4 Margin of middle involucral bracts undulate ................................ {\b 5. saxatile}
\par 4 Margin of middle involucral bracts flat
\par 5 Outer involucral bracts ovate to triangular, obtuse ....................... {\b 2. rupestre}
\par 5 Outer involucral bracts narrowly triangular to linear-
\par   lanceolate, acute
\par 6 Leaves oblong-spathulate; margin entire .................................... {\b 6. pumilum}
\par 6 Leaves oblanceolate to obovate; margin irregularly
\par   sinuate-dentate or strongly erose .................................................. {\b 4. graecum}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. sordidum} (L.) Reichenb., {\i Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 224 (1831). Dwarf shrub up to 30 cm. Stems lanate, densely leafy. Leaves 1-3 cm, linear, densely lanate on both surfaces, entire; margin strongly revolute. Flowering stems with 2-6 small, sessile to shortly pedunculate, clustered capitula. Involucral bracts ovate, acute, brownish, all more or less similar, denticulate.{\i  Rocks and walls. S.W. Europe, extending eastwards to C. Italy.} Bl Co Ga Hs It Sa.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. rupestre} (L.) DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  5}: 396 (1836). Dwarf shrub up to 50 cm. Stems erect, lanate. Leaves 1-4 cm, oblanceolate to obovate, densely lanate beneath, glabrescent or with occasional arachnoid hairs above, erose to remotely erose-dentate; margin somewhat revolute. Capitula solitary. Outer involucral bracts ovate to triangular, obtuse; inner lanceolate, cuspidate, entire to erose. 2n = 18.{\i  Dry places. W. & C. Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} Bl Co Ga Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. metlesicsii} Pignatti,{\i  Gior. Bot. Ital. }{\b 103}: 291 (1969). Like {\b 2} but 5-10 cm; leaves spathulate to oblanceolate, glabrous, white-punctate beneath; margin sinuate-dentate. •{\i  Sicilia. }Si.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. graecum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 11}): 6 (1849) ({\i P. rupestre} subsp.{\i  graecum }(Boiss. & Heldr.) Hayek). Dwarf shrub up to 30 cm. Stems ascending to erect, lanate. Leaves 1·5-2·5 cm, oblanceolate to obovate, densely lanate beneath, lanate to subglabrous above, irregularly sinuate-dentate to strongly erose-undulate. Capitula solitary. Outer involucral bracts narrowly triangular to lanceolate, acute, brownish; inner bracts linear-lanceolate, subacute, entire.{\i  Rocky places.  •S.E. Europe, extending westwards to Lampedusa.} Al Cr Gr It Si.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. saxatile} (L.) Cass.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Philom. Paris }{\b 1819}: 174 (1819) (incl. {\i P. methanaeum} Hausskn.). Dwarf shrub up to 60 cm. Stems ascending to erect, lanate. Leaves 2·5-3·5 cm, linear to linear-oblanceolate, greenish and sparsely lanate above, densely lanate beneath, erose or rarely remotely dentate; margin sometimes revolute. Capitula solitary. Middle involucral bracts linear-lanceolate, acute; margin undulate; inner bracts linear. 2n = 18.{\i  Rocks and walls. Mediterranean region and S.W. Europe}. Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. pumilum} (Sibth. & Sm.) DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  5}: 397 (1836). Caespitose, dwarf perennial up to 15 cm. Leaves 1·5-2·5 cm, oblong-spathulate, glabrous or densely tomentose, entire. Capitula solitary. Involucral bracts lanceolate, acuminate, entire.{\i  Rock-crevices. • Mountains of Kriti.} Cr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 30.          Leysera}            L.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Annual herbs. Leaves alternate, entire. Involucral bracts in several rows, very unequal, increasing in length inwards. Receptacle flat, alveolate. Florets yellow, the outer ligulate, female, the inner tubular, hermaphrodite. Achenes narrowly cylindrical, hairy; pappus of short scales and, in the inner achenes, a few long hairs, plumose in the distal third.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. leyseroides} (Desf.) Maire, {\i Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Afr. Nord}{\b  20}: 186 (1929). Stems 5-15 cm, branched, glandular-pubescent. Leaves linear, glandular-pubescent. Peduncles c. 4 cm, slender, axillary, erecto-patent, becoming erect just below the capitulum. Involucre 8-9 mm, glabrous; bracts mostly scarious, obtuse. Ligules c. 1 mm.{\i  Dry, sandy places. S.E. Spain} ({\i near Almeria}). Hs. ({\i North Africa.})
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 31.              Inula}            L.
\par 
\pard\f0\f24\qc By P.W. Ball & †T.G. Tutin. 
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial, rarely biennial herbs or small shrubs. Leaves simple, alternate. Capitula solitary or in a corymbose or paniculate inflorescence. Involucral bracts imbricate, in many rows. Receptacle flat or slightly convex, without scales. Florets yellow, the outer ligulate, female, the ligule often very short. Tubular florets hermaphrodite. Achenes angled, not abruptly contracted below the pappus. Pappus-hairs simple, free.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: G. Beck,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 44}: 283-339 (1882). K. H. Rechinger fil.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  87}: 81-100 (1938).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Putative hybrids between {\b 2-7} have been recorded from areas where any two of these species grow together. In many cases the morphological evidence strongly supports the view that these plants are of hybrid origin, but in others they appear to be variants of one or other of the alleged parents.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Outer involucral bracts 4 mm or more wide, ovate;
\par   ligules 30-40 mm; achenes 3-5 mm ............................................. {\b 1. helenium} 
\par 1 Outer involucral bracts less than 4 mm wide, linear or
\par   lanceolate, rarely triangular to ovate; ligules less 
\par   than 30 mm; achenes 1-3 mm
\par 2 Ligules not more than 12 mm, not more than 11/2 times
\par   as long as the involucre
\par 
\par 133}
\par