{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 38.         Pallenis }          (Cass.)Cass.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to biennial herbs. Stems leafy. Capitula medium, terminating the branches. Involucral bracts in 2-3 rows. Receptacle convex, with scales. Ligulate florets in 2 rows, female, yellow tubular florets numerous, the tube compressed and sometimes with 1-2 narrow wings. Outer achenes flat, winged; inner slightly compressed, not or scarcely winged; pappus of numerous short hyaline scales.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. spinosa} (L.) Cass.,{\i  Dict. Sci. Nat.}{\b  37}: 276 (1825). Up to 60 cm, softly hairy. Stems hard, woody at the base, usually branched, the branches overtopping the main stem. Leaves lanceolate to elliptical, obtuse, mucronate; basal petiolate; cauline sessile and semi-amplexicaul. Outer involucral bracts 1·5-3·5 cm, ovate, coriaceous below, with a long, patent, spine-tipped, leaf-like apex exceeding the ligules; inner ovate, coriaceous, with or without a short, narrow, green apex. Ligules deeply 3-toothed at apex; tubular florets 5-lobed. Achenes 2-2·5 mm.{\i  S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b spinosa}: Stem equally hairy throughout, usually branched in upper 1/3; branches erecto-patent. Disc of capitulum at anthesis 1·5-2 cm across; ligules deep yellow. 2n = 10. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b microcephala} (Halácsy) Rech. fil.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  85}: 62 (1936): Stem with sparse, short hairs above, usually branched from below the middle; branches divaricate. Disc of capitulum at anthesis smaller; ligules pale yellow, often suffused with purple.{\i  Aegean region.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 39.          Asteriscus}           Miller
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Pallenis} but sometimes perennial; inner florets with a terete tube; outer achenes more or less triquetrous or somewhat compressed, the remainder terete.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Perennial; ligules as long as involucral bracts ............................. {\b 2. maritimus} 
\par 
Annual; ligules much shorter than involucral bracts ..................... {\b 1. aquaticus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. aquaticus} (L.) Less., {\i Syn. Gen. Comp.} 210 (1832) ({\i A. citriodorus} Heldr. & Halácsy). Annual. Stem (2-)10-50 cm, simple or with erecto-patent branches, usually near the apex. Leaves oblanceolate, entire, obtuse, the lower usually petiolate, the upper sessile. Outer involucral bracts 1-2 cm, ovate and coriaceous below, with a long, leaf-like apex, much exceeding the ligules; inner ovate, coriaceous, with or without a short green apex. Ligules deeply 3-toothed at apex; tubular florets 5-lobed. Achenes 1·5-2 mm; pappus 0·75-1 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Damp or sandy places. Mediterranean region, extending to Portugal and S. Bulgaria.} Al Bl Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. maritimus} (L.) Less.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1832). Scabrid, hispid perennial. Stems rarely more than 20 cm, woody, much-branched, ascending. Leaves oblong to oblong-spathulate, petiolate. Outer involucral bracts c. 1 cm, coriaceous below, with an obtuse, spathulate apex, equalling or shorter than the ligules. Ligules deeply 3-toothed; tubular florets 5-lobed. Achenes c. 1·5 mm; pappus 1-1·5 mm. 2n = 12.{\i  Maritime rocks. W. part of the Mediterranean region, S. Portugal; W. & S. Greece.} Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   Tribe      {\b  Heliantheae}    Cass. 
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves usually opposite and simple. Capitula usually with ligules; outer florets female or sterile, the inner hermaphrodite or functionally male; corolla usually yellow. Receptacle with scales. Anthers obtuse or sagittate at base, but not caudate. Style branches truncate or with a non-stigmatic apex. Pappus of scales, a corona, few setae or absent.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 40.           Guizotia}               Cass.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A. Hansen
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves simple, the lower opposite, the uppermost alternate. Capitula medium. Involucral bracts imbricate, in 2 rows, the outer herbaceous, the inner scarious. Receptacle convex, with scales. Outer florets ligulate, female, yellow; inner hermaphrodite; corolla shortly 5-lobed. Achenes compressed, 3- to 4-angled; pappus absent.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. abyssinica} (L. fil.) Cass., {\i Dict. Sci. Nat.}{\b  59}: 248 (1829). Stems up to 2 m, erect, divaricately branched, glandular-hairy above. Leaves 3-10 cm, oblong-lanceolate, serrate to subentire, sessile, amplexicaul. Capitula numerous. Outer involucral bracts 5, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, the inner hairy. Ligules 11-15 mm, usually 8. Outer florets subtended by scales resembling the inner involucral bracts. Achenes c. 4 mm, widened upwards, shining brown or black. {\i Cultivated for the oil obtained from the achenes and for bird-seed. Casual in most parts of Europe and locally naturalized.} [Cz Ge Hs It.] ({\i E. Africa}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 41.           Bidens}               L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Leaves opposite, entire to 2-pinnatisect. Capitula solitary, usually pedunculate. Involucral bracts in 2 rows, the outer usually herbaceous and often leaf-like, the inner membranous, often with a scarious margin. Receptacle flat or slightly convex, with scales. Ligulate florets usually absent, rarely in 1 row, sterile; tubular florets hermaphrodite. Achenes obovoid-oblong or linear, compressed or somewhat 4-angled, usually with setose margins; pappus of 2-5, usually retrorsely hispidulous or aculeate setae.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: E. E. Sherff,{\i  Publ. Field Mus. Bot.} ({\i Chicago}) {\b 16}({\b 1}): 1-346; 16(2): 347-709 (1937).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 At least the lower leaves pinnate, with petiolulate pinnae
\par 
2 Pinnae lobed almost to the midrib; achenes longer than
\par 
  the inner involucral bracts
\par 
3 Leaf-lobes rhombic to broadly lanceolate; pappus-
\par 
  bristles 2-4 mm, erecto-patent at maturity ................................... {\b 8. bipinnata}
\par 
3 Leaf-lobes mostly linear-lanceolate; pappus-bristles
\par 
  1-2·5 mm, erect at maturity .................................................... {\b 9. subalternans}
\par 
2 Pinnae unlobed; achenes about equalling the inner 
\par 
  involucral bracts, rarely longer
\par 
4 Capitula c. 20 mm in diameter; achenes oblong .......................... {\b 6. frondosa}
\par 
4 Capitula c. 10 mm in diameter; achenes fusiform ........................... {\b 7. pilosa}
\par 
1 Lower leaves simple or lobed, but lobes not petiolulate
\par 
5 Peduncles recurved just below the capitula; achenes 
\par 
  with a convex, cartilaginous apex .................................................... {\b 5. cernua}
\par 
5 Peduncles not recurved; achenes with a flat or concave,
\par 
  not cartilaginous apex
\par 
6 Outer involucral bracts never leaf-like; ligules
\par 
  10-30 mm always present; marginal setae of achenes erect .............. {\b 4. aurea}
\par 
6 Outer involucral bracts usually leaf-like; ligules not more  
\par 
  than 10 mm, usually absent; marginal setae of achenes deflexed
\par 
7 Capitula with 10-12 outer involucral bracts;
\par 
  achenes 3-4 mm, with 2 bristles ...................................................... {\b 3. radiata}
\par 
7 Capitula with (2-)5-8 outer involucral bracts; achenes
\par 
  with (2)3-5 bristles
\par 
8 Central achenes flat ..................................................................... {\b 1. tripartita}
\par 
8 Central achenes strongly 4-angled ................................................ {\b 2. connata}
\par 

\par 
139}
\par