{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28  Sexual, the male and female plants being about equally frequent.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from Scotland with slightly wider leaves densely tomentose on both surfaces, at least when young, have been called var.{\i  hyperborea} (D. Don) DC. They usually grow with typical plants and their status requires investigation. Similar plants occur elsewhere, particularly in the Alps.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. hibernica} Br.-Bl.,{\i  Vegetatio}{\b  3}: 298 (1951), originally described from Ireland and since reported from several places in N. & N.W. Europe, cannot be satisfactorily separated from {\b 1} on any of its several supposedly diagnostic characters.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. nordhageniana} Rune & Ronning, {\i Svensk Bot. Tidskr.}{\b  50}: 118 (1956). Like {\b 1} but of a laxer habit, not tomentose and usually not more, than 6 cm; lower surface of leaves, flowering stem and lower half of involucral bracts purplish; upper cauline leaves with a relatively wide, scarious apex; capitula 1-3(-4); upper half of involucral bracts often with yellowish-brown spots. 2n = 28.{\i  Snow-patches. • Mountains of N.Norway, known only from a few localities at} c. 70°{\i  N.} ?Fe No.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. alpina} (L.) Gaertner,{\i  Fruct. Sem. Pl.}{\b  2}: 410 (1791). Mat-forming, tomentose perennial up to 15 cm, with woody stock and slender, branching stolons. Basal leaves 8-15(-20) × 1·5-3·5 mm, narrowly obovate-spathulate to oblanceolate, acute and apiculate, densely tomentose beneath, subglabrous or glabrous above. Upper cauline leaves with a relatively wide scarious apex. Capitula 3-5, usually more or less sessile. Upper half of involucral bracts in female plants lanceolate, dark greenish brown, erose above. 2n = 70, 84, 85. {\i Mountain rocks and heaths; calcicole. • N. & W. Fennoscandia, just extending to N.W. Russia.} Fe No Rs (N) Su.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Apomictic. Male plants are known only from scattered localities in Norway and W. Sweden; they do not produce functional pollen.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   The closely related {\b A. boecherana} A. E. Porsild,{\i  Bot. Tidsskr.}{\b  61}: 36 (1965), from Iceland (and from Greenland and N. Canada), differs in having leaves which are nearly always densely tomentose on the upper surface and in having 2n = 56; only female plants are known.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. porsildii} Elis. Ekman,{\i  Svensk Bot. Tidskr.}{\b  21}: 51 (1927). Like {\b 3} but not more than 10 cm; basal leaves more or less glabrous on both surfaces but flowering stems and cauline leaves somewhat tomentose. 2n = 63, 70.{\i  Damp mountain heaths. N.W. Fennoscandia.} Fe No Su.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. carpatica} (Wahlenb.) Bluff & Fingerh., {\i Comp. Fl. Germ.}{\b  1}: 348 (1825). Tomentose perennial up to 15(-24) cm, with vertical woody stock without stolons and producing a few basal leaf-rosettes. Basal leaves up to 90 × 11 mm, oblanceolate to linear, acute. Cauline leaves few, the upper with a brown scarious apex. Capitula (6-)7-9(-11). Involucral bracts lanceolate in female plants, broadly elliptical to obovate in male plants, with a dark centre, pale brown above; apex erose. Male florets cream-coloured, sometimes purplish above; anthers purple. Pappus less than 1·75 mm longer than the style at maturity. Achenes frequently produced. 2n = 56. {\i Grassy or stony slopes. • Pyrenees, Alps, Carpathians.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Sexual, the male and female plants being about equally frequent. This octoploid species can produce hexaploid progeny when crossed with {\b 1} but such hybrids are very rare in nature.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   There is considerable variation in leaf-width and the upper surface varies from subglabrous to densely tomentose.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. villifera} Boriss.,{\i  Not. Syst. }({\i Leningrad}) {\b 20}: 292 (1960). Like {\b 5} but with (3-)4-6(-9) capitula; involucral bracts with a darker, purplish centre; male florets purplish, at least above; anthers yellow; pappus more than 1·75 mm longer than the style at maturity; achenes very rarely produced. 2n = 28, 42.{\i  Snow-patches and other damp places; calcicole. Arctic Europe and N. Ural}. Fe No Rs (N) Su. ({\i Siberia.})
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Pollen-formation in the hexaploid (2n = 42) is irregular and neither this nor the tetraploid normally produces mature achenes in Europe. The stigmatic lobes of the tetraploids are shorter (c. 0·3 mm) than those of the hexaploids (c. 0·8 mm).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    The contrasting colours of the male florets and the anthers in this species and {\b 5} are not always evident in dried material.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 27.       Leontopodium}         (Pers.) R.Br.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Leaves alternate, entire. Inflorescence of several small capitula crowded together at the apex of the stem and subtended by an involucre of leaves. Involucral bracts in several rows. Receptacle convex, without scales. Florets all tubular, the outer female, the inner functionally male, or the capitulum consisting entirely or nearly entirely of one or the other type. Achenes subterete, unribbed; pappus-hairs in 1 row, denticulate, connate at base.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: H. von Handel-Mazzetti, {\i Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  44} ({\b 2}): 1-178 (1927).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. alpinum} Cass., {\i Dict. Sci. Nat.}{\b  25}: 474 (1822). Flowering stems (1-)5-20(-30) cm, erect, simple. Leaves 1·5-4 cm. Leaves subtending the inflorescence patent, densely white-lanate. Capitula subglobose; involucre 4-6 mm; outer bracts oblanceolate, acute, lanate, with brown scarious margin and apex. Florets yellowish-white. Achenes c. 0·5 mm. 2n = 52.{\i  Rocky and grassy slopes. Mountains of Europe, from the Jura and Carpathians to the Pyrenees, C. Appennini and S.W. Bulgaria}. Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alpinum}: Indumentum appressed; stems usually more than 5 cm. Leaves, except those subtending the inflorescence, greenish above, linear-lanceolate or the basal spathulate. Leaves subtending the inflorescence linear-oblong, much exceeding the capitula. {\i Throughout the range of the species, except S.W. Bulgaria and C. Appennini.}
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b nivale} (Ten.) Tutin,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  67}: 283 (1973) ({\i Gnaphalium nivale} Ten.): Indumentum patent; stems up to 5 cm. All leaves densely white-lanate on both surfaces, usually spathulate. Leaves subtending the inflorescence spathulate, about as long as the capitula.{\i  C. Appennini; Jugoslavia} ({\i near Pec}); {\i S.W. Bulgaria} ({\i Pirin Planina}).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 28.           Anaphalis}       DC.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A. Hansen
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Lanate, dioecious or polygamous perennials. Leaves simple, alternate. Capitula small. Involucral bracts imbricate, in several rows, scarious. Receptacle flat or convex, without scales. Male florets tubular; female florets filiform. Achenes fusiform; pappus of one row of hairs.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. margaritacea} (L.) Bentham in Bentham & Hooker fil.,{\i  Gen. Pl.}{\b  2}: 303 (1873). Stems 30-100 cm. Leaves 5-12 × 1-1·5
\par 
\par 132}
\par