{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 34.           Carpesium}            L.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs. Leaves simple, alternate. Capitula often nodding, terminal or axillary, sessile or shortly pedunculate. Involucral bracts in few rows, the outer herbaceous, the others coriaceous, obtuse. Receptacle flat, without scales. All florets tubular, the outer female, the inner hermaphrodite, yellow. Achenes fusiform, costate, shortly beaked, with a cartilaginous rim; pappus absent.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Capitula all pedunculate; outer involucral bracts leaf-like ............. {\b 1. cernuum}
\par Capitula subsessile; outer involucral bracts not leaf-like ......... {\b 2. abrotanoides}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. cernuum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 859 (1753). Annual or biennial 20-80 cm. Leaves elliptical to narrowly rhombic, narrowed into a petiole, appressed-hairy and glandular on both surfaces, but more densely so beneath and on the veins, repand-dentate or -denticulate, the lower 10-20 cm. Capitula 15-25 mm in diameter; involucre hemispherical; outer involucral bracts leaf-like, patent or recurved. Achenes c. 5 mm; beak glandular.{\i  S. & S.C. Europe, extending eastwards to W.C. Ukraine.} Au Bu Cz Ga †Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. abrotanoides} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 860 (1753). Like {\b 1} but perennial; leaves shortly petiolate or sessile, entire or remotely serrulate, sparsely pubescent; capitula c. 5 mm in diameter, sessile, solitary or in pairs in the leaf-axils; outer involucral bracts not leaf-like. 2n = 40.{\i  N.E. Italy, N.W. Jugoslavia, S.W. Hungary.} Hu It Ju.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 35.           Jasonia}             Cass.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Leaves simple, alternate. Capitula medium, in a cymose-paniculate or corymbose inflorescence. Involucral bracts in several rows. Receptacle flat or slightly convex, without scales. Florets yellow, the outer sometimes ligulate. Tubular florets hermaphrodite. Achenes fusiform. Pappus-hairs in 2 rows, the outer short, the inner long, denticulate.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves erecto-patent, acute; ligules absent .................................... {\b 1. glutinosa}
\par Leaves patent, obtuse; ligules usually present ................................ {\b 2. tuberosa}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. J. glutinosa} (L.) DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  5}: 476 (1836). Plant with numerous short glandular and long flexuous eglandular hairs. Stem 10-45 cm, simple or branched. Leaves 1·5-3 cm, lanceolate, acute, erecto-patent, sessile. Inflorescence cymose-paniculate or corymbose, or sometimes of a single capitulum; capitula medium; involucre c. 6 mm; outer bracts much shorter than inner, herbaceous, glandular; inner bracts scarious, eglandular, ciliate. Ligules absent; florets yellow. Achenes villous, glandular at the apex; pappus reddish-brown. {\i Stony slopes and rock crevices. S., C. & E. Spain, S. France, Islas Baleares, Malta.} Bl Ga Hs Si.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. J. tuberosa} (L.) DC., {\i loc. cit.} (1836). Like {\b 1} but usually with few long hairs; leaves up to 5 cm, linear to linear-lanceolate, patent, obtuse; inner involucral bracts glandular near apex, not ciliate; ligules usually present, yellow; achenes sericeous, eglandular. 2n = 18.{\i  Rock-crevices and river-gravels. S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 36.        Buphthalmum}             L.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Leaves simple, alternate. Capitula medium to large, solitary on long, leafy peduncles. Involucral bracts in several rows. Receptacle convex, with numerous scales which are folded round the achenes. Ligulate florets in one row, female, yellow. Tubular florets hermaphrodite, yellow. Anthers not bearded at base. Achenes of the ligulate florets 3-angled, more or less compressed; achenes of the inner florets with several angles. Pappus a scarious rim, denticulate or with few, longer teeth.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Lower leaves petiolate, others sessile; pappus denticulate ........ {\b 1. salicifolium} 
\par All leaves, except the uppermost, petiolate; pappus with 
\par    2-3 long, aristate teeth ................................................................. {\b 2. inuloides}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. salicifolium} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 904 (1753) (incl.{\i  B. grandiflorum} L.). Somewhat hairy perennial 15-70(-150) cm. Stem simple or branched, with 1 or more capitula. Lower leaves 5-10 cm, obovate-lanceolate, obtuse, petiolate; upper leaves oblong to linear-lanceolate, usually acute or acuminate, sessile; all entire or remotely denticulate and more or less appressed-pubescent. Involucre 15-30 mm in diameter, hemispherical; bracts lanceolate, acuminate, somewhat sericeous. Ligules 7-20 × 2-3 mm. Achenes 3-4 mm, glabrous; pappus denticulate. 2n = 20.{\i  Mainly in hilly or mountainous country; somewhat calcicole. • C. Europe, extending to E. & S.E. France, N. Italy and C. Jugoslavia.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. inuloides} Moris, Stirp. Sard., App. [1] (1828). Like {\b 1} but stems woody at the base; all leaves, except the uppermost bractlike ones, obovate or spathulate, petiolate, repand-dentate; pappus with 2-3 long, aristate teeth.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • Extreme north of Sardegna, and adjacent islets.} Sa.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 37.           Telekia}           Baumg.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Buphthalmum} but anthers bearded at base; achenes of ligulate and tubular florets similar, terete or slightly compressed, with several angles.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Upper cauline leaves with rounded or shortly cuneate base;
\par   capitula several ............................................................................... {\b 1. speciosa}
\par Upper cauline leaves cordate and semiamplexicaul; 
\par   capitulum solitary ................................................................. {\b 2. speciosissima}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. speciosa} (Schreber) Baumg.,{\i  Enum. Stirp. Transs.}{\b  3}: 150 (1816). Somewhat hairy perennial up to 200 cm. Stem branched above, forming a corymbose inflorescence of 2-8 capitula. Lower leaves c. 30 cm, broadly ovate or rhombic, coarsely crenate-serrate, nearly glabrous above, pubescent beneath, the lower shortly petiolate, cordate, the upper sessile, rounded or broadly cuneate at base. Capitula 50-60 mm in diameter; involucre c. 15 mm in diameter, hemispherical; bracts ovate to ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, the outer with a deflexed herbaceous apex. Ligules 10-15 × c. 1 mm, deep yellow; tubular florets brownish-yellow. Achenes 6 mm, glabrous. 2n = 20.{\i  Mountains of E.C. Europe and the Balkan peninsula; cultivated for ornament and sometimes naturalized elsewhere.} Al Bu Cz Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (W) [Au Be Br Ga Ge Rs (C)].
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. speciosissima} (L.) Less.,{\i  Syn. Gen. Comp.} 209 (1832). Like {\b 1} but up to 50 cm; stem unbranched, with 1 capitulum; upper cauline leaves sessile, cordate, semiamplexicaul; involucral bracts lanceolate, acuminate; achenes 4 mm, pubescent. 2n = 20. {\i Rocky places; calcicole. • N. Italy} ({\i between Lago di Lugano and Lago di Garda}). It.
\par 
\par 138}
\par