{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 scarcely branched from the base, 4-angled, glabrous. Leaves in whorls of 4, 9-25 × (3·5-)4-10(-11) mm, elliptical to ovate, more or less rounded at apex, narrowed into a petiole-like base, paler beneath, with 1 main vein and a distinct reticulate venation, glabrous; margin with fine scabridity in several rows. Inflorescence long-pyramidal; partial inflorescences laxly cymose; bracts lanceolate to filiform; pedicels 0·5-2 mm. Flowers 4-merous; corolla 1·3-2 mm, infundibuliform, white, glabrous; tube 0·7-1·2 mm; lobes 0·5-0·7 mm, about as long as wide. Filaments 0·2-0·4 mm; anthers 0·2-0·3 mm, ovoid to globose, yellowish. Fruit 1-1·5 mm, glabrous, granulate. 2n = 44. {\i Woods. Mediterranean region, ascending to montane zone}. Al Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. A. tinctoria} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }104 (1753) ({\i Galium triandrum} Hyl.). Stock with more or less horizontal, orange stolons; plants usually blackening on drying. Stems (20-)25-80 cm, erect, robust, more or less branched from the base, 4-angled, mostly glabrous. Leaves in whorls of 4-6(-7), 25-40(-50) × 1·2-3(-3·3) mm, lanceolate to linear, obtuse or acute, more or less 3-veined, glabrous or shortly hairy on the veins; margin with fine scabridity in several rows. Inflorescence broadly ovoid; partial inflorescences laxly cymose, with some ovate to elliptical, obtuse to acute, eciliate or shortly ciliate bracts; pedicels 0-2·5 mm. Flowers 3-merous; corolla (2-)3-4(-4·5) mm, narrowly infundibuliform, white; tube 1·2-2·5 mm; lobes (0·8-)1-2 mm, somewhat longer than wide, glabrous or shortly hairy. Filaments 0·4-0·5 mm; anthers 0·5-0·6 mm, yellowish. Fruit 1·5-2 mm, glabrous, finely granulate. 2n = 22, 44.{\i  From N.C. France and S. Scandinavia southwards to C. Italy, S. W. Bulgaria and S. Ural.} Au Bu Cz *Da *Fe Ga Ge He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable in colour on drying, in branching, and in leaf shape and inflorescence; the typical plants have glabrous, ovate and obtuse bracts.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  The relationship of this variability to the diploid and tetraploid condition remains to be studied. {\b A. hungarorum} Borbás, {\i Term. Füz.} {\b 19}: 223 (1896) ({\i A. ciliata} Rochel, non Moench, {\i A. banatica} J. Holub), recorded from various parts of E.C. and S.E. Europe, is constantly black on drying and has relatively wide lanceolate leaves and ciliate, distinctly acute bracts; its status is uncertain, but it seems to be the most distinct of the variants.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. ASPERULA. Annuals. Leaves mostly in whorls of 6-8, 1-veined, rounded at apex. Partial inflorescences capitate, enveloped by leaf-like, long-ciliate bracts. Corolla 4-merous, hypocrateriform, bluish-violet (rarely whitish), papillose-puberulent outside. Ovary and fruit more or less globose, smooth, glabrous.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. A. arvensis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 103 (1753). Stems (5-)10-55 cm. Leaves (4-)10-25(-35) × 0·6-4 mm, the lowest broadly lanceolate; cauline linear-lanceolate. Flowers 4-merous, equalling or shorter than the bracts. Corolla 5-6·5 mm, more or less salverform, usually bluish-violet; tube 4-5·5 mm; lobes 0·5-1·7 mm. Filaments 0·2-0·3 mm; anthers 0·7-1 mm. Fruit 2-3 mm in diameter. {\i Fields and waste places. Most of Europe.} Al Au Bl Bu Co Ga *Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Cz Da No Su.] (S.W. Asia and N. Africa.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  In most of N. Europe only casual, and in much of C. Europe a naturalized alien; the northern limit of its native range is, however, difficult to establish.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. orientalis} Boiss. & Hohen. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 3}): 30 (1843) ({\i A. azurea} Jaub. & Spach), from S.W. Asia, differs chiefly in its corolla 7-12(-14) mm, distinctly exceeding the bract, and its fruits only c. 1·5 mm in diameter. Cultivated for ornament, it has become a casual in S.C. Europe and more rarely elsewhere.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. THLIPHTHISA (Griseb.) Ehrend. Dwarf shrubs or perennial herbs, with woody taproot, without rhizomes or stolons. Leaves in whorls of 6-8(-11), elliptical to linear, 1-veined, obtuse to acuminate at apex. Inflorescence pyramidal to ovoid, leafy more or less throughout; partial inflorescences with bracts and bracteoles. Corolla 4-merous, infundibuliform to rotate, purplish, reddish, brownish, greenish, yellowish or whitish, externally smooth and glabrous or hairy. Ovary and fruit oblong, truncate at apex, glabrous and more or less granulate, rarely hairy.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. A. rigida} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr. }{\b 1}: 89 (1806) ({\i A. kritensis} Coust. & Gand.). Virgate dwarf shrub with squarrose branches; stems 7-30 cm, rigid, ascending, more or less sparsely and shortly hairy; internodes mostly longer than the leaves. Leaves 6-10 × 0·3-1·2 mm, in whorls of 6, the upper narrowly linear, the lower oblong-elliptical, often shortly hairy; vein prominent beneath; margin distinctly revolute. Inflorescence lax, the flowers sessile; bracts distinctly longer than the fruits, long-acuminate, keeled, ciliate, connate at the base. Corolla 2-3·5 mm, infundibuliform, reddish or yellowish, glabrous; tube 1·75-2·5 mm; lobes 0·5-1 mm, shortly acuminate. Style about as long as ovary; stigma oblong-clavate. Fruit c. 1·5 mm, glabrous. 2n = 22.{\i  Dry, rocky places. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  The closely related{\b  Galium suberosum} Sibth. & Sm., {\i op. cit.} 91 (1806), differs from {\b 57} in having a globose stigma, shallowly cup-shaped corolla and narrowly lanceolate leaves 10-15 mm; it is only known for certain from Cyprus and records from Kriti are evidently the result of confusion with {\b 57}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. A. tournefortii} Sieber ex Sprengel, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  1}: 395 (1824) (incl. {\i A. majori} Barbey). Plant glaucous-pruinose; stems (10-)14-30(-35) cm, rigid, stout, more or less woody below, geniculately ascending to erect, glabrous below, puberulent above; internodes mostly as long as the leaves. Leaves 12-15 × 6-10 mm, in whorls of 6(-7), broadly obovate, obtuse, thick, coriaceous; vein scarcely prominent; margin weakly revolute. Inflorescence pyramidal, rather dense, many-flowered, the flowers subsessile; bracts about as long as the fruits, lanceolate, hairy, not connate at the base. Corolla 3-5 mm, infundibuliform, pale yellow, mostly long-hairy; tube c. 3·5 mm; lobes c. 0·7-1·5 mm, triangular. Style about as long as the ovary; stigma shortly clavate. Fruit 1·5-2 mm, puberulent. 2n = 22. {\i Calcareous cliffs. S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. A. muscosa} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 109 (1856). Stems (7-)10-16(-20) cm, herbaceous, ascending, slender, caespitose, mostly shortly hairy; internodes usually shorter than the leaves. Leaves 9-12 × 0·8-1·5 mm, in whorls of 6-8, narrowly lanceolate to linear, long-acuminate, not or scarcely scabrid; vein more or less prominent beneath; margin plane, shortly ciliate. Flowers solitary in the leaf-whorls; pedicels 1-2 mm; bracts leaf-like, much longer than the fruits. Corolla 3-4·5 mm, infundibuliform, pale yellow; tube 2·5-3 mm; lobes 0·5-1·5 mm, ovate, glabrous. Style about as long as ovary stigma shortly clavate. Fruit c. 1·5 mm, glabrous. 2n = 22. {\i Coniferous montane woods. • E.C. Greece} ({\i Olimbos}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. A. baenitzii} Heldr. ex Boiss., Fl. Or., Suppl. 280 (1888). Like {\b 59} but stems 2-4 cm, laxly caespitose, procumbent to ascending; leaves 4-7 × 1·2-2 mm, in whorls of 6, the upper broadly lanceolate and weakly scabrid, the lower much shorter
\par 

\par 
13}
\par