{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 and{\b  H. stramineum} Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Syn.}{\b  2}: 467 (1844), all from Sicilia, {\b H. fontanesii} Camb.,{\i  Mém. Mus. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Paris}){\b  14}: 270 (1827), from Islas Baleares, and{\b  H. boissieri} Nyman, {\i Consp.} 381 (1879), from Gibraltar. The status of these taxa is uncertain.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. H. heldreichii} Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  3}: 229 (1875). Like {\b 6} but leaves linear; inflorescence compact; involucre 3-4 mm in diameter; bracts narrowly ovate, lanate at base.{\i  Cliffs. • W. Kriti.} Cr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. H. ambiguum} (Pers.) C. Presl,{\i  Fl. Sic.} xxix (1826) ({\i H. lamarckii} Camb.). Like {\b 6} but basal leaves and those of non-flowering shoots usually 20-60 mm, oblong-spathulate to spathulate, rarely less than 7 mm wide; involucre ovoid in bud becoming campanulate; bracts fairly closely imbricate, the inner c. 4 times as long as the outer, ovate-oblong, obtuse; achenes covered with white glands. 2n = 28.{\i  Calcareous cliffs. •  Islas Baleares.} Bl.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. H. saxatile} Moris,{\i  Fl. Sard.}{\b  2}: 387 (1840-1843). Aromatic. Stems 15-60 cm, not or slightly angular. Lower leaves 20-70 mm, linear-spathulate to linear-oblanceolate, obtuse, tomentose on both surfaces or glabrescent and greenish above. Inflorescence 2-10 cm across; involucre 4-5 mm in diameter, cylindric-campanulate, later widening; bracts fairly closely imbricate, obtuse, the inner not more than 3 times as long as the outer, the outer ovate, coriaceous throughout or scarious above, the inner narrower and more completely scarious. Achenes minutely papillose. {\i Calcareous rocks and cliffs. • Sardegna; Pantelleria.} Sa Si.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b saxatile}: Outer involucral bracts sparsely lanate. {\i Sardegna}.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b errerae} (Tineo) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 381 (1879): Outer involucral bracts densely tomentose.{\i  Pantelleria}.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. H. italicum} (Roth) G. Don fil. in Loudon, {\i Hort. Brit.} 342 (1830). Aromatic. Stems (10-)20-50 cm, angular. Leaves (5-)10-30(-40) mm, narrowly linear, greenish and sparsely tomentose to glabrescent or rarely white-tomentose. Inflorescence 1·5-8 cm across; involucre 2-4 mm in diameter, oblong-cylindrical to narrowly campanulate; bracts closely and regularly imbricate, all, except usually the outermost, glandular, the inner at least 5 times as long as the outer, narrowly oblong to linear, scarious, the outer broadly rounded, coriaceous, usually tomentose. Achenes with scattered shining white glands or eglandular. 2n = 28.{\i  Dry places. S. Europe.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Achenes eglandular; involucre 3-4 mm in diameter . ({\b c}) subsp. {\b serotinum}
\par 1 Achenes with scattered white glands; involucre 2-3 mm 
\par   in diameter
\par 2 Involucre 2-3 mm in diameter; outer bracts eglandular;
\par   lower leaves usually 20-50 mm ..................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b italicum}
\par 2 Involucre 2 mm in diameter; outer bracts glandular on 
\par   the outside; leaves rarely more than 10 mm ........ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b microphyllum}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b italicum}: Up to 50 cm. Lower leaves usually 20-50 mm. Non-flowering shoots without axillary fascicles of leaves. Involucre 2-3 mm in diameter; outer bracts eglandular. Achenes with scattered white glands.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b microphyllum} (Willd.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 382 (1879): 10-30(-40) cm, less robust. Lower leaves 5-10 mm. Non-flowering shoots with numerous axillary fascicles of leaves. Involucre c. 2 mm in diameter; outer bracts glandular. Achenes with scattered white glands. {\i Coastal cliffs and rocks. Islands of the Mediterranean region.}
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b serotinum} (Boiss.) P. Fourn.,{\i  Quatre Fl. Fr.} 952 (1940): Usually not more than 40 cm. Lower leaves up to 40 mm. Non-flowering shoots without axillary fascicles of leaves. Involucre 3-4 mm in diameter; outer bracts eglandular. Achenes eglandular. 2n = 28.{\i  S.W. Europe}.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Flowers later than subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  H. litoreum} Guss., {\i Fl. Sic. Syn.}{\b  2}: 468 (1844) combines the 30-60 mm long, linear leaves of some variants of{\b  6} with the small cylindrical capitula of {\b 10}, but the involucral bracts are less regularly imbricate, and the outer bracts are often subacute and somewhat longer than in {\b 10}. It occurs on coastal cliffs and rocks in S. Italy and the Sicilian archipelago, but not in Sicilia itself.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. H. orientale} (L.) Gaertner, {\i Fruct. Sem. Pl.}{\b  2}: 404 (1791). Perennial 12-30 cm. Stems erect or ascending from the branched woody stock, densely lanate. Leaves densely white-lanate- basal 20-60 mm, usually crowded, oblong-spathulate, obtuse, narrowed into the long petiole; upper shorter and narrower. Inflorescence 2-8 cm across; involucre 7-10 mm in diameter, hemispherical, shining yellow; inner bracts at least 3 times as long as the outer, linear-spathulate, the outer ovate-orbicular, glabrous.{\i  Lowland cliffs. Greece and Aegean region.} Cr Gr [Rm].
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. zivojinii} Cernjávski & Soska,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  49}: 282 (1940), is intermediate between {\b 11} and {\b 12} and has greyish-white-tomentose, sparsely glandular stems and leaves, the lower leaves c. 70 × 6 mm, narrowly spathulate-lanceolate, and subglobose capitula 7-8 mm in diameter. It occurs on calcareous cliffs at 1000 1700 m in S. Jugoslavia (S. of Ohrid).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. H. plicatum} DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  6}: 183 (1838). Perennial 20-40 cm. Stems erect or ascending from the branched woody stock, glandular-puberulent. Leaves green, glandular and viscid, somewhat lanate on the margin and on the veins beneath; basal crowded, oblong-spathulate, narrowed into the petiole, withering early; lower cauline 30-40 mm, oblong-spathulate, obtuse, sessile, shortly decurrent; upper cauline smaller, linear-lanceolate, acute to acuminate, with somewhat revolute margin. Inflorescence 2-6 cm across; involucre c. 5 mm in diameter, subglobose to widely campanulate; bracts shining yellow, glabrous, often longitudinally plicate, rather laxly imbricate, the inner c. 3 times as long as the outer, linear-oblong, subacute, the outer ovate, obtuse. Achenes brown, minutely white-tuberculate.{\i  Dry mountain pastures. S. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr Ju.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. H. arenarium} (L.) Moench,{\i  Meth.} 575 (1794). Herbaceous perennial 8-30(-50) cm. Plant not sweet-smelling. Stems erect or ascending from the stout, branched stock, appressed-lanate, greyish-white. Leaves more or less densely whitish-tomentose; lower 50-70 mm, obovate-oblong, obtuse, 1-veined, narrowed into the petiole; upper narrowly oblong-lanceolate to filiform, subacute, not apiculate. Non-flowering shoots with rosettes of broadly spathulate, petiolate leaves. Inflorescence 2-5 cm across; involucre 4-5 mm in diameter, subglobose, becoming hemispherical, yellow to reddish or ange, shining; bracts closely imbricate, the inner 5 times as long as the outer, narrowly spathulate, the outer suborbicular, somewhat tomentose at base. Outer florets hermaphrodite. Achenes scabrid. 2n = ?14, 28. {\i Dry, sandy places. From the Netherlands, S. Sweden and Estonia southwards to S. Germany, S. Bulgaria and W. Kazakhstan}. Au Be Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Ho Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par 
\par 130}
\par