{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 635 (1936): Stems up to 30 cm. Indumentum very dense, white. Basal leaves 3-9 cm, lanceolate. Capitula subtended by 0-1(-2) bracts. Involucre 6-8 mm; bracts appressed to erecto-patent, not elongate.{\i  C., S. & E. Greece}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   I. rotundifolia} (Halácsy) W. Greuter,{\i  Boissiera}{\b  13}: 140 (1967) ({\i I. candida} var.{\i  rotundifolia} Halácsy), with almost orbicular basal leaves, long woody stems densely clothed with sericeous persistent leaf-bases and flowering stems shorter than the leaves, occurs on maritime rocks in S. Greece (Malea). Its status requires further investigation.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. I. verbascifolia} (Willd.) Hausskn.,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver.} nov. ser.,{\b  7}: 32 (1895) ({\i I. candida} subsp.{\i  verbascifolia} (Willd.) Hayek). Like {\b 13} but stems up to 50 cm; indumentum lanate, not sericeous, often rather sparse; basal leaves usually ovate-lanceolate and shortly cuneate at base, often acute, crenate-serrate to entire; veins usually prominent beneath; involucre 7-12 mm; ligules shorter or longer than involucre.{\i  Balkan peninsula and S.E. Italy.} Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ligules exceeding involucre by 2 mm or more
\par 
2 Involucre (8-)10-12 mm ........................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b verbascifolia}
\par 
2 Involucre 7-10 mm
\par 
3 Outer involucral bracts not more than ½ as long as inner
\par 
   ................................................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b aschersoniana}
\par 
3 Outer involucral bracts at least ½ as long as inner ....... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b parnassica}
\par 
1 Ligules shorter to slightly longer than involucre
\par 
4 Outer involucral bracts less than ½ as long as inner;
\par 
  most capitula subtended by 0-2 bracts ............................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b methanea}
\par 
4 Outer involucral bracts at least ½ as long as inner;
\par 
  most capitula subtended by 2 or more bracts
\par 
5 Ligules slightly exceeding involucre ............................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b parnassica}
\par 
5 Ligules shorter than involucre ..................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b heterolepis}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b verbascifolia}: stems 20-50 cm, stout. Basal leaves 6-9 × 2·5-4 cm. Capitula subtended by numerous linear-spathulate bracts which pass gradually into the outer involucral bracts. Involucre (8-)10-12 mm; bracts obtuse, except the innermost. Ligules exceeding the involucre by 2 mm or more. 2n = 16.{\i  From W. Jugoslavia to N.W. Greece; S.E. Italy} ({\i Monte Gargano}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b aschersoniana} (Janka) Tutin,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  67}: 283 (1973) ({\i I. aschersoniana} Janka, {\i I. candida} subsp.{\i  aschersoniana} (Janka) Hayek): Stem 25-45 cm, rather slender. Basal leaves 4-8 × 1·5-2·5(-3) cm. Capitula usually subtended by several ovate to elliptical bracts. Involucre 7-8 mm; outer bracts c. ½ as long as inner, obtuse, the inner acute. Ligules exceeding the involucre by 2 mm or more. •{\i  N., C. & E. Greece, S. & E. Bulgaria, S. Jugoslavia} ({\i Makedonija}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b parnassica} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Tutin, {\i loc. cit.} (1973) ({\i I. parnassica} Boiss. & Heldr.): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but capitula subtended by 2-4 lanceolate bracts; involucre 7-10 mm; outer bracts at least ½ as long as inner, all acute; ligules exceeding the involucre by less than 2 mm. •{\i  C. & S. Greece}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b methanea} (Hausskn.) Tutin,{\i  loc. cit.} (1913) ({\i I. methanea }Hausskn., {\i I. candida} subsp.{\i  methanea} (Hausskn.) Hayek): Stems 15-30 cm, slender. Basal leaves 3-4·5 × 1·5-2 cm Capitula subtended by 0-2 small, narrow bracts. Involucre c. 7 mm; outer bracts less than ½ as long as inner, all acute. Ligules not exceeding the involucre. •{\i  C. & S. Greece}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b heterolepis} (Boiss.) Tutin,{\i  loc. cit. }(1973) ({\i I. heterolepis} Boiss.): Stems 12-25 cm, stout. Basal leaves 3·5-5(-7) × 2·5-3·5 cm. Capitula subtended by several ovate bracts. Involucre c. 8 mm; outer bracts at least ½ as long as inner, obtuse. Ligules not exceeding the involucre.{\i  Karpathos.} ({\i E. Aegean region, Anatolia}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. I. subfloccosa} Rech. fil.,{\i  Anzeig. Akad. Wiss.} ({\i Wien}){\b  93}: 101 (1956). Like {\b 13} but plant densely glandular; stems usually with branches 5-15 cm; indumentum of young leaves dense and lanate, becoming floccose; veins very prominent beneath; involucre 11-12 mm; bracts very numerous, gradually increasing in length from the outer inwards, white-tomentellous and glandular; ligules 2-3 mm longer than the involucre. •{\i  E. Greece} ({\i S. Evvoia}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. I. conyza} DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  5}: 464 (1836) ({\i I. vulgaris} Trevisan). Erect, puberulent to tomentose perennial 30-120 cm. Lower leaves 9-15 × 2-6 cm, elliptical or oblong-lanceolate, serrulate, the upper sessile, cuneate at base. Involucre 9-15 mm, cylindrical; bracts puberulent, the outer 4-6 × 1 mm, triangular, with recurved apex, the inner 9-11 × 0·4-0·7 mm, linear. Ligules 7-9 mm, shorter than the involucre. Achenes 2-2-5 mm, hairy; pappus 3-4 times as long as achene, with c. 30 setae. 2n = 32.{\i  W., C. & S. Europe extending to E. Denmark and N.W. Ukraine.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. I. thapsoides} Sprengel,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Halensis }16 (1810). Erect, densely villous perennial 30-85 cm. Lower leaves 18-22 × 5·5-8 cm, ovate, serrate, the upper decurrent. Involucre 8-15 mm, cylindrical; bracts densely hairy, the outer  4-7 × c. 1·5 mm, lanceolate, erect, the inner 8-10 × 0·5-0·7 mm, linear. Ligules 7-9 mm, not exceeding the involucre. Achenes 2-2·5 mm, hairy; pappus with c. 30 setae. {\i Damp, shady places. Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i Caucasian region.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. I. bifrons} (L.) L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1236 (1763). Erect, glabrous to glandular-hairy perennial 30-100 cm. Lower leaves 10-30 × 2-6 cm, oblong, entire to coarsely dentate, the upper decurrent. Involucre 9-12 mm, cylindrical; bracts sparsely glandular or hairy, the outer 3-4 × c. 1 mm, linear-lanceolate, erect or with slightly recurved apex, the inner 8-10 × 0·7-1 mm, linear. Ligules 8-10 mm, not exceeding the involucre. Achenes c. 2 mm, hairy; pappus with c. 30 setae. •{\i  From S.C. France to Romania and Bulgaria.} Al Bu Ga It Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  I. thapsoides} subsp.{\b  urumoffii} (Degen) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 605 (1931), from S. Bulgaria, appears to be a variant of {\b 18}. It has long patent hairs on the upper part of the stem, the leaves and involucral bracts appressed-hairy, and the upper leaves only shortly decurrent. {\i I. bifrons} forma{\i  pubescens} Velen., also from S. Bulgaria, is probably identical with this taxon.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. I. crithmoides} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 883 (1753). Glabrous, rarely somewhat glandular small shrub up to 100 cm. Leaves 2-4·5(-6) × 0·2-0·4(-0·9) cm, linear to linear-lanceolate, fleshy, entire or 3-toothed at apex. Capitula medium. Involucre hemispherical; outer bracts 3-4 × 0·5-1 mm, linear, erect, the inner 5-10 × 0·5-1 mm, linear-subulate. Ligules 14-25 mm, exceeding the involucre. Achenes 2-3 mm, hairy pappus with c. 30 setae. 2n = 18.{\i  Coasts of S. & W. Europe northwards to} c. 55°{\i  N. in Britain; inland in E. Spain. }Al Bl Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hb Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 32.             Dittrichia}           W. Greuter
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Cupularia} Gren. & Godron, non Link)
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Inula} but capitula medium to small; achenes cylindrical, abruptly contracted below the pappus; pappus-hairs connate near base.
\par 

\par 
136}
\par