{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b arenarium}: Upper leaves oblong-lanceolate to broadly linear; margin usually flat.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ponticum} (Velen.) Clapham, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  70}: 18 (1975) ({\i H. arenarium} var.{\i  ponticum} Velen.): Upper leaves narrowly linear to filiform; margin strongly revolute.{\i  W. shore of Black Sea}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Intermediates between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}) have been reported, and{\b  H. buschii} Juz., {\i Spisok Rast. Gerb. Fl. SSSR}{\b  13}: 97 (1955), is stated to be a hybrid between subsp. ({\b a}) and {\b 14}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. H. graveolens} (Bieb.) Sweet,{\i  Hort. Brit.} 223 (1826). Like {\b 13} but sweet-smelling; stems arising from slender, creeping underground stolons; indumentum laxer, villous-lanate and plant often yellowish-green; basal leaves distinctly 3-veined, the upper cauline often apiculate; outer florets female.{\i  Damp mountain grassland and open pineforest. Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. XEROCHLAENA (DC.) Bentham. Herbs; leaves with flat margin; capitula medium, solitary or in a terminal cluster; involucre exceeding the florets; bracts variously coloured, erectopatent at first, later patent, the middle the longest.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. H. foetidum} (L.) Cass.,{\i  Dict. Sci. Nat.}{\b  25}: 469 (1822). Foetid biennial 20-100 cm. Leaves 30-70 mm, green and sparsely pubescent above, white-tomentose beneath, the lowest oblong, narrowed into a long petiole; middle and upper broadly lanceolate-cordate, sessile and amplexicaul. Inflorescence compact; involucre 15-20 mm in diameter when open; bracts stramineous, shining, ovate, acute. Achenes minutely tuberculate. 2n = 14.{\i  Naturalized on maritime rocks and sands and on roadsides in W. Europe.} [Ga Hs Lu.] ({\i S. Africa.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. H. bracteatum} (Vent.) Andrews,{\i  Bot. Reposit}{\b . 6}: sub t. 428 (1805). Annual 40-120 cm, not aromatic. Stems erect, robust, branched, scabrid. Leaves 50-120 cm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, shortly petiolate, green and more or less glabrous on both surfaces. Capitula solitary, 25-70 mm in diameter; involucral bracts coriaceous below, scarious and shining above; outer short, suborbicular; middle lanceolate; inner narrow, acuminate. Achenes glabrous.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized in Spain.} [Hs.] ({\i Australia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Some variants have golden-yellow involucral bracts and others have the outer bracts red and the rest white.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   H. petiolare} Hilliard & B. L. Burtt, {\i Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  32}: 357 (1973) ({\i H. petiolatum} auct., non (L.) DC.), a white-tomentose woody perennial 20-40 cm, with ovate leaves 15-25 mm, abruptly narrowed into the petiole, and terminal corymbs of creamy-white capitula 3 mm in diameter, is more or less naturalized in hedges and by roads in W.C. Portugal. It is commonly cultivated for its ornamental foliage under the name of {\i Gnaphalium lanatum} hort. and is native of S. Africa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 25.             Lasiopogon}          Cass.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Holub.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals, much-branched from base; lateral stems procumbent, spreading in a circle. Leaves alternate. Capitula small, 3-6 aggregated in terminal clusters. Receptacle flat, without scales. Involucral bracts in 1-2 rows, the inner scarious, longer than the florets, patent in fruit. Florets all tubular; female in 1 or more rows, filiform, the corolla entire; hermaphrodite few, in the middle of the receptacle, the corolla widening upwards, 4-dentate. Achenes slightly compressed; pappus hairs plumose, deciduous.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. muscoides} (Desf.) DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  6}: 246 (1838). Whitish-tomentose, pulvinate herb. Lateral stems 5-12 cm, slender. Cauline leaves 1-3 × 0·4 0·7 mm, oblanceolate, obtuse, remote leaves subtending clusters of capitula 3-7 × 1-2 mm, oblong-spathulate. Inner involucral bracts c. 2·2 × 0·5 mm, lanate on the back, with scarious margin, glabrous and rounded at the apex, pale brown, shining in fruit. Female florets more than 10, the hermaphrodite 3-4. Achenes 0·5 × 0·15 mm, oblong-obovoid, brown, minutely papillose.{\i  Dry, sandy-places. C. & S.E. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 26.          Antennaria}         Gaertner
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By G. Halliday
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Dioecious, usually tomentose perennial herbs, with basal leaf rosettes and erect, simple, leafy, flowering stems with a terminal cluster of 1-8(-12) shortly pedunculate, small capitula. Involucral bracts in several rows, erect in fruit. Receptacle flat, without scales. Female florets filiform-tubular; functionally male florets tubular; pappus-hairs in several rows, those of the functionally male florets conspicuously thickened above.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sexual or apomictic; in the latter case often only the female plants are known. In the sexual species {\b 1} and {\b 5}, little taxonomic importance is usually attached to widely differing amounts of tomentum on the leaves; in the apomictic species {\b 3} and {\b 4} such variation appears to have a phytogeographical and cytological significance.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Short glandular hairs are usually present but are often concealed by the tomentum.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: K. Urbanska-Worytkiewicz,{\i  Ber. Geobot. Inst. Rübel}({\i Zürich}){\b  40}: 79-166 (1970).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Caespitose; stolons absent; basal leaves oblanceolate to linear
\par 
2 Male florets cream-coloured, with purple anthers; pappus
\par 
  exceeding styles by less than 1·75 mm at maturity ...................... {\b 5. carpatica}
\par 
2 Male florets purplish, with yellow anthers; pappus 
\par 
  exceeding styles by more than 1·75 mm at maturity ...................... {\b 6. villifera}
\par 
1 Mat-forming; short stolons present; basal leaves obovate
\par 
  to oblanceolate-spathulate
\par 
3 Basal leaves densely tomentose beneath
\par 
4 Upper half of involucral bracts broadly obovate or 
\par 
  oblong-obovate, white or pink, petaloid ........................................... {\b 1. dioica}
\par 
4 Upper half of involucral bracts lanceolate, dark greenish-brown ... {\b 3. alpina}
\par 
3 Basal leaves not densely tomentose beneath
\par 
5 Upper half of involucral bracts broadly obovate or
\par 
  oblong-obovate, white or yellowish, petaloid ..................... {\b 2. nordhageniana}
\par 
5 Upper half of involucral bracts lanceolate, dark
\par 
  greenish-brown ............................................................................. {\b 4. porsildii}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. dioica} (L.) Gaertner,{\i  Fruct. Sem. Pl.}{\b  2}: 410 (1791). Mat-forming, tomentose perennial up to 20(-30) cm, with woody stock and slender, branched stolons with numerous leaf-rosettes. Basal leaves up to 35 × 8 mm, obovate-spathulate, obtuse, apiculate or emarginate; lower surface densely tomentose, upper surface usually glabrous or subglabrous. Upper cauline leaves with a short, green, glabrous mucro. Capitula 2-8(-12), usually subsessile but peduncles occasionally up to 4 cm. Upper half of involucral bracts white or pink, broadly obovate in male plants, oblong-obovate in female plants. 2n = 28.{\i  Heaths, dry grassland and sandy or stony places. Much of Europe, but local in the south and only on mountains. }Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par 

\par 
131}
\par