{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3 Middle and upper cauline leaves cuneate at base, not 
\par 
  amplexicaul or decurrent
\par 
4 Pappus 3-4 times as long as the achene, with c. 30 setae;
\par 
  leaves puberulent to thinly grey-tomentose beneath ..................... {\b 16. conyza}
\par 
4 Pappus about twice as long as the achene, with 10-15 
\par 
  setae; leaves densely white-tomentose or -lanate 
\par 
  beneath ...................................................................... ({\b 13-15}).{\b  candida} group
\par 
3 Middle and upper cauline leaves amplexicaul or decurrent,
\par 
  usually ± cordate at base
\par 
5 Cauline leaves decurrent
\par 
6 Stem and leaves glabrous or with sparse, long, patent hairs ........ {\b 18. bifrons}
\par 
6 Stem and leaves densely villous with appressed hairs ............ {\b 17. thapsoides}
\par 
5 Cauline leaves amplexicaul but not decurrent
\par 
7 Achenes glabrous; capitula 7-11 mm in diameter .................... {\b 3. germanica}
\par 
7 Achenes hairy; capitula at least 15 mm in diameter ...................... {\b 9. caspica}
\par 
2 Ligules 12 mm or more, more than 1½ times as long as
\par 
  the involucre
\par 
8 Leaves with 3-7 parallel veins ..................................................... {\b 7. ensifolia}
\par 
8 Leaves pinnately veined or the veins obscure
\par 
9 Small shrub; leaves not more than 5(-8) mm wide, fleshy,
\par 
  with obscure lateral veins ...................................................... {\b 19. crithmoides}
\par 
9 Herbs; leaves usually more than 5 mm wide, not fleshy,
\par 
  with distinct lateral veins
\par 
10 Upper surface of leaves with prominent reticulate venation
\par 
11 Outer involucral bracts about as long as inner, all 
\par 
   linear to lanceolate; lower surface of leaves and 
\par 
   involucral bracts ± densely hairy ....................................................... {\b 6. hirta}
\par 
11 Outer involucral bracts ovate to oblong-lanceolate, ± 
\par 
   spathulate at apex, shorter than inner, the inner 
\par 
   linear; lower surface of leaves and involucral bracts
\par 
   glabrous or sparsely hairy
\par 
12 Upper cauline leaves cordate at base and distinctly 
\par 
   amplexicaul .................................................................................... {\b 4. salicina}
\par 
12 Upper cauline leaves cuneate at base, not amplexicaul ......... {\b 5. spiraeifolia}
\par 
10 Upper surface of leaves without prominent reticulate venation
\par 
13 Cauline leaves cuneate at base, not amplexicaul
\par 
14 Stem 30-60 cm; outer involucral bracts ovate-lanceolate,
\par 
   with recurved apex ...................................................................... {\b 2. helvetica}
\par 
14 Stem 10-25(-35) cm; outer involucral bracts lanceolate,
\par 
   with appressed apex ................................................................... {\b 12. montana}
\par 
13 Cauline leaves ± cordate at base and amplexicaul
\par 
15 Outer involucral bracts patent or deflexed
\par 
16 Outer involucral bracts 0·5-0·8 mm wide, longer than 
\par 
   inner; ligules 15-25 mm ............................................................ {\b 8. britannica}
\par 
16 Outer involucral bracts 1-1·3 mm wide, shorter than 
\par 
   inner; ligules 9-14 mm ................................................................... {\b 9. caspica}
\par 
15 Outer involucral bracts usually erect
\par 
17 Outer involucral bracts 5-7 mm, distinctly shorter than
\par 
   inner; capitula 25-30 mm in diameter ................................ {\b 10. oculus-christi}
\par 
17 Outer involucral bracts c. 10 mm, almost as long as 
\par 
   inner; capitula 50-80 mm in diameter ................................... {\b 11. helenioides}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. I. helenium} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 881 (1753). Erect, robust, tomentose perennial 60-250 cm. Leaves grey-tomentose beneath, the lower 40-70 × 10-25 cm, ovate-elliptical, the upper cordate-amplexicaul. Capitula large; involucre 15-20 mm, hemispherical; bracts tomentose. the outer 10-13 × 4-5 mm, ovate, recurved, the inner 13-18 × 1·5-2·5 mm, lanceolate. Ligules 30-40 mm, much exceeding the involucre. Achenes 3-5 mm, glabrous; pappus with c. 30 setae. 2n = 20.{\i  Probably native in S.E. Europe; formerly widely cultivated elsewhere as a medicinal plant and for ornament, and naturalized almost throughout Europe.} *Bu *Gr It Ju Rm *Rs (W, K, E) Sa [Au Be Br Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It No Po Rs (N, B, C ) Su]. ({\i W. & C. Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. I. helvetica} Weber, {\i Pl. Min. Cogn. Dec.} 17 (1784) ({\i I. vaillantii} (All.) Vill.). Erect, grey-tomentose perennial up to 150 cm. Leaves entire to serrate-dentate, puberulent above, grey tomentose beneath, the lower 8-12 × 1·5-2·5 cm, lanceolate or elliptic-lanceolate, the upper sessile, cuneate at base. Capitula medium to large; involucre 10-13 mm, hemispherical; bracts tomentose, the outer 6-7 × 1·5-2 mm, ovate-lanceolate with recurved apex, the inner 8-10 × 0·7-1 mm, linear. Ligules 15-20 mm, much exceeding the involucre. Achenes 2-2·5 mm, glabrous or sparsely hairy at apex; pappus with c. 30 setae.{\i  Woods and stream-sides.  • From E. Spain to S.W. Germany and N.W. Italy.} Ga Ge He Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. I. germanica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 883 (1753). Erect, somewhat tomentose perennial 30-60 cm. Leaves denticulate, sparsely hairy above, moderately densely hairy beneath, the lower 4·5-10 × 1-3 cm, oblong to ovate, the upper sessile, cordate, amplexicaul. Capitula 7-11 mm in diameter; involucre 7-10 mm, cylindrical; bracts tomentose, the outer c. 3 × 2 mm, ovate with recurved apex, the inner 5-8 × 0·5-0·7 mm, linear. Ligules 8-11 mm, not or only slightly exceeding the involucre. Achenes c. 1·5 mm, glabrous; pappus with c. 30 setae. 2n = 16.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe, extending northwards to} c. 54° {\i N. in C. Russia.} Al Au Bu Cz Ge Gr Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. salicina} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 882 (1753). Erect, glabrous or sparsely hairy perennial 25-75 cm. Leaves with prominent reticulate venation above, the lower 2-6(-10) × 0·5-3(-4·5) cm, linear-lanceolate to ovate, the upper sessile, cordate, amplexicaul. Capitula medium to large; involucre 8-12 mm, hemispherical; bracts glabrous but ciliate, the outer 5-7 × 2-2·5 mm, lanceolate with patent apex, the inner 7-11 × 1-2 mm, linear. Ligules 15-25 mm, much exceeding the involucre. Achenes 1·5-2 mm, glabrous; pappus with 30-35 setae.{\i  Most of Europe, but very rare in the islands and the extreme north.} Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Sa Su Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b salicina}: Stem setose at base, otherwise glabrous; leaves entire or remotely denticulate, glabrous or subglabrous. 2n = 16. {\i Throughout the range of the species except parts of the south-east.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b aspera} (Poiret) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 602 (1931) ({\i I. aspera} Poiret; incl.{\i  I. sabuletorum} Czern. ex Lavrenko): Stem sparsely hairy; leaves denticulate, sparsely hairy on the veins beneath.{\i  S. Europe, extending northwards to C. Russia}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. I. spiraeifolia} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1219 (1759) ({\i I. squarrosa} L.). Erect perennial 30-80 cm, pubescent below, glabrous above. Leaves with prominent reticulate venation above, sparsely hairy at least on the margin and veins beneath, the lower 5-8 × 1·2-2 cm, lanceolate to ovate, denticulate or serrulate, the upper sessile, cuneate and slightly rounded at base. Capitula medium; involucre 10-12 mm, hemispherical; bracts glabrous, the outer 4-6 × 2-3 mm, ovate-spathulate with recurved apex, the inner 8-10 × 1-1·5 mm, linear. Ligules 14-17 mm, much exceeding the involucre. Achenes 1·5-2 mm, glabrous; pappus with c. 30 setae. 2n = 16. •{\i  From W.C. France to Bulgaria.} Al Bu Co Ga He Hu It Ju ?Rm ?Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. I. hirta} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 883 (1753). Erect, hirsute perennial 15-50 cm. Leaves with prominent reticulate venation on both surfaces, hirsute, entire or denticulate, the lower 4-8 × 1-2 cm, obovate- or oblanceolate-oblong, the upper sessile, not or slightly amplexicaul. Capitula medium to large; involucre 10-13 mm, hemispherical; bracts hirsute, the outer 10-12 × 1·2-2 mm, lanceolate,
\par 

\par
134}
\par