{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Ligules 10-12 mm, distinctly exceeding the involucre ..................... {\b 1. viscosa} 
\par Ligules 4-7 mm, not or scarcely exceeding the involucre ........... {\b 2. graveolens}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. viscosa} (L.) W. Greuter,{\i  Exsicc. Genav.}{\b  4}: 71 (1973) ({\i Inula viscosa} (L.) Aiton). Densely glandular, viscid perennial 40-130 cm; stems woody at base. Lower leaves 30-70 × 2-30 mm, linear to oblong-lanceolate, acute, remotely denticulate; upper sessile, semiamplexicaul. Capitula medium; involucre 6-8 mm; outer bracts 1-2 × 0·5-0·7 mm, linear-lanceolate, acute, erect; inner 6-8 × 0·6-0·8 mm. Ligules 10-12 mm, distinctly exceeding the involucre. Achenes c. 2 mm, hairy; pappus with 15 setae. 2n = 18, 34.{\i  Waste places. S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b viscosa}: Stems erect; leaves 30-60 × 4-30 mm, oblong-lanceolate; margin flat.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, except S.W. Portugal.}
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b revoluta} (Hoffmanns. & Link) P. Silva & Tutin,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  67}: 282 (1973) ({\i Inula revoluta} Hoffmanns. & Link): Stems often procumbent; leaves 60-70 × 2-3 mm, linear; margin revolute.{\i  S.W. Portugal}.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. D. graveolens} (L.) W. Greuter,{\i  Exsicc. Genav.}{\b  4}: 71 (1973) ({\i Inula graveolens} (L.) Desf.). Erect, densely glandular annual 20-50 cm, smelling of camphor. Lower leaves 20-75 × 2-13 mm, lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, entire or remotely denticulate; upper sessile, semiamplexicaul. Capitula small; involucre 4-7 mm; outer bracts c. 3 × 0·5-1 mm, linear-triangular; inner 4-7 × 0·7-1 mm, linear-lanceolate. Ligules 4-7 mm, not or scarcely exceeding the involucre. Achenes c. 2 mm, hairy; pappus with c. 30 setae. 2n = 18, 20+0-2 B. {\i S. & W. Europe, northwards to N.C. France.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [He].
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 33.          Pulicaria}            Gaertner
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D. Ratcliffe
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Inula} but the pappus with an outer row of more or less connate scales.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perennial; ligules exceeding the involucre by 5 mm or more, patent
\par 2 Basal leaves green at anthesis; stolons absent; capitula few ............ {\b 1. odora}
\par 2 Basal leaves withered at anthesis; stolons present;
\par   capitula usually numerous ........................................................ {\b 2. dysenterica}
\par 1 Usually annual; ligules not exceeding the involucre by 
\par   more than 3 mm, usually erect
\par 3 Pappus with 18-25 hairs, the surrounding scales connate
\par   at base only ........................................................................................ {\b 5. sicula}
\par 3 Pappus with 8-10 hairs, the surrounding scales connate
\par   for at least 1/2 their length
\par 4 Leaves lanceolate to elliptical, soft, usually undulate;
\par   hairs on achenes appressed ............................................................ {\b 3. vulgaris}
\par 4 Leaves, except the lowest, linear to narrowly oblong, rigid,
\par    not or scarcely undulate; hairs on achenes erecto-patent ............ {\b 4. paludosa}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. odora} (L.) Reichenb., {\i Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 239 (1831). Perennial with a short stock. Stems 20-70 cm, villous or lanate, simple or sparingly branched. Basal leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate, shortly petiolate, green at anthesis; cauline leaves oblong-lanceolate, semiamplexicaul, the lower auriculate, glandular-denticulate, green and scabrid above, greyish-lanate beneath. Capitula 1 to few, 2-3 cm in diameter, hemispherical; peduncles 3-15 cm, thickened above, usually with several bracts. Involucral bracts linear, long-acuminate, more or less lanate and glandular. Ligules c. 8 mm longer than the involucre, patent. Pappus of scales free almost to the base, surrounding 10-12 hairs. Achenes c. 2 mm, hairy. 2n = 18+0-6 B.{\i  Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. dysenterica} (L.) Bernh., {\i Syst. Verz. Erfurt }153 (1800). Perennial with scaly stolons. Stems 20-60 cm, lanate or tomentose, freely branched. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, the lowest petiolate, withered at anthesis, the others sessile, usually widest near the semiamplexicaul, auriculate base; all undulate, remotely serrate, green and scabrid above, greyish-tomentose beneath. Capitula usually numerous, 1*5-3 cm in diameter, hemispherical; peduncles 1*5-2*5 cm, not thickened above, without or with 1 bract. Involucral bracts linear to subulate, more or less lanate and glandular. Ligules c. 5 mm longer than the involucre, patent. Pappus of scales connate for more than 1/2 their length, surrounding 14-20 hairs. Achenes c. 1·5 mm, hairy. 2n = 18, 20. {\i Damp places. S., W. & C. Europe, extending northwards to Denmark.} All except Az Fa Fe Is No Rs (N, B, ?C, E) Sb; extinct (except as a casual) in Su.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. vulgaris} Gaertner,{\i  Fruct. Sem. Pl.}{\b  2}: 461 (1791) ({\i P. prostrata} Ascherson). Annual, more or less hairy, often with glandular hairs. Stems 7-30(-45) cm, greenish or brownish, pubescent; branches erecto-patent, overtopping the main stem. Basal leaves oblanceolate, petiolate, withered at anthesis; middle and upper leaves lanceolate to elliptical, gradually narrowed to the semiamplexicaul but not auriculate base, soft and usually undulate. Capitula usually numerous, 0*8-1 cm in diameter, hemispherical; peduncles up to c. 1*5 cm, scarcely thickened after anthesis, usually with several bracts. Involucral bracts linear to linear-lanceolate, villous and glandular, the inner with setaceous apex. Ligules about equalling the involucre, erect. Pappus of scales, connate for at least 1/2 their length, surrounding 8-10 hairs. Achene c. 1·5 mm, with sparse, appressed hairs. 2n = 18. {\i Seasonally wet places. Most of Europe, from S. England, S. Sweden and C. Russia southwards}. Al Au Be Br Bu ?Cr Cz †Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. paludosa} Link in Schrader,{\i  Neues Jour. Bot.}{\b  1}({\b 3}): 142 (1806). Like {\b 3} but middle and upper leaves linear to narrowly oblong, rigid, not or scarcely undulate; inner involucral bracts acute; ligules up to 3 mm longer than the involucre, sometimes patent; achene c. 1 mm, with erecto-patent hairs. 2n = 18+0-1 B.{\i  Seasonally wet places. • Iberian peninsula.} Hs.Lu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 {\i  P. paludosa}  may be conspecific with {\b P. arabica} (L.) Cass.,{\i  Dict. Sci. Nat.}{\b  44}: 94 (1826), from N. Africa, which has once been collected in Kriti.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  P. microcephala} Lange, {\i Bol. Soc. Brot. }{\b 1}: 42, 50 (1883), described from W. Portugal (Ilha Berlenga), is a dwarf much branched plant with leaves mostly less than 5 mm long and very numerous capitula 0·4-0·5 cm in diameter; it is probably a variant of {\b 4}, but further investigation is needed. A similar variant has been collected once in S.W. Spain (S.W. of Cádiz).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. sicula} (L.) Moris,{\i  Fl. Sard.}{\b  2}: 363 (1840-1843). Like {\b 3} but middle and upper leaves linear, rigid, not undulate; peduncles up to 4 cm, thickened after anthesis; involucral bracts rather sparsely pubescent and glandular, the inner subacute; pappus-hairs 18-25, the scales connate at the base only; achene rather densely appressed-hairy.{\i  Seasonally damp places. Mediterranean region.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Hs It Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par 137}
\par