{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 the inner 10-12 × 0·7-1 mm, linear. Ligules 15-30 mm, much exceeding the involucre. Achenes c. 2 mm, glabrous; pappus with c. 30 setae. 2n = 16.{\i  S., C. & E. Europe, northwards to} 57°{\i  N. in Russia}. Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, E) [Rs (N)].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. I. ensifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 883 (1753). Erect, glabrous or floccose-tomentose perennial 10-60 cm. Leaves glabrous except for the ciliate margin, with 3-7(-13) prominent parallel veins, entire, the lower 3·5-9 × 0·2-1 cm, linear-lanceolate or lanceolate, the upper sessile, not or slightly amplexicaul. Capitula medium to large; involucre 10-13 mm, hemispherical; bracts sericeous-lanate at base, the outer 8-10 × 1·3-3·5 mm, triangular-ovate with patent apex, the inner 8-10 × 1-1·5 mm, linear-lanceolate. Ligules 15-22 mm, much exceeding the involucre. Achenes c. 2 mm, glabrous or setulose near apex; pappus with c. 30 setae. 2n = 16.{\i  E. & E.C. Europe, extending westwards to N. Italy; Gotland.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b I. serpentinica} Rech. fil. & Goulimy, {\i Anzeig. Akad. Wiss.} ({\i Wien}){\b  94}: 26 (1957), from W. Makedhonia, is like {\b 7} but has leaves with 7-12 prominent veins, a denser and longer indumentum in all parts, and never more than one capitulum on a stem. It is probably best regarded as a subspecies of {\b 7}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. I. britannica} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 882 (1753). Erect, pubescent biennial 15-75 cm. Leaves sparsely pubescent above, densely pubescent beneath, rarely almost sericeous, entire or serrulate, the lower 4-15 × (0·5-)1-2·5(-4) cm, elliptical or ovate-elliptical, the upper sessile and slightly amplexicaul. Capitula medium to large involucre 7-9 mm, hemispherical; bracts sericeous at the base the outer 7-12 × 0·5-0·8 mm, linear-lanceolate, patent or deflexed, the inner 5-8 × 0·4-0·6 mm, linear-lanceolate. Ligules 15-25 mm, much exceeding the involucre. Achenes 1-1·5 mm, hairy or subglabrous; pappus with 15-25 setae. 2n = 32.{\i  Europe except the islands and much of the north and west.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu [Fe].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. I. caspica} Blume in Ledeb., {\i Ind. Sem. Horti Dorpat.} 10 (1822). Erect biennial 20-70 cm. Leaves glabrous or sparsely hispid, entire, the lower 8-15 × 1-2·5 cm, narrowly oblong or lanceolate, the upper more or less amplexicaul. Capitula at least 15 mm in diameter; involucre 10-13 mm, hemispherical; bracts sparsely scabrid-hirsute, the outer 5-8 × 1-1·3 mm, linear or linear-lanceolate, with recurved apex, the inner 7-10 × c. 1 mm, linear. Ligules 9-14 mm, equalling or slightly exceeding the involucre. Achenes 1-1·5 mm, hairy; pappus with 20-25 setae. {\i Shores of the Caspian Sea. S.E. Russia and W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E). ({\i W. & C. Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. I. oculus-christi} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 881 (1753). Erect, sericeous-lanate perennial 15-60 cm. Leaves sericeous-lanate, entire or denticulate, the lower 7-14 × 1·5-3·5(-4·5) cm, oblong or oblong-lanceolate to obovate-elliptical, the upper more or less amplexicaul. Capitula 25-30 mm in diameter; involucre 10-15 mm, hemispherical; bracts sericeous-lanate, the outer 5-7 × c. 1 mm, lanceolate, erect, the inner 10-12 × 0·3-0·7 mm, linear. Ligules 16-20 mm, much exceeding the involucre. Achenes 2-3 mm hairy; pappus with c. 30 setae. 2n = 32. {\i S.E. & E.C. Europe extending northwards to} c. 53°{\i  N. in S.C. Russia.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b I. auriculata} Boiss. & Balansa in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 3}): 13 (1856), from Anatolia, has been once recorded from Turkey-in-Europe. It is like {\b 10} but has the stem and leaves relatively sparsely tomentose, the involucre c. 10 mm, the outer bracts recurved at the apex, the inner c. 8 × 1 mm and the ligules 12-14 mm, only slightly exceeding the involucre.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. I. helenioides} DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 5}: 470 (1815). Erect, sericeous-villous perennial 15-50 cm. Leaves sericeous-villous, entire or denticulate, the lower 10-18 × 1·5-3 cm, oblong-oblanceolate, the upper amplexicaul. Capitula 50-80 mm in diameter; involucre 12-15 mm, hemispherical; bracts villous, rarely subglabrous, the outer c. 10 × 1·5-2 mm, linear-lanceolate, erect, the inner 10-12 × c. 1 mm, linear. Ligules 18-25 mm, much exceeding the involucre. Achenes c. 2 mm, hairy; pappus with c. 30 setae. •{\i  S. France, N.C. & E. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. I. montana} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 884 (1753). Like {\b 11} but stems 10-35 cm, sericeous-villous or -lanate; lower leaves 5-12 × 1-1·5 cm, the upper cuneate at base; outer involucral bracts 6-7 × 1-1·2 mm, lanceolate, the inner c. 10 × 0·6-0·8 mm, linear; achenes 2-3 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry places; calcicole. W. Mediterranean region, extending to W.C. France and E. Italy.} Ga Hs It Lu Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b 13-15}). {\b I. candida} group. Usually densely white-tomentose or -lanate perennials. Lower leaves lanceolate to orbicular-ovate, the upper more or less cuneate at base. Capitula medium; involucre hemispherical to almost cylindrical. Ligules shorter than or slightly exceeding the involucre. Achenes c. 2 mm, hairy; pappus about twice as long as achene, with 10-15 setae.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves floccose when mature, densely glandular ................. {\b 15. subfloccosa} 
\par 
1 Leaves persistently lanate, eglandular or rarely with a few glands
\par 
2 Ligules at least 2 mm longer than involucre ....................... {\b 14. verbascifolia}
\par 
2 Ligules not or scarcely longer than involucre
\par 
3 Outer involucral bracts less than ½ as long as inner;
\par 
  most capitula subtended by 0-2 bracts ................................. {\b 14. verbascifolia}
\par 
3 Outer involucral bracts more than ½ as long as inner;
\par 
  most capitula subtended by 2 or more bracts
\par 
4 Stem and leaves more or less densely appressed-sericeous-
\par 
  tomentose; leaves entire ............................................................... {\b 13. candida}
\par 
4 Stem and leaves lanate, the indumentum not sericeous or
\par 
  closely appressed; leaves often crenate or toothed .............. {\b 14. verbascifolia}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. I. candida} (L.) Cass., {\i Dict. Sci. Nat.}{\b  23}: 554 (1822) ({\i I. candida} subsp.{\i  limonifolia} (Sibth. & Sm.) Hayek). Stems up to c. 30 cm, slender, simple or with few short branches in the upper 1/3. Indumentum dense or moderately dense, appressed-sericeous-tomentose. Basal leaves (1·5-)4-9 cm, usually lanceolate and gradually narrowed into the petiole, obtuse, entire; veins not prominent beneath. Involucre (6-)8-9 mm. Ligules shorter than the involucre. •{\i  C., S. & E. Greece, Kriti.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucral bracts appressed to erecto-patent;
\par 
  involucre 6-8 mm ........................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b limonella}
\par 
1 Involucral bracts recurved near the usually elongate
\par 
  apex; involucre 8-9(-11) mm
\par 
2 Indumentum very dense; basal leaves 3-9 cm ................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b candida}
\par 
2 Indumentum moderately dense;
\par 
  basal leaves 1·5-3·5 cm ................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b decalvans}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b candida}: Stem up to 30 cm. Indumentum very dense, white. Basal leaves 3-9 cm, ovate to lanceolate. Capitula usually subtended by several bracts. Involucre 8-9 mm; bracts recurved, usually with an elongate apex.{\i  W. Kriti, Kithira}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b decalvans} (Halácsy) P. W. Ball ex Tutin,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  67}: 282 (1973) ({\i I. limonifolia} var. {\i decalvans} Halácsy): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but stems usually not more than 10 cm; indumentum less dense; basal leaves 1·5-3·5 cm.{\i  E. Kriti}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b limonella} (Heldr.) Rech. fil.,{\i  Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  54}({\b B}):
\par 

\par 
135}
\par