{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. jorullensis} Kunth in Humb., Bonpl. & Kunth,{\i  Nov. Gen. Sp.}{\b  4}: 284 (1820) ({\i S. cordifolia} Kunth). Up to 120 cm, pubescent. Leaves broadly ovate to cordate, acute to subobtuse at apex, cuneate at base, shallowly and regularly crenate or serrate, the petiole broadly winged to the base and more or less amplexicaul. Capitula 5-8 mm across (excluding outer involucral bracts); outer involucral bracts (6-)10-20 mm, linear-spathulate; stalked glands present on inner and outer involucral bracts and often on upper part of stem. {\i Naturalized in Britain and Germany; casual elsewhere.} [Br Ge.] ({\i Tropical America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   S. microcephala} DC., {\i Prodr.} {\b 5}: 496 (1836), native of Australia, with narrowly elliptical to lanceolate, sessile leaves and outer involucral bracts not exceeding the inner, also occurs as a casual.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 43.            Eclipta}            L.
\par

\par\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Leaves opposite, entire or toothed. Inflorescence of several small, pedunculate capitula. Involucral bracts in 2 rows. Receptacle flat or slightly convex, with scales. Outer florets ligulate, female; the inner tubular, shortly 4(-5)lobed, hermaphrodite. Outer achenes triangular in section, the inner subterete; pappus absent or of few small teeth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. prostrata} (L.) L., {\i Mantissa Alt.} 286 (1771). Strigose, much-branched annual 20-90 cm. Leaves 4-13 × 0·8-2 cm, oblong to lanceolate, remotely serrate, acute, sessile or the lower petiolate. Capitula hemispherical; involucral bracts c. 5 mm, herbaceous; receptacular scales setaceous, ciliate at apex. Ligules c. 6 mm, white. 2n = 22.{\i  Rice-fields and other wet places. Naturalized locally in S. Europe.} [Hs It Lu.] ({\i Tropical and warm temperate America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 44.           Rudbeckia}           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A. Hansen
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Biennial or perennial herbs. Leaves simple to 2-pinnatifid, alternate. Capitula medium to large. Involucral bracts in 2-3 rows. Receptacle conical, with scales which partly enclose the achenes. Outer florets ligulate, sterile; inner florets tubular, hermaphrodite; corolla 5-lobed. Achenes prismatic, more or less 4-angular, glabrous; pappus a short corona or absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Stem and leaves hairy; leaves simple, ± entire; pappus absent .......... {\b 1. hirta} 
\par
 Stem and upper surface of leaves glabrous or nearly so;
\par
  leaves pinnatifid or 2- to 3-lobed; pappus present ........................ {\b 2. laciniata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. hirta} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 907 (1753). Erect, hispid or hirsute, branched biennial or short-lived perennial 30-100 cm. Lower leaves elliptic-oblanceolate, long-petiolate, the others linear-lanceolate to ovate, subsessile, entire or remotely toothed. Capitula long-pedunculate. Involucral bracts 10-15 × 2-3 mm, linear-lanceolate, subequal, hispid. Ligules 2-4 cm, pale yellow, darker at base. Inner florets purplish-brownish-black. Pappus absent.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and naturalized in waste places, in woods and on river-banks, mainly in C. Europe.} [Au Be Cz Ga Ge He Hu Ju Po Rs (C, W, E).] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. R. laciniata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 906 (1753). Glaucous perennial up to 300 cm. Stem and upper surface of leaves glabrous or nearly so. Lower leaves 2-pinnatifid, petiolate; middle leaves deeply 2- to 3-lobed, the lobes more or less pinnatifid; upper leaves simple, ovate, sessile; all entire or coarsely toothed. Capitula long-pedunculate. Involucral bracts ovate-oblong, with deflexed apex. Ligules 3-6 cm, yellow, soon deflexed. Inner florets yellow-green. Pappus a short, usually toothed corona. 2n = 76.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and naturalized on river-banks, mainly in C. Europe.} [Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 45.             Helianthus}            L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A. Hansen
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stout annual or perennial herbs. Leaves simple, the lower opposite, the others usually alternate. Capitula large. Involucral bracts imbricate, in 2 to several rows, herbaceous. Receptacle flat or slightly convex, with scales which partly enclose the achenes. Outer florets ligulate, sterile, yellow. Inner florets hermaphrodite; corolla shortly 5-lobed. Achenes somewhat compressed and angled; pappus of 2 deciduous setae and rarely some small scales.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Some species and hybrids, in addition to those described below, occur as escapes from cultivation, and may be in process of becoming naturalized. The commonest of these are the annuals {\b H. debilis} Nutt., {\i Trans. Amer. Philos. Soc.} nov. ser., {\b 7}: 367 (1841) and{\b  H. petiolaris} Nutt.,{\i  Jour. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philad.}{\b  2}: 115 (1821) and the perennials {\b H. decapetalus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 905 (1753),{\b  H. rigidus} (Cass.) Desf., {\i Cat. Pl. Horti Paris.} ed. 3, 184 (1829),{\b  H. strumosus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 905 (1753), and {\i H. annuus} ×{\i  decapetalus}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: C. B. Heiser, {\i Mem. Torrey Bot. Club}{\b  22}({\b 3}): 1-218 (1969).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Annual; receptacle flat or nearly so ................................................ {\b 1. annuus} 
\par
1 Perennial; receptacle convex
\par
2 Involucral bracts at least as long as the diameter of 
\par
  the disc, narrow, ± patent; upper leaves not much smaller
\par
  than lower; rhizomes tuberous .................................................... {\b 2. tuberosus}
\par
2 Involucral bracts shorter than the diameter of the disc,
\par
  wide, appressed; upper leaves usually much smaller than 
\par
  lower; rhizomes not tuberous .................................................. {\b 3}. × {\b laetiflorus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. annuus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 904 (1753). Coarse, scabrid-hairy, usually unbranched annual up to 3 m. Leaves 10-40 × 5-35 cm, broadly ovate, the lower cordate at base, usually toothed, 3-veined, petiolate. Capitula up to 30 cm in diameter, usually solitary, more or less nodding. Involucral bracts ovate-oblong, acuminate, ciliate. Receptacle flat or nearly so. Ligules at least 25 mm. Inner florets brownish. Achenes 5-15 mm, hairy.{\i  Widely cultivated in E.C. & S.E. Europe for the oil obtained from the achenes; locally naturalized elsewhere from gardens.} [Al Au Bu Cz Gr He Hs Hu Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E) Tu.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. tuberosus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 905 (1753). Perennial; stems 1-2·8 m, scabrid-hispid or glabrous, usually branched above. Rhizomes tuberous. Leaves 10-25 × 7-15 cm, ovate, acuminate, coarsely serrate, scabrid above, whitish-pubescent beneath, narrowed into a winged petiole, the upper not much smaller. Capitula 4-8 cm in diameter, several, erect. Involucral bracts at least as long as the diameter of the disc, more or less patent, lanceolate, acuminate, ciliate, dark green. Receptacle convex. Ligules 30-40 mm. Inner florets yellow. Achenes 5-6 mm, glabrous or hairy.{\i  Cultivated for its edible tubers} ({\i Jerusalem artichokes}){\i  and naturalized, mainly in C. Europe.} [Al Au Cz Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C).] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H}. ×{\b  laetiflorus} Pers., {\i Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 476 (1807) ({\i H. rigidus }×{\i  tuberosus}). Like {\b 2} but rhizomes not tuberous; leaves broadly lanceolate, conspicuously 3-veined below, very scabrid on both surfaces, the upper usually much smaller; capitula 6-10 cm in diameter; involucral bracts shorter than the diameter of the disc,
\par

\par
141}
\par