{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo10\dy28\hr14\min51}{\revtim\yr1998\mo10\dy28\hr14\min54}{\version2}{\edmins3}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords1034}{\nofchars5899}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 and elliptical, coriaceous, shining, scabrid, very shortly acute; flowers sessile; corolla 2\'b75-3\'b75 mm, sparsely and shortly hairy; tube 2-2\'b75 mm; lobes c. 1\'b75 mm, linear-triangular, very shortly acuminate.}{\i\fs28  Rocks in the subalpine zone. \bullet  S. Greece}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Attiki}{\fs28 ). Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 61. A. chlorantha}{\fs28  Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., }{\i\fs28 Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 6}{\fs28 ): 90 (1859). Stems (15-)20-45(-55) cm, woody at base, ascending, slender, mostly scabrid with forwardly-directed teeth on the angles; internodes mostly longer than the leaves. Leaves 9-15(-20) \'d7 0\'b73-1 mm, in whorls of up to 6, linear to filiform, more or less long-acuminate; vein scarcely prominent beneath; margin weakly revolute and scabridulous. Inflorescence lax; pedicels 0\'b75-3 mm, often recurved; bracts shorter than the fruits, broadly lanceolate, shortly acuminate, keeled, ciliate on the margin, shortly connate at the base. Corolla 2-3 mm, infundibuliform, glabrous, yellowish; tube 0\'b74-0\'b78 mm; lobes 1\'b72-2\'b71 mm, narrowly ligulate, shortly acuminate. Style much longer than ovary; stigma globose. Fruit c. 1\'b75 mm, glabrous. 2n = 22. }{\i\fs28 Rocky places in the montane zone. \bullet  Albania and N.W. Greece.}{\fs28  Al Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 62. A. scutellaris}{\fs28  Vis.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Dalm. }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 : 12 (1852). Stems (10-) 15-50(-60) cm, ascending, slender, glabrous, rarely shortly hairy; internodes mostly only slightly longer than the leaves. Leaves 15-30 \'d7 0\'b75-2 mm, in whorls of (4-)6-7(-11), lanceolate to linear, more or less shortly acuminate; vein prominent beneath; margin revolute and shortly ciliate. Inflorescence lax, the pedicels 1-3 mm; bracts shorter than the fruits, ovate, navicular, connate at base. Corolla 1-1\'b78 mm, cup-shaped, white to reddish; tube 0\'b74-0\'b78 mm; lobes 0\'b77-1 mm, triangular, shortly acuminate, shortly hairy. Style much shorter than ovary; stigma globose. Fruit 1\'b75-1\'b78 mm, glabrous. 2n = 22. }{\i\fs28 Rocky places. \bullet  Jugoslavia and Albania.}{\fs28  Al Ju ?Rm.
\par 
\par   The variation within this species described by B. Korica,}{\i\fs28  \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  102}{\fs28 : 339-364 (1955) is scarcely worth taxonomic recognition.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 63. A. baldaccii}{\fs28  (Hal\'e1csy) Ehrend.,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  68}{\fs28 : 269 (1974) (}{\i\fs28 Galium baldaccii}{\fs28  Hal\'e1csy). Plant with sparse to dense, long, patent hairs; stems (5-)8-17(-20) cm, ascending to erect, slender; internodes mostly as long as the leaves. Leaves 3-8 \'d7 0\'b76-1\'b75 mm, in whorls of 6-8(-9), narrowly lanceolate, acute; vein very prominent beneath; margin weakly revolute. Inflorescence ovoid, rather lax; pedicels 1-2 mm; bracts usually shorter than the fruits, ovate, navicular, shortly connate at base. Corolla 0\'b77-1 mm, slightly cup-shaped, dirty yellow, with long hairs outside; tube 0\'b72 mm; lobes 0\'b75-0\'b78 mm, triangular, acute. Style shorter than the ovary; stigma globose. Fruit c. 1\'b75 mm, densely hairy.}{\i\fs28  Rock-crevices; calcicole. \bullet  Coastal mountains of S. Crna Gora}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 near Bar}{\fs28 ). Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 64. A. saxicola}{\fs28  Ehrend.,}{\i\fs28  loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1974). Stems (5-)10-20(-25) cm, ascending to erect, sparingly branched, with short, patent hairs; internodes much longer than the leaves. Leaves 3-5 \'d7 1\'b78-2\'b75 mm, in whorls of up to 6, ovate to obovate, more or less obtuse; vein scarcely prominent beneath; margin not or scarcely revolute. Inflorescence long and narrow, with rigidly erect and strict branches; pedicels 0\'b75-2 mm, often recurved; bracts shorter than the pedicels and peduncles, broadly pelviform, clasping the stem. Corolla 0\'b77-1 mm, slightly cup-shaped, yellowish; tube 0\'b71-0\'b72 mm; lobes 0\'b76-0\'b78 mm, triangular, acute, glabrous. Style shorter than the ovary; stigma globose. Fruit c. 1\'b75 mm, glabrous, shining.}{\i\fs28  Mountain rocks. \bullet  S. Greece}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 E. Peloponnisos}{\fs28 ). Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 65. A. boryana}{\fs28  (Walpers) Ehrend.,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  68}{\fs28 : 269 (1974) (}{\i\fs28 Galium boryanum}{\fs28  Walpers). Stems (4-)5-15(-20) cm, slender, forming dense cushions up to 30 cm in diameter, shortly and stiffly hairy; internodes as long as or slightly longer than the leaves. Leaves 2\'b78-5 \'d7 1-2 mm, in whorls of (4-)6(-8), elliptical to broadly lanceolate, more or less obtuse, scabrid and shortly and stiffly hairy; vein scarcely prominent beneath; margin weakly revolute. Inflorescence leafy throughout, lax, few-flowered; pedicels 1-3 mm, erect; bracts leaf-like, much longer than the fruits, not connate. Corolla 1-2 mm, slightly cup-shaped, orange; tube 0\'b71-0\'b74 mm; lobes 1-1\'b76 mm, triangular, acute, with short, stiff hairs. Style shorter than the ovary; stigma globose. Fruit 1\'b75-1\'b78 mm, glabrous (very rarely with short, stiff hairs).}{\i\fs28  Rocks in the montane and subalpine zones. \bullet  S. Greece }{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 Peloponnisos}{\fs28 ). Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 66. A. purpurea}{\fs28  (L.) Ehrend.,}{\i\fs28  \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  122}{\fs28 : 260 (1973) (}{\i\fs28 Galium purpureum}{\fs28  L.). Stems ascending to erect, weakly 4-angled below, with short, more or less curved hairs; internodes mostly distinctly longer than the leaves. Leaves narrowly lanceolate to filiform, scabrid on the margin. Pedicels (1-)2-4(-7) mm, slender, often recurved; bracts keeled, ciliate on the margin, shortly connate at the base. Corolla 0\'b78-1\'b76 mm, slightly cupshaped to more or less rotate; tube 0\'b71-0\'b73 mm, glabrous; lobes 0\'b77-1\'b73 mm, ovate to triangular, more or less apiculate. Style usually shorter than ovary; stigma globose. Fruit c. 2 mm, glabrous. }{\i\fs28 Dry places. \bullet  S. Europe, eastwards from S.E. France, and extending northwards to S. Austria and N.C. Romania.}{\fs28  Al Au Bu Ga Gr He It Ju Rm.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 purpurea}{\fs28 : Stems (15-)20-50(-60) cm, with curved hairs. Leaves 10-20 \'d7 0\'b74-1 mm, in whorls of (6-)7-10(-11), narrowly linear to filiform, gradually acuminate; margin distinctly revolute. Inflorescence-branches patent and curved; bracts lanceolate, long-acuminate. Corolla usually purple, sometimes yellowish; lobes distinctly apiculate, almost always glabrous. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Throughout the range of the species except S.W. part of Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 apiculata}{\fs28  (Sibth. & Sm.) Ehrend.,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  68}{\fs28 : 269 (1974) (}{\i\fs28 Galium apiculatum}{\fs28  Sibth. & Sm.): Stems (5-)8-30(-35) cm, with more or less crispate hairs. Leaves 4-10 \'d7 0\'b75-1\'b75 mm, in whorls of (4-)6-8(-9), narrowly lanceolate to linear, abruptly acuminate; margin scarcely revolute. Inflorescence-branches strict to patent; bracts ovate. Corolla usually yellowish-green, often more or less tinged with red; lobes weakly apiculate, hairy above. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  S.W. part of Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 5.        Galium}{\fs28          L. 
\par }{\fs24 By F. Ehrendorfer; Sect.}{\i\fs24  Platygalium,Trachygalium, Galium, Leiogalium,}{\fs24   
\par }{\i\fs24 Jubogalium}{\fs24  and }{\i\fs24 Kolgyda}{\fs24  in collaboration with F. Krendl;
\par Sect.}{\i\fs24  Aparinoides}{\fs24  in collaboration with Ch. Puff.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Like }{\i\fs28 Asperula}{\fs28  but stems sometimes terete, sometimes retrorsely aculeolate; ultimate branches of inflorescence often without bracts, always without bracteoles; pedicels often longer than ovary or fruit; flowers usually hermaphrodite, (3-)4-merous; corolla rarely infundibuliform, usually cup-shaped or rotate; ovary and fruit ovoid, sometimes with hooked hairs; fruit dry, rarely somewhat fleshy.
\par 
\par  Descriptions of leaves refer both to the leaves and the leaf-like stipules with which they are associated. Measurements of internode-length refer to middle parts of the stem. Numbers of leaves (including stipules) per whorl refer to the best-developed whorls. Measurements of leaves refer to the longest cauline
\par 
\par 14}
\par }