{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 oblong; female capitula usually solitary; involucre in fruit fusiform-obovoid, weakly angled, wrinkled, more or less glabrous, with spinose teeth; beak 1-1·5 mm.{\i  Naturalized in S. France and N.E. Spain.} [Ga Hs.] ({\i Temperate South America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. coronopifolia} Torrey & A. Gray,{\i  Fl. N. Amer.}{\b  2}: 291 (1842). Like {\b 1} but perennial, with a creeping rhizome; leaves often subsessile, usually 1-pinnatisect; lobes oblong; involucre in fruit unarmed or with short, blunt teeth. 2n = 72.{\i  Locally naturalized, but distribution uncertain owing to confusion with other species.} [Be Da Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Po Rs (W).] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. trifida} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 987 (1753). Annual up to 200 cm. Stems patent-hirsute or hispid above, glabrous below. Leaves petiolate, opposite, scabrid, broadly elliptical to ovate-orbicular, palmately 3- to 5-lobed, sometimes entire. Male involucre c. 1 mm, cup-shaped; bracts tuberculate; male flowers 10-15; corolla present. Female involucre 6-10 mm in fruit, many-ribbed, each rib ending in a short spine. 2n = 24. {\i Cultivated ground and waste places. Naturalized in a number of European countries.} [Cz Ga Ge It Rs (B, W, E).] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 50.           Xanthium}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D. Löve.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual herbs. Leaves alternate, entire or variously lobed. Capitula solitary or in axillary clusters, unisexual, the male above the female. Male capitula subglobose; involucral bracts in 1 row; receptacle cylindrical, with scales; florets numerous; stamens 5; anthers free and hooked at apex; filaments connate; style and ovary rudimentary. Female capitula ovoid; involucral bracts in 2 rows, the outer small, free, the inner connate, coriaceous, prickly, ending in 2 (rarely 1) beaks and forming a 2-locular structure containing 2 florets; corolla absent; styles exserted through a hole on the inside of the beak near its base. Achenes ovoid; pappus absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: F. J. Widder, {\i Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih}.) {\b 20}: 1-223 (1923); {\b 21}: 273-305 (1925); {\i Phyton} ({\i Austria}) {\b 11}: 69-82 (1964);{\b  12}: 182-190 (1967). A. Cronquist, {\i Rhodora }{\b 47}: 402-403 (1945). D. Löve & P. Dansereau,{\i  Canad. Jour. Bot.}{\b  37}: 173-208 (1959).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves long-petiolate, green beneath, without spines at 
\par
  base of petiole ........................................................................... {\b 1. strumarium} 
\par
Leaves sessile or shortly petiolate, white- or grey-
\par
  tomentose beneath, with 1-2, 3-fid, yellow spines at 
\par
  base (rarely replaced by small leaves) ......................................... {\b 2. spinosum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. X. strumarium} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 987 (1753). Stem 20-120 cm, sometimes more, usually branched, unarmed. Leaves long-petiolate; lamina broadly ovate to triangular, with a cordate or rarely cuneate base, entire, or with 3-5 wide, coarsely serrate lobes, green and with short, stiff hairs on both surfaces. Capitula in axillary clusters and sometimes also in a terminal, leafless inflorescence, the male above the female. Involucre in fruit with straight or hooked spines and distinct beaks.{\i  River-banks, lake shores, pastures and disturbed ground. E., C. & S. Europe; casual in the north and west. }Al Au Az Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b strumarium}: Not aromatic. Stems and branches green. Involucre 12-15 × 6-10 mm in fruit, green or greyish green when ripe, covered with dense but slender spines. 2n = 36.{\i  Throughout the range of the species; native}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28     ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b italicum} (Moretti) D. Löve, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b 71}: 271 (1976) ({\i X. californicum} E. L. Greene,{\i  X. echinatum} Murray, {\i X. italicum} Moretti, {\i X. strumarium} subsp. {\i cavanillesii} (Schouw ex Didr.) D. Löve & Dansereau): Aromatic. Stems and branches often with violet or brownish lines or dots. Involucre 15-35 × 6-25 mm in fruit, yellow or brown when ripe, covered with stout spines. 2n = 36.{\i  Chiefly in the southern part of the range of the species; probably an early introduction from South and North America}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Introgressive hybrid populations between the two subspecies are found and are very variable in appearance, with the involucre small to large with short, fine and dense to coarse and distant spines ({\i X. albinum} (Widder) H. Scholz; incl. subsp. {\i riparium} (Celak.) Widder & Wagenitz, {\i X. brasilicum }Velloso, {\i X. orientale} L. ({\i X. macrocarpum} DC.), {\i X. riparium} Itz. & Hertsch,{\i  X. saccharatum} Wallr.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. X. spinosum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 987 (1753). Stems 15-100 cm, much branched, with 1-2 stout, 3-fid, yellow spines in the leaf-axils, the spines rarely more or less connate at the base or replaced by leaf fascicles. Leaves sessile or shortly petiolate; lamina entire or 3- to 5-fid, dark green above, white- or grey-tomentose beneath. Male capitula in terminal inflorescences, the female axillary. Involucre 10-12 × 6-8 mm in fruit, covered with slender spines. 2n = 36.{\i  Ruderal. Naturalized in C. & S. Europe; casual further north.} [Al Au Az Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.] ({\i South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 51.            Heliopsis}            Pers.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A. Hansen.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Leaves opposite. Capitula solitary, large. Involucral bracts in 2-3 rows. Receptacle conical, with numerous scales. Ligulate florets in 1 row, female, yellow. Tubular florets hermaphrodite. Achenes obtusely 3- to 4-angled; pappus absent or a small, more or less toothed rim.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: T. R. Fisher, {\i Ohio Jour. Sci.}{\b  57}: 171-191 (1957).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. helianthoides} (L.) Sweet,{\i  Hort. Brit.} 487 (1827). Stems 30-150 cm, simple or branched. Leaves lanceolate to deltate-ovate, smooth or scabrid, coarsely serrate or dentate, petiolate. Peduncles 10-25 cm; involucral bracts ovate-lanceolate, the outer usually leaf-like. Ligules c. 25 × 6 mm. Achenes 3-3·5 mm, glabrous, truncate, those of the ligules 3-angled, those of the tubular florets 4-angled above, rounded below.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized in Europe.} [Da Ge Hu Po.] ({\i North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b scabra} (Dunal) Fisher,{\i  Ohio Jour. Sci.}{\b  57}: 190 (1957): Leaves lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate; petioles 2-2·5 cm. Disc of capitulum 12-14 mm.{\i  Scattered throughout the European range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b occidentalis} Fisher, {\i op. cit.} 189 (1957): Leaves deltate-ovate; petioles not more than 1·5 cm. Disc of capitulum 15-25 mm.{\i  Scattered throughout the European range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subsp.{\i  helianthoides} is not known to occur in Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 52.         Galinsoga}           Ruiz & Pavon
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual herbs. Leaves opposite. Capitula small, in dichasial cymes. Involucral bracts few, in 1-2 rows. Receptacle conical, with scales. Ligulate florets female; tubular florets hermaphrodite. Achenes obovoid-prismatic, the outer somewhat compressed dorsally; pappus of several scales.
\par

\par
143}
\par