{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. tripartita} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 831 (1753) (incl. {\i B. bullata} L.{\i  B. orientalis} Velen.). Almost glabrous to hirsute annual (3-)10-60(-100) cm. Leaves usually 3-lobed, less frequently 5-lobed or unlobed, coarsely serrate; petiole short, winged. Capitula 10-25 mm in diameter, wider than long; outer involucral bracts 5-8, usually leaf-like, the inner ovate, brownish with a green margin. Receptacular scales as long as the achenes, oblong-lanceolate, scarious, with dark lines. Achenes (4-)5-6 mm, cuneiform; marginal setae deflexed; bristles (2)3-4. 2n = 48. {\i Damp places. Most of Europe, but rare in the extreme north and extreme south.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Sb.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in size, dissection of leaves and length of outer involucral bracts. Much of the variation appears to depend on time of germination and edaphic factors, but a single plant can exhibit considerable variation.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. connata} Muhl. ex Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 1718 (1803). Like {\b 1} but leaves usually unlobed, the lower sometimes with 1-2 pairs of decurrent lobes; achenes verrucose, with 4-5 bristles, the central strongly 4-angled.{\i  Naturalized in W. & C. Europe.} [Be Cz Ga He Ho Po.] ({\i North America}.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. B. radiata} Thuill., {\i Fl. Paris} ed. 2, 422 (1800). Like {\b 1} but outer involucral bracts 10-12; receptacular scales about as long as the achenes together with their bristles, narrowly oblong; achenes 3-4 mm; bristles 2. 2n = 48.{\i  Damp places. N.E. & N.C. Europe, extending westwards to E. Denmark and N.C. France and southwards to S. Russia.} Au Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Po Rs (N, B, C, W, ?K, E) Su.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. B. aurea} (Aiton) Sherff,{\i  Bot. Gaz. }{\b 59}: 313 (1915). Nearly glabrous perennial 50-180 cm. Leaves linear-lanceolate, lanceolate or deeply divided into linear lobes, acuminate, coarsely and irregularly serrate. Capitula with involucral bracts all about equal, the outer not leaf-like. Ligules 10-30 mm, 5-6, yellow, with purplish lines. Receptacular scales about as long as the achenes, oblong-lanceolate. Achenes 4-7 mm cuneiform; marginal setae erect; bristles 2. 2n = 72.{\i  Damp places. Naturalized in S.W. Europe.} [Ga Hs It Lu.] ({\i Central America.})
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. B. cernua} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 832 (1753). Glabrous or somewhat pubescent annual (4-)10-90 cm. Leaves linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, acuminate, coarsely and remotely serrate, unlobed, sessile. Capitula 15-25 mm in diameter (without ligules), nodding, wider than long; outer involucral bracts 5-8, leaf-like, the inner ovate, scarious with dark lines. Ligules often present. Receptacular scales as long as the achenes, oblanceolate, scarious, with dark lines. Achenes 6-8 mm, cuneiform; marginal setae deflexed; bristles 3-4. 2n = 24.{\i  Damp places. Much of Europe, but absent from the extreme north and much of the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. B. frondosa} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 832 (1753) ({\i B. melanocarpa} Wieg.). Almost glabrous annual 10-100 cm. Leaves petiolate, pinnate, with 1(-2) pairs of petiolate pinnae and a larger, terminal pinna; pinnae oblong-lanceolate to ovate, acute or acuminate, coarsely serrate. Capitula 10-20 mm in diameter, erect, wider than long; outer involucral bracts 5-8, herbaceous, sometimes leaf-like, somewhat villous near the base, the inner ovate-oblong, blackish, with a scarious margin. Receptacular scales as long as the achenes, oblong, scarious, with dark lines. Achenes 5-8 mm, cuneiform, rugose, with erect hairs on the face and margins; bristles 2, erect. 2n = 48.{\i  Widely naturalized in W., S. & C.Europe.} [Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rs (W) Si.] ({\i America.})
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. B. pilosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 832 (1753). Like {\b 6} but capitula 5-15 mm in diameter, longer than wide, at least in fruit; outer involucral bracts little longer than inner, greenish; receptacular scales shorter than the achenes; achenes 6-8(-12) mm, fusiform, papillose, glabrous except for a few erect setae on the ribs; bristles 2-3 erecto-patent. 2n = 72.{\i  Roadsides, cultivated ground and damp places. Naturalized, mainly in S.W. Europe.} [Az Cz Hs Lu.] ({\i South America.})
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   B. vulgata} E. L. Greene,{\i  Pittonia}{\b  4}: 72 (1899) has recently been recorded from France and Romania. It is like {\b 6} but has 10-16, hispid-ciliate outer involucral bracts and achenes with the marginal bristles erect or patent in the lower 3/4 and deflexed in the upper 1/4. It is a native of North America.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. B. bipinnata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 832 (1753). Almost glabrous annual 10-100 cm. Leaves petiolate, pinnate, with up to 4 pairs of pinnae, the lower of which are lobed almost to the midrib; lobes rhombic to broadly lanceolate, entire or coarsely toothed, sparsely hairy on the veins beneath. Capitula 5-10 mm in diameter, longer than wide; outer involucral bracts shorter than inner, herbaceous, all lanceolate to oblong. Receptacular scales shorter than the achenes, linear, scarious, with dark lines. Outer achenes 8-10 mm, the inner 10-18 mm, linear, papillose, with few, short, erect setae; bristles 2-3, 2-4 mm, erecto-patent at maturity.{\i  Fields and roadsides. Naturalized in S. & S.C. Europe.} [Ga He It Ju.] ({\i South America.})
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. B. subalternans} DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  5}: 600 (1836). Like {\b 8} but leaf-lobes linear-lanceolate, more or less hairy on and between the veins beneath; outer achenes 6-8 mm, the inner 8-14 mm; bristles 1-2·5 mm, erect at maturity.{\i  Damp places. Naturalized in S.W. Europe.} [Ga Hs.] ({\i South America}.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Often confused with {\b 8} and probably overlooked.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 42.          Sigesbeckia}            L.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R.K. Brummitt
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Annual herbs; stems erect, usually dichotomously much branched. Leaves opposite. Capitula small, in lax panicles or rarely solitary; outer involucral bracts linear to linear-spathulate patent, usually much longer than the inner, with stipitate glands. Outer florets with short ligules, female, yellow; inner florets tubular, hermaphrodite, subtended by receptacular scales; pappus absent.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: H. Henker, {\i Arch. Freunde Naturgesch. Mecklenb.}{\b  11}: 7-54 (1965).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves triangular-hastate, irregularly dentate or lobed,
\par   the petiole tapering from above and ± unwinged in its 
\par   lower part, not amplexicaul ......................................................... {\b 1. orientalis}
\par Leaves broadly ovate to cordate, shallowly and regularly
\par   crenate or serrate, the petiole broadly winged to the 
\par   base and ± amplexicaul .............................................................. {\b 2. jorullensis}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. orientalis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 900 (1753). Up to 120(-190) cm pubescent. Leaves triangular-hastate, acute at apex, cuneate at base, irregularly dentate or lobed, the petiole tapering from above and more or less unwinged in its lower part, not amplexicaul. Capitula 6-9 mm across (excluding outer involucral bracts) outer involucral bracts 7-15 mm, linear-spathulate; stalked glands present on outer and inner involucral bracts and often on peduncle. 2n = 60.{\i  Naturalized in waste places and by railways in S. Romania; casual elsewhere}. [?It Rm.] ({\i Warm temperate and tropical regions of the Old World.})
\par 
\par 140}
\par