{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 35 At least the outer achenes with auricle up to 1 mm;
\par
   peduncles clavate in fruit; ligules absent ................................... {\b 37. muricata}
\par
34 Ribs of achenes not very prominent, granulate or rugulose
\par
36 Ligules c. 2 mm, sterile, pink; ribs of achenes interrupted, 
\par
   rugulose; receptacle nearly flat ............................................... {\b 62. glaberrima}
\par
36 Ligules more than 2 mm, fertile, white, rarely  absent;
\par
   ribs of achenes continuous, granulate; receptacle 
\par
   conical or almost hemispherical  
\par
37 Peduncles clavate in fruit ................................................. {\b 36. secundiramea}
\par
37 Peduncles not clavate in fruit    
\par
38 Corona up to nearly ½ as long as achene; branches 
\par
   slender, straight, somewhat rigid; peduncles long;
\par
   stems 15-35 cm ..................................................................... {\b 38. macedonica}
\par
38 Corona absent or a very short rim; branches flexuous,
\par
   not rigid; peduncles short; stems usually not more 
\par
   than 15 cm .......................................................................... {\b 36. secundiramea}
\par
33 Achenes of the tubular florets not tuberculate or granulate  
\par
39 Ligulate florets absent or sterile   
\par
40 Involucre cylindrical-obconical; all involucral bracts acute, 
\par
   without or with a very narrow hyaline margin; stems not 
\par
   more than 15 cm, simple or with short branches above; 
\par
   ligules usually absent ...................................................................... {\b 34. rigida}
\par
40 Involucre hemispherical or hemispherical-obconical;
\par
   inner involucral bracts with a ± wide hyaline margin;
\par
   stems usually more than 15 cm, ± branched, frequently
\par
   from the base; ligules usually present  
\par
41 peduncles not clavate in fruit; capitula 30-40 mm in 
\par
   diameter; achenes 2-2·25 mm (excl. auricle) ........................ {\b 32. scopulorum}
\par
41 Peduncles usually ± clavate in fruit; capitula 15-37 
\par
   mm in diameter; achenes 1·5-2 mm (excl. auride) .................. {\b 33. tomentosa}
\par
39 Ligulate florets fertile  
\par
42 Receptacle hemispherical to hemispherical-ovoid; achenes 
\par
   of ligules and sometimes of the outer tubular florets with 
\par
   a large hyaline auricle up to as long as the achene, 
\par
   the others with a very short thick corona; involucral 
\par
   bracts usually with dark brown or black margin .............................. {\b 41. chia}
\par
42 Receptacle conical; achenes without pappus or with an
\par
   auricle; involucral bracts with hyaline or pale brown margin  
\par
43 Peduncles ± clavate in fruit  
\par
44 Leaves subpalmately divided, fleshy, finally glabrescent  .....{\b 31. flexicaulis}
\par
44 Leaves pinnately divided, usually not fleshy, ± persis-
\par
   tently hairy  
\par
45 Ligules up to 11 × 4 mm; receptacle at least 5·5 × 3 mm ......... {\b 27. arvensis}
\par
45 Ligules not more than 6 × 3 mm; receptacle not more 
\par
   than 5·5 × 3 mm  
\par
46 Outer achenes nearly as wide as or wider than long,
\par
   with very thick ribs; hyaline, lacerate auricle some-
\par
   times present; ligules up to 6 × 3 mm ........................................ {\b 27. arvensis}
\par
46 All achenes distinctly longer than wide, with obscure 
\par
   ribs; auricle opaque; ligules c. 3 × 2 mm .................................... {\b 30. werneri}
\par
43 peduncles not clavate in fruit  
\par
47 Biennial or perennial with a woody stock; ligules 3·5-6·5 ×
\par
    2·25-3 mm; receptacle 2-5 × 2-3 mm, shortly conical .............. {\b 27. arvensis}
\par
47 Annual; ligules up to 17 × 7·5 mm; receptacle up  to 
\par
   10 × 3·5 mm, elongate-conical in fruit  
\par
48 Achenes with an auricle 0·55-1·75 mm; ribs slightly
\par
   thickened; rim not thickened .................................................... {\b 29. auriculata}
\par
48 Achenes without or with an auricle not more than 
\par
   0·25 mm; ribs thick and raised; rim thick, obtuse 
\par
49 Receptacular scales linear-subulate to oblanceolate,
\par
   entire; outer achenes at least 2/3 as wide as long;
\par
   tube of florets not swollen .......................................................... {\b 27. arvensis}
\par
49 Receptacular scales oblanceolate to obovate, cuneate 
\par
   at base, dentate-lacerate at apex; outer achenes not 
\par
   more than ½  as wide as long; tube of florets spongy
\par
   and swollen in the lower half .................................................... {\b 28. ruthenica}
\par
29 Perennial, usually with non-flowering shoots, rarely
\par
   very robust biennial; peduncles not clavate in fruit
\par
50 Leaves spathulate-cuneate, entire or 3- to 5-lobed at
\par
   apex, sericeous .................................................................... {\b 10. argyrophylla}
\par
50 At least the lower leaves 1- to 2-pinnatifid to pinna-
\par
   tisect, not sericeous 
\par
51 Ligules yellow 
\par
52 Stems 9-16(-30) cm, ascending, usually simple; ligules
\par
   3·5-6 mm wide; achenes c. 2 mm, not granulate; young 
\par
   leaves densely lanate ................................................................. {\b 1. trotzkiana}
\par
52 Stems 40-60 cm, erect, corymbosely branched; ligules
\par
   up to 3 mm wide; achenes 1-1·5 mm, granulate, mainly 
\par
   on the angles; leaves sparsely hairy .......................................... {\b 14. virescens} 
\par
51 Ligules white, rarely pink or absent .
\par
51 Ligules purplish-pink at least at base; stems usually
\par
   not more than 12 cm ................................................................... {\b 4. aetnensis} 
\par
53 Ligules white or absent; stems usually more than 12 cm 
\par
54 Leaves sessile, pectinate; segments linear to setaceous,
\par
   with subulate mucro .................................................................. {\b 22. orientalis} 
\par
54 At least the lower leaves petiolate, not pectinate;
\par
   segments usually narrowly oblong to elliptical 
\par
55 At least the achenes of the outer tubular florets tuberculate 
\par
56 Stems c. 5 mm in diameter at base; capitula up to 60
\par
   mm in diameter; ligules present; achenes auriculate ................... {\b 18. ismelia} 
\par
56 Stems less than 5 mm in diameter at base; capitula
\par
   22-45 mm in diameter; ligules sometimes absent;
\par
   pappus absent ......................................................................... {\b 17. tuberculata} 
\par
55 Achenes of tubular florets not tuberculate, though 
\par
   sometimes granulate 
\par
57 At least the outer receptacular scales ± 3-dentate and
\par
   dark brown to blackish towards the apex; all involucral
\par
   bracts with dark brown to black margin and apex,
\par
   clearly distinct from inner part of bract   
\par
58 Ligules absent; plant glabrous .................................................. {\b 3. sibthorpii}
\par
58 Ligules present 
\par
59 Receptacle conical, acute or subacute; segments and 
\par
   lobes of leaves not more than 1 mm wide, linear 
\par
60 Biennial with non-flowering shoots absent at anthesis;
\par
   involucre deeply umbonate; achenes 1·5-1·75 mm .................... {\b 15. orbelica} 
\par
60 Perennial with non-flowering shoots present at anthesis;
\par
   involucre not or slightly umbonate; achenes 2 mm .................. {\b 23. pindicola} 
\par
59 Receptacle hemispherical or hemispherical-conical, obtuse or 
\par
   subobtuse; segments and lobes of leaves more than 1 mm wide
\par
61 Stems (20-)30-60 cm, up to 6 mm in diameter at base,
\par
   frequently branched; capitula up to 63 mm in diameter .............. {\b 5. punctata} 
\par
61 Stems up to 35 cm, rather thinner at base, usually
\par
   simple; capitula 20-50 mm in diameter ...................................... {\b 2. carpatica} 
\par
57 Receptacular scales not or indistinctly 3-dentate,
\par
   usually not brown or with only the apex of acumen brown;
\par
   involucral bracts with hyaline or brownish margin not
\par
   clearly distinct from inner part of bract 
\par

\par
147}
\par