{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Receptacle without scales
\par
2 Leaves fleshy, the lobes obtuse; achenes all similar,
\par
  obconical turbinate, distinctly ribbed, caducous .................... {\b 61. ammanthus}
\par
2 Leaves not fleshy, the lobes acute; outer achenes
\par
  cylindrical, obscurely ribbed, persistent, the inner
\par
  cylindric-obconical, distinctly ribbed, caducous ........................ {\b 59. filicaulis}
\par
1 Receptacle with scales at least in the upper half
\par
3 Receptacle without scales in the lower part; scales 
\par
  narrowly lanceolate to linear-subulate; annual
\par
4 Outer achenes cylindrical, persistent; pappus present;
\par
  ligules absent ............................................................................ {\b 60. tomentella}
\par
4 Achenes turbinate, caducous; pappus absent; ligules 
\par
  usually present
\par
5 Achenes tuberculate or verruculose; leaf-lobes narrowly
\par
  linear ................................................................................................ {\b 39. cotula}
\par
5 Achenes slightly ribbed, the ribs nearly or quite smooth;
\par
  leaf-lobes filiform ..................................................................... {\b 40. lithuanica}
\par
3 Receptacle with scales all over; scales usually wider;
\par
  annual, biennial or perennial
\par
6 Achenes usually somewhat compressed, rhombic in trans-
\par
  verse section; receptacular scales ± rigid; leaf-
\par
  segments usually pectinately divided
\par
7 Annual; ligules white
\par
8 Branches divaricate; involucre nearly flat .................................... {\b 55. syriaca}
\par
8 Branches erect to erecto-patent; involucre ± hemispherical
\par
9 Peduncles clavate in fruit; acumen of receptacular 
\par
  scales about as long as the scale
\par
10 Receptacular scales abruptly contracted above; achenes
\par
   with 7-11 ribs on each side; leaves 2- to 3-pinnatipartite.... {\b 53. altissima}
\par
10 Receptacular scales gradually narrowed above; achenes 
\par
   with 2-4 ribs on each side; leaves 1-pinnatisect, with
\par
   pectinate segments ................................................................... {\b 54. coelopoda}
\par
9  Peduncles not clavate in fruit; acumen of receptacular 
\par
   scales less than ½ as long as the scale
\par
11 Achenes 2·5-3 mm, slightly compressed, indistinctly 
\par
   ribbed; stems not more than 30 cm ...................................... {\b 58. brachmannii}
\par
11 Achenes (1·5-)2-2·5 mm, distinctly compressed and ± 
\par
   ribbed; stems up to 60 cm
\par
12 Achenes with (3-)5-7 distinct ribs on each side;
\par
   corona up to 1 mm; involucre finally umbonate ........................ {\b 56. segetalis}
\par
12 Achenes with 2-3 obscure ribs on each side; corona 
\par
   absent or very short; involucre not umbonate ........................... {\b 57. austriaca}
\par
7  Perennial
\par
13 Ligules absent
\par
14 Corona usually less than ¼ as long as achene; receptacular 
\par
   scales oblong-lanceolate, attenuate-acuminate .................... {\b 42. tinctoria}
\par
14 Corona ¼-½ as long as achene; receptacular scales
\par
   obovate-cuneate, ± abruptly contracted into the acumen
\par
15 Inner involucral bracts oblong-lanceolate, acute;
\par
   stems 30-90 cm, erect, corymbosely branched ......................... {\b 49. triumfetti}
\par
15 Inner involucral bracts oblong or elliptic-oblong,
\par
   obtuse or rounded; stems 10-40(-60) cm, usually simple ....... {\b 47. parnassica}
\par
13 Ligules present
\par
16 Ligules pure white or cream
\par
17 Ligules 13-30 × 2-4 mm, oblong to linear; all involucral
\par
   bracts with blackish margin and apex
\par
18 Stems 50-105 cm, corymbosely branched above; leaves up
\par
   to 15 × 10 cm, soft, green, sparsely hairy beneath;
\par
   capitula up to 65 mm in diameter; corona 1/4-1/3 as 
\par
   long as achene ......................................................................... {\b 51. macrantha}
\par
18 Stems 20-50 cm, simple or once branched at middle;
\par
   leaves not more than 5 × 2·5 cm, rigid, greyish,
\par
   sericeous beneath; capitula not more than 50 mm in
\par
   diameter; corona more than half as long as achene .................... {\b 52. jailensis}
\par
17 Ligules 6-20 × 2·5-6·5 mm, oblong to broadly elliptical;
\par
   inner and sometimes middle involucral bracts brownish 
\par
   at margin and apex
\par
19 Stems up to 90 cm, erect, corymbosely branched;
\par
   involucral bracts acute or subacute
\par
20 Capitula (25-)30-50 mm in diameter; ligules up to 
\par
   20 mm, pure white ....................................... {\b 49. triumfetti}
\par
20 Capitula 25-30(-35) mm in diameter; ligules not more 
\par
   than 12 mm, cream ........................................ {\b 50. dumetorum}
\par
19 Stems 10-40(-60) cm, decumbent or ascending; involucral
\par
   bracts obtuse
\par
21 Stems usually branched; leaves often 2-pinnatisect;
\par
   inner involucral bracts c. 2 mm wide; corona c. 1/3 as
\par
   long as achene ............................................... {\b 48. dubia}
\par
21 Stems usually simple; leaves pinnatifid; inner involucral bracts
\par
    less than 2 mm wide; corona ¼-½ as long as achene ............ {\b 47. parnassica} 
\par
16 Ligules yellow or orange
\par
22 Ligules pale- to lemon-yellow
\par
23 Stems 25-30(-40) cm, usually simple and with 1 capitulum; 
\par
   leaves green, with very sparse indumentum and flat teeth ...... {\b 46. monantha}
\par
23 Stems 30-50(-70) cm, usually branched, with many 
\par
   capitula; leaves densely greyish- or whitish-lanate 
\par
   beneath, with inflexed teeth ........................................................ {\b 42. tinctoria}
\par
22 Ligules golden-yellow to orange
\par
24 Involucral bracts acute or subacute, all or most with
\par
   dark brown or blackish margin and apex; ligules orange
\par
25 Capitula 40-50 mm in diameter with disc 15-25 mm in
\par
   diameter; achenes up to 2·5 mm; corona c. 1 mm ........... {\b 44. sancti-johannis}
\par
25 Capitula less than 40 mm in diameter with disc 11-18 mm
\par
   in diameter; achenes up to 2 mm; corona c. 0·5 mm .................. {\b 42. tinctoria}
\par
24 Outer involucral bracts acute, the inner obtuse to 
\par
   subacute, all with hyaline or pale margin and apex or 
\par
   only the inner diffusely brownish at apex; ligules 
\par
   golden-yellow
\par
26 Capitula 25-50 mm in diameter; leaves usually sparsely hairy
\par
27 Corona not more than 0·5 mm; capitula 25-45 mm in 
\par
   diameter; stems up to 60(-80) cm, not very robust ..................... {\b 42. tinctoria}
\par
27 Corona c. 1 mm; capitula 40-50 mm in diameter stems up
\par
   to 90 cm, rather robust ...................................................... {\b 43. gaudium-solis}
\par
26 Capitula not more than 30 mm in diameter; plants 
\par
   densely greyish- or whitish-lanate
\par
28 Stems 10-25 cm, procumbent; capitula 12-20(-25) mm in
\par
   diameter ...................................................................................... {\b 45. cretacea}
\par
28 Stems usually up to 60 cm, erect; capitula 20-25 (-30)
\par
   mm in diameter ........................................................................... {\b 42. tinctoria}
\par
6  Achenes not compressed, orbicular or subquadrate in 
\par
   transverse section; receptacular scales not or scarcely
\par
   rigid leaf-segments not pectinately divided
\par
29 Annual, rarely slender biennial, without non-flowering
\par
   shoots; peduncles sometimes clavate in fruit
\par
30 Receptacular scales with rather dense white hairs .............. {\b 61. ammanthus}
\par
30 Receptacular scales glabrous
\par
31 Ligules yellow ..................................................................... {\b 35. chrysantha}
\par
31 Ligules white, rarely pink or absent
\par
32 Achenes cylindrical, the outer persistent, the inner caducous;
\par
    receptacular scales linear or setaceous; ligules absent .......... {\b 60. tomentella}
\par
32 Achenes turbinate or subpyramidal, rarely subcylindrical,
\par
   all persistent or all caducous; receptacular scales usually 
\par
   linear-lanceolate or oblong; ligules usually present
\par
33 Achenes of at least the outer tubular florets granulate
\par
   or tuberculate
\par
34 Ribs of achenes prominent and strongly tuberculate
\par
35 All achenes with a denticulate rim; peduncles not 
\par
   clavate in fruit; ligules often present ...................................... {\b 17. tuberculata}
\par

\par
146}
\par