{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 appressed, elliptical. {\i Cultivated for ornament and naturalized in waste places.} [Da Ga Ge Ho Hu Rs (C).] ({\i North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Some records may be referable to{\i  H. rigidus,} from W. North America.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 46.             Verbesina}            L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A. Hansen
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs with simple leaves. Capitula medium. Involucral bracts in 3-4 rows. Ligulate florets yellow or white, female or sterile; tubular florets hermaphrodite. Receptacle with scales. Achenes flattened, more or less winged. Pappus usually of 2 awns.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: J. R. Coleman,{\i  Amer. Midl. Nat.}{\b  76}: 475-481 (1966).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. V. encelioides} (Cav.) Bentham & Hooker fil. ex A. Gray in Brewer, S. Watson & A. Gray, {\i Bot. Calif. }{\b 1}: 350 (1876). Erect, appressed-pubescent, branched annual up to 130 cm. Leaves 8-10 cm, opposite below, alternate above, ovate or deltate-ovate, coarsely serrate, usually with broadly auriculate, winged petioles. Capitula terminal, solitary; peduncles up to 12 cm. Involucral bracts linear, acute, subequal. Ligules 10-15, 15-25 mm, orange-yellow, 3-lobed at apex. Achenes of ligulate florets 3 mm, 3-angled, tuberculate, blackish, awnless. Achenes of tubular florets 4-7 mm, oblong-cuneate, white-winged, blackish, hairy; pappus of 2 scabrid, filiform awns; receptacular scales membranous, as long as the achenes. {\i Locally naturalized.} [?.Da ?Ge ?He ?Su.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b encelioides}: Leaves usually densely pubescent and all auriculate. Involucral bracts usually more than 12 mm.{\i  Scattered throughout the European range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b exauriculata} (Robinson & Greenman) J. R. Coleman, {\i Amer. Midl. Nat.}{\b  76}: 478 (1966): Leaves not densely pubescent, the lower without auricles. Involucral bracts usually less than 12 mm.{\i  Scattered throughout the European range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 47.         Silphium}              L.
\par
 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Leaves simple, opposite. Capitula medium. Involucral bracts in several rows. Receptacle flat, with numerous scales which are folded round the achenes. Ligulate florets in 2-3 rows, female, yellow. Tubular florets functionally male, yellow. Achenes strongly compressed and winged above. Pappus almost obsolete.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. perfoliatum} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2}: 1232 (1759). Stems up to 250 cm, 4-angled, glabrous. Leaves triangular-ovate, coarsely toothed, acute, the lower up to 30 cm, long-petiolate, the upper abruptly contracted into a winged petiole; wings of pairs of petioles connate to form a cup round the stem. Capitula pedunculate, in a corymbose inflorescence. Involucre 15-25 × 12-25 mm; bracts ovate, glabrous. {\i Cultivated for ornament; occurs as a casual and locally naturalized, on river-banks and in damp meadows in C. Europe.} [Cz Ge He.] ({\i North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 48.             Iva}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A. Hansen.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs or shrubs. Leaves alternate or opposite. Capitula small, in spikes or panicles. Involucral bracts 5, in one row. Receptacle with scales. All florets tubular. Marginal florets female, few; inner male. Achenes cuneate-obovate, somewhat compressed; pappus absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: R. C. Jackson, {\i Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull.}{\b  41}: 793-876 (1960).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. I. xanthifolia} Nutt.,{\i  Gen. N. Amer. Pl.}{\b  2}: 185 (1818). Annual, with erect, branched stems up to 200 cm, glabrous or hairy. Leaves 7-30 cm, more or less opposite, petiolate, 3-veined, broadly obovate-subcordate to rhombic, sometimes 3- to 5-lobed, coarsely serrate, scabrid above, hairy beneath. Capitula numerous, greenish-white, sessile or on short peduncles, in axillary and terminal, leafless spikes or panicles. Involucre turbinate. Functionally male florets 8-20, with filiform scales; female florets usually 5, with obovate, ciliate scales. Corolla of functionally male florets c. 2·5 mm; of female c. 0·5 mm or obsolete. Achenes c. 3 mm, muricate, dark brown. 2n = 36. {\i Cultivated ground, railway-lines and waste places. Naturalized in E.C. & S.E. Europe and in France; casual elsewhere.} [Au Cz Ga Ge Hu Po Rm Rs (C, W, E).] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 49.              Ambrosia}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A. Hansen.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Leaves mostly opposite. Capitula unisexual, inconspicuous; male hemispherical, drooping, in terminal, ebracteate racemes; female in axils of the uppermost leaves, each with a single floret. All florets tubular. Achene enclosed by the nut-like involucre; pappus absent; involucre usually with small spines or tubercles near apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: A. Lawalreé,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. Bruxelles }{\b 18}: 305-315 (1947);{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Belg.}{\b  87}: 207-208 (1955). E.-J. Bonnot, {\i Bull. Mens. Soc. Linn. Lyon}{\b  36}: 348-359 (1967).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves palmately 3- to 5-lobed or entire, all opposite;
\par
  involucre 6-10 mm in fruit ................................................................ {\b 5. trifida}
\par
1 Leaves pinnatifid, sometimes alternate; involucre 3-5 mm
\par
  in fruit
\par
2 Perennial; involucre in fruit unarmed or with short,
\par
  blunt teeth .............................................................................. {\b 4. coronopifolia}
\par
2 Annual; involucre in fruit with 4-7 acute, spinose teeth
\par
  or conical tubercles
\par
3 Plant aromatic; involucre in fruit 5-angled, glandular-
\par
  pubescent, with 5 conical tubercles; beak 0·5 mm ....................... {\b 1. maritima}
\par
3 Plant not aromatic; involucre in fruit fusiform-obovoid
\par
  weakly angled, wrinkled, ± glabrous, with spinose teeth,
\par
  beak 1-1·5 mm
\par
4 Female capitula in clusters of 2-4 ......................................... {\b 2. artemisiifolia}
\par
4 Female capitula solitary .............................................................. {\b 3. tenuifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. maritima} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 988 (1753). Erect, branched, aromatic annual up to 125 cm. Stems often woody below. Leaves petiolate, deeply 2-pinnate, densely grey-hairy beneath; lobes ovate to lanceolate. Male involucre 3 mm in diameter, cupshaped; bracts connate and crenately lobed, usually pubescent; male flowers 10-15; corolla present. Female capitula in axillary clusters; involucre 3-5 mm, 5-angled in fruit, glandular-pubescent, with 5 conical tubercles; beak 0·5 mm; female flowers without corolla. Achenes obovoid, smooth.{\i  Maritime sands. Mediterranean region.} Al Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. artemisiifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 988 (1753). Like {\b 1} but not aromatic; leaves often 1-pinnatisect, green beneath; lobes lanceolate; involucre in fruit fusiform-obovoid, weakly angled wrinkled, more or less glabrous, with 5-7 spinose teeth; beak 1-1·5 mm. 2n = 36.{\i  Locally naturalized, mainly in C. & S. Europe.} [Au Be Cz Ga Ge Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W).] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. tenuifolia} Sprengel,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  3}: 851 (1826). Like {\b 1} but not aromatic; leaves somewhat grey-hairy beneath; lobes linear
\par

\par
142}
\par