{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min11}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min12}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1061}{\nofchars6049}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 acuminate, shorter than the florets. Achenes cylindrical-obconical, subquadrangular, obsoletely ribbed, not or slightly granulate; corona up to 0\'b75 mm.}{\i\fs28  Grassy and stony places. Mountains of S. & S.C. Europe, from the Pyrenees to the E. Carpathians and N. Greece.}{\fs28  Al Au Bu Gr He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 
\par  Very variable in habit, indumentum, size of leaves, shape and width of leaf-lobes, size of capitula, etc. Some plants from S.E. Europe and E. Pyrenees are more or less whitish-sericeous, sometimes have stems with 1-2 branches, and a slightly higher receptacle. These have been called}{\b\fs28  A. cinerea}{\fs28  Pancic, }{\i\fs28 Nov. Elem. Fl. Bulg.}{\fs28  }{\i\fs28 39}{\fs28  (1886), and may merit subspecific rank.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Stems usually not more than 10 cm; leaves pinnatipartite,
\par   with cuneate, entire or 2- to 3-lobed segments, the lobes up 
\par   to 3 mm wide .......................................................... (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 pyrethriformis}{\fs28 
\par 1 Stems usually more than 10 cm; leaves 1- to 2-pinna-
\par   tisect, usually with narrower, not cuneate lobes
\par 2 Glabrous; stems usually more than 3\'bd times as long as the  non-
\par   flowering shoots; capitula 20-30(-40) mm in diameter ......(}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 petraea}{\fs28 
\par 2 Sparsely hairy to \'b1 whitish-sericeous, rarely glabrous;
\par   stems usually less than 3\'bd times as long as the non-
\par   flowering shoots; capitula(20-)30-50 mm in diameter ... (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 carpatica}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 carpatica}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 A. orientalis}{\fs28  subsp. }{\i\fs28 carpatica}{\fs28  (Willd.) Hayek): Stems (6-)10-35(-40) cm. Leaves up to 6 \'d7 2\'b78 cm, light green, more or less sparsely hairy to whitish-sericeous, rarely glabrous. Capitula (20-)30-40(-50) mm in diameter; peduncles (1-)3-11 cm. Involucre glabrous to densely hairy; outer bracts at least half as long as the inner, all usually with dark scarious margin and apex. Ligules up to 20 \'d7 8\'b75 mm; disc 10-18 mm in diameter. Achenes 2\'b75-3 mm. 2n = 36, 54. }{\i\fs28 Pyrenees; E. Alps; Carpathians and mountains of Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 pyrethriformis}{\fs28  (Schur) Beldie,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Veg. Munt. Bucegi}{\fs28  270 (1967) (}{\i\fs28 A. pyrethriformis}{\fs28  Schur,}{\i\fs28  A. carpatica}{\fs28  var. }{\i\fs28 sericea}{\fs28  Heuffel): Stems usually not more than 10 cm; leaves with short, cuneate lobes, 1-3 mm wide, obtuse or rounded at apex, sericeous when young. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S. Carpathians}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 petraea}{\fs28  (Ten.) R. Fernandes,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  70}{\fs28 : 7 (1975) (}{\i\fs28 A. petraea}{\fs28  Ten.): Stems usually 16-35 cm. Leaves up to 5 \'d7 2 cm, somewhat thicker and more densely glandular-punctate than in subspp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) and (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ); peduncles 7-25 cm; involucre somewhat umbonate; ligules up to 12(-16) \'d7 5(-7) mm. Disc 8-13 mm in diameter. Achenes 2\'b75-3 mm, rather attenuate to the base, with a distinct, hyaline oblique corona c. 0\'b75 mm. \bullet }{\i\fs28  C. Appennini, ?E. Pyrenees}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par  Some plants from Albania, Greece and Bulgaria which have been referred to}{\i\fs28  A. orientalis}{\fs28  var.}{\i\fs28  macedonia }{\fs28 (Griseb.) Hayek are like sericeous variants of subsp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ), but have more numerous and crowded stems, less hairy leaves, an umbonate and more convex involucre, with sometimes almost obtuse bracts with a less distinct black margin; the receptacle is usually conical and acute and the scales less distinctly 3-dentate. They approach }{\b\fs28 19}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) but differ from it in several characters and may prove to be a distinct species.
\par 
\par  Plants from Austria (Steiermark), sometimes known as }{\b\fs28 A. styriaca}{\fs28  Vest, }{\i\fs28 Syll. Pl. Nov. Ratisbon.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 K\'f6nigl. Baier. Bot. Ges}{\fs28 .)}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 12 (1824), have stout stems usually 11-16 cm, wide leaf-lobes and large capitula with wide ligules. They may, perhaps, represent another subspecies, but similar variants occur sporadically elsewhere.
\par 
\par  Plants from the E. Pyrenees, sometimes referred to }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ), are somewhat intermediate between this and sericeous variants of }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. A. sibthorpii}{\fs28  Griseb., }{\i\fs28 Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 210 (1846) (}{\i\fs28 A. orientalis}{\fs28  subsp. }{\i\fs28 sibthorpii}{\fs28  (Griseb.) Hayek). Like }{\b\fs28 2(c}{\fs28 ) but ligules absent; involucral bracts with paler margin, the outer contracted (not attenuate) to the apex; receptacular scales shorter, not so dark at apex or only the outer brown towards apex; receptacle more distinctly conical; florets slightly shorter, with swollen tube in lower 1/3; achenes 2-2\'b75 mm.}{\i\fs28  Mountain rocks. \bullet  N. Greece}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Athos}{\fs28 ). Gr.
\par 
\par  Perhaps not specifically distinct from }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 , but a local variant, which might be reduced to subspecific level.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. A. aetnensis}{\fs28  Schouw in Sprengel,}{\i\fs28  Syst. Veg.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 : 595 (1826). Perennial, forming low, rounded tussocks. Stock woody, much-branched. Stems 4\'b75-12(-20) cm, densely leafy below. Lower leaves up to 2\'b75 cm, pinnatisect, fleshy, dull green, sparsely to densely hairy; segments partite or lobed; lobes oblong, mucronate. Capitula up to 22 mm in diameter; peduncles 1\'b75-7 cm. Involucral bracts with hyaline or purplish margin, the outer and middle lanceolate, acute, the inner oblong, subacute. Ligules 3\'b75-6\'b75(-8) \'d7 2\'b725-3 mm, purplish-pink at least at base. Disc 7-9 mm in diameter at anthesis, up to 13 mm in fruit. Receptacular scales oblong, hyaline, purplish-pink mainly at the apex. Achenes 2\'b75-2\'b775 mm, obconical-pyramidal, with distinct, slightly raised ribs; corona 0\'b725-0\'b75 mm, obliquely truncate. 2n = 36.}{\i\fs28  Volcanic debris, c. }{\fs28 2000 }{\i\fs28 m. \bullet  Sicilia}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Etna}{\fs28 ). Si.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. A. punctata}{\fs28  Vahl,}{\i\fs28  Symb. Bot.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 91 (1791). Robust, glabrescent to whitish-sericeous perennial with a woody stock. Stems (20-)30-60 cm and up to 6 mm thick at base, several, usually corymbosely branched. Leaves up to 12 \'d7 5\'b75 cm, 1- to 2(3)pinnatisect or pinnatipartite, glandular-punctate beneath, with patent segments, the lobes linear to oblong, up to 7 mm wide. Capitula up to 63 mm in diameter; peduncles up to 24 cm. Involucre depressed-subhemispherical at anthesis, more or less umbonate in fruit; bracts green, the outer and middle triangular-lanceolate, acute, with dark brown scarious margin and apex, the inner ovate-oblong, with wider and sometimes paler apex. Ligules up to 24 \'d7 8 mm; disc 12-20 mm in diameter. Receptacle hemispherical-conical with obtuse apex; scales oblong, at least the outer 3-dentate, dark brown towards apex, equalling the florets. Achenes 2-3 mm, obpyramidal, not or slightly ribbed not granulate; corona up to 1 mm.}{\i\fs28  Sicilia.}{\fs28  Si.
\par 
\par  The above description applies to subsp.}{\b\fs28  cupaniana}{\fs28  (Tod. ex Nyman) R. Fernandes,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  70}{\fs28 : 7 (1975), the only subspecies occurring in Europe. The typical subspecies occurs in N.W. Africa and has distinctly ribbed and granulate achenes. Plants from Spain, referred by Willkomm to}{\i\fs28  A. punctata,}{\fs28  are }{\b\fs28 17}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. A. cretica}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  895 (1753) (non}{\i\fs28  A. cretica}{\fs28  (L.) Nyman). Perennial. Non-flowering shoots forming more or less dense cushions. Stems usually simple, leafy up to about the middle. Leaves 1-pinnatisect, frequently folded along rhachis; petiole 1/2-2/3 of the leaf-length. Peduncles long. Involucre hemispherical, more or less persistently lanate. Receptacle hemispherical or shortly ovoid; scales oblong, about equalling the florets. Achenes obpyramidal to turbinate, sometimes slightly ribbed, mainly on inner face, smooth or granulate, with acute rim or a very short corona. }{\i\fs28 Mountains of S. Europe; W. Czechoslovakia.}{\fs28  Al Bu Cz Ga Gr ?Hs It Ju Rm ?Si Tu.
\par 
\par  Very polymorphic. Further subspecies, in addition to the following, should perhaps be recognized.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Involucre strongly umbonate; involucral bracts with hyaline
\par    margin and apex; ligules usually absent;
\par    achenes c. 2\'b725 mm ............................................................ (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 alpina}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 149}
\par }