{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 62 Leaves fleshy, sparsely hairy to glabrous; stem stout,
\par
   procumbent or ascending, ± branched, rooting at base;
\par
   ligules present; involucral bracts with hyaline margin ............. {\b 13. maritima} 
\par
62 Not as above
\par
63 Receptacle hemispherical or shortly ovoid, rounded at apex
\par
64 Ligules present
\par
65 Non-flowering shoots ± pulvinate;stems 12-30 (-40) cm,
\par
   less than 5 times as long as non-flowering shoots,
\par
   usually ascending, not in groups, rather stout; involucral 
\par
   bracts usually with brownish scarious margin ................................ {\b 6. cretica}
\par
65 Non-flowering shoots not pulvinate; stems 20-55 cm, 4½-10
\par
   times as long as non-flowering shoots, erect, in groups, 
\par
   slender; involucral bracts with hyaline margin ....................... {\b 11. gerardiana}
\par
64 Ligules absent
\par
66 Achenes not ribbed; pappus absent or very short;
\par
   stems simple .................................................................................... {\b 6. cretica}
\par
66 Achenes ribbed; pappus present; stems often branched
\par
67 Leaves densely greyish- or brownish-tomentose;
\par
   achenes 2·5-3 mm, with a short auricle ...................................... {\b 21. spruneri}
\par
67 Leaves green, sparsely hairy; achenes (1·5-) 2-2·5 mm,
\par
   usually with a short corona ......................................................... {\b 12. alpestris}
\par
63 Receptacle conical (sometimes short), or distinctly 
\par
   narrowed to the apex
\par
68 Stems branched, the branches again branched; ligules present
\par
69 Stems not more than 22 cm, slender; disc 6-9 mm in 
\par
   diameter; ligules 4-5 × 3 mm ................................................... {\b 24. meteorica}
\par
69 Stems up to 80 cm, stout; disc 9-13 mm in diameter;
\par
   ligules 11-17 × 3·5-4-5 mm
\par
70 Biennial; non-flowering shoots absent at anthesis;
\par
   involucre deeply umbonate; achenes 1·5-1·75 mm ..................... {\b 15. orbelica}
\par
70 Perennial; non-flowering shoots present at anthesis;
\par
   involucre not or slightly umbonate; achenes 2 mm .................. {\b 23. pindicola}
\par
68 Stems simple or with simple branches; ligules present or absent
\par
71 Young leaves usually densely hairy; achenes usually with pappus
\par
72 Non-flowering shoots numerous, dense, pulvinate;
\par
   indumentum whitish-lanate; ligules present ................................... {\b 7. sterilis}
\par
72 Non-flowering shoots not pulvinate; indumentum greyish
\par
   or brownish; ligules present or absent
\par
73 Cauline leaves up to c. 1·5 × 0·7 cm, with ± flabellate,
\par
   very crowded segments; lobes obtuse; achenes subprismatic, 
\par
   distinctly ribbed ......................................................................... {\b 20. anatolica}
\par
73 Cauline leaves up to 3 × 2 cm or more; lobes acute;
\par
   achenes obconical or obpyramidal, not or slightly ribbed 
\par
74 Outer receptacular scales sparsely hairy on back;
\par
   involucral bracts usually without a brownish margin;
\par
   cauline leaves not more than 3 × 2 cm ..................................... {\b 19. tenuiloba}
\par
74 Outer receptacular scales not hairy on back; involucral
\par
   bracts with brownish margin and apex; cauline leaves 
\par
   up to 6 cm ................................................................................. {\b 23. pindicola}
\par
71 Young leaves ± sparsely hairy; pappus absent or an 
\par
   auricle not more than 0·25 mm
\par
75 Achenes 1·25-1·5 mm; disc 4-8(-9) mm in diameter;
\par
   involucre not umbonate
\par
76 Ligules absent; stems 3-15 cm, simple ............................... {\b 8. abrotanifolia}
\par
76 Ligules present; stems often more than 15 cm, simple
\par
   or with 1-3 branches .................................................................. {\b 26. stribrnyi}
\par
75 Achenes 1·5-2·5 mm; disc often more than 8 mm in 
\par
   diameter, at least in fruit
\par
77 Stems not more than 20 cm; involucre not or slightly umbonate
\par
78 Ligules absent; disc up to 13 mm in diameter; achenes
\par
   (1·5-)2-2·5 mm ........................................................................... {\b 12. alpestris}
\par
78 Ligules present; disc not more than 10 mm in diameter;
\par
   achenes 1·5-2 mm
\par
79 Receptacle not or scarcely higher than wide ......................... {\b 9. panachaica}
\par
79 Receptacle distinctly higher than wide .................................... {\b 25. rumelica}
\par
77 Stems 20-55 cm; involucre usually umbonate
\par
80 Ligules present ...................................................................... {\b 11. gerardiana}
\par
80 Ligules absent
\par
81 Stems 24-45 cm, erect, rigid; capitula 5-8 mm in dia-
\par
   meter at anthesis; achenes 1·5-1·75 mm ................................. {\b 16. hydruntina}
\par
81 Stems 10-35(-40) cm, ascending, not rigid; capitula
\par
   8-13 mm in diameter at anthesis; achenes (1·5-)2-2·5 mm ........ {\b 12. alpestris}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Anthemis}. Perennial or annual, rarely biennial. Receptacle with obovate-cuneate to linear, not or scarcely rigid scales at least above. Achenes not compressed, turbinate, subpyramidal or obconical, orbicular or subquadrate in transverse section.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. HORITHIA (DC.) R. Fernandes. Usually perennial herbs or dwarf shrubs with non-flowering shoots. Peduncles not clavate in fruit. Involucral bracts with hyaline to black scarious margin and apex. Receptacular scales usually more or less persistent, concolorous or brown to black at apex. Ligules white, yellow or frequently absent. Receptacle hemispherical, ovoid or shortly conical. Achenes with smooth, tuberculate or often granulate, ribs, or the ribs obsolete.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. trotzkiana} Claus ex Bunge,{\i  Del. Sem. Horti Dorpat.} 3 (1847). Very dense dwarf shrub; flowering stems with withered remains of leaves at base. Stems 9-16(-30) cm, simple or with few erect branches. Leaves up to 5·5 cm, 1- to 2-pinnatisect, white-lanate, glabrescent; lobes linear; mucro long, acute. Capitula c. 20 mm in diameter. Involucre campanulate; bracts lanate, the outer ovate-triangular, acute, the others with a wide hyaline apex. Ligules 7·5-13 × 3·5-6 mm, yellow. Disc 10-13 mm in diameter. Receptacle shortly conical; receptacular scales oblong-cuneate, abruptly acuminate, shorter than the florets. Achenes c. 2 mm, obpyramidal, ribbed on the adaxial side, not granulate, with or without a short corona. {\i Calcicole. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan}. Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. carpatica} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b 3}: 2179 (1803). Stock woody. Stems usually simple, densely appressed-hairy to glabrous. Leaves densely appressed-hairy to glabrous, 1- to 2-pinnatisect or pinnatipartite, with entire, dentate or lobed segments, the lower cauline long-petiolate; lobes linear-lanceolate or obovate-lanceolate. Capitula usually long-pedunculate. Involucre subhemispherical, not umbonate; bracts subequal, ovate-lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, acute to subobtuse, green with rather wide, black or brown margins and apex. Ligules usually longer than the diameter of the disc; corolla-tube swollen and spongy at base. Receptacle hemispherical-conical; scales oblong or oblong-cuneate, frequently brown towards the dentate or lacerate apex,
\par

\par
148}
\par