{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Peduncles with erecto-patent hairs less than 0·5 mm and 
\par
  few, short patent glandular hairs; receptacular scales
\par
  3-fid; pappus-scales not aristate .................................................. {\b 1. parviflora}
\par
Peduncles with numerous, long patent glandular hairs more  than
\par
  0·5 mm; receptacular scales entire; pappus-scales aristate ............... {\b 2. ciliata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. parviflora} Cav., {\i Icon. Descr.}{\b  3}: 41 (1795). Stem up to 80 cm, branched, glabrous below. Leaves up to 5(-9) cm, ovate, acute to acuminate, serrate; petiole shorter than lamina, slender. Peduncles with erecto-patent hairs less than 0·5 mm and few, short patent glandular hairs. Capitula subglobose; involucral bracts c. 4 mm, broadly ovate; receptacular scales 3-fid. Ligules c. 1 mm, about as wide as long, usually 5, white, 3-toothed; tubular florets yellow. Achenes 1-1·5 mm, with short ascending setae; pappus-scales not aristate. 2n = 16. {\i Waste places and cultivated ground. Widely naturalized in Europe.} [Au Az Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, ?E) Su.] ({\i South America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. G. ciliata} (Rafin.) S. F. Blake,{\i  Rhodora }{\b 24}: 35 (1922) ({\i G. quadriradiata} auct., non Ruiz & Pavon). Like {\b 1} but stems hairy below; peduncles with numerous long, patent, flexuous glandular hairs more than 0·5 mm; receptacular scales not 3-fid; pappus-scales aristate. 2n = 32, 36. {\i Waste places and cultivated ground. Apparently less common than }{\b 1},{\i  but probably often overlooked.} [Au Az Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Su.] (Mexico to Chile.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   Tribe   {\b  Helenieae}           Bentham
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves alternate or opposite, simple or pinnatisect. Capitula usually with ligules; outer florets female or sterile, the inner hermaphrodite or functionally male; corolla usually yellow. Receptacle without scales. Anthers obtuse at base. Style branches truncate or with a non-stigmatic apex. Pappus of scales.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 53.              Schkuhria}           Roth
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual herbs. Leaves pinnatifid, glandular-punctate, alternate or opposite. Capitula small. Involucral bracts 5-8, in one row or with 2-3 small outer bracts, free. Receptacle concave, without scales. Florets (3-)4(-5), one ligulate and female, the others tubular,hermaphrodite. Achenes 4-angled, pubescent. Pappus of 8 scales.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. pinnata} (Lam.) O. Kuntze,{\i  Revis. Gen.}{\b  3}: 170 (1898). Erect, freely branched annual 25-75 cm, appressed-pubescent at least above. Leaves 1- to 2-pinnatisect, with linear segments. Capitula very numerous, in a more or less corymbose panicle. Involucre 5-6 × 3-4 mm, obconical, with 2 linear bracts at its base; involucral bracts purplish with yellow scarious margin in fruit. Ligule c. 1·5 mm, yellow. Achenes attenuate below, appressed-pubescent. Pappus-scales alternately acuminate-aristate and obtuse.{\i  Cultivated or disturbed ground. Naturalized in E. Spain; an occasional casual elsewhere.} [Hs.] ({\i South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 54.            Gaillardia}            Foug.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A. Hansen.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or short-lived perennials. Leaves entire or pinnatifid, alternate. Capitula large. Involucral bracts in 2-3 rows. Receptacle convex-subglobose, with numerous scales or setae. Outer florets ligulate, usually female; inner florets tubular, hermaphrodite. Achenes obovoid, usually covered by a basal tuft of long hairs. Pappus of 5-10 long-awned scales.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: S. F. Biddulph,{\i  Res. Stud. State Coll. Washington}{\b  12}: 195-256 (1944).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. aristata} Pursh,{\i  Fl. Amer. Sept.}{\b  2}: 573 (1814). Erect, hairy perennial 20-70 cm. Leaves 5-15 × 0·5-2·5 cm, linear-oblong to lanceolate-ovate, the lower often oblanceolate, entire (often serrate) or pinnatifid. Capitula solitary or few, long-pedunculate. Involucral bracts 6-13 × 2-3 mm, herbaceous, narrow, often hairy, patent, deflexed in fruit. Ligules numerous, 1-3·5 cm, yellow, often with purplish base. Tubular florets purple or brownish-purple. Achenes c. 4 mm, covered by the appressed basal hairs, shorter than the setae on the receptacle. Pappus 2-3 mm (excluding awn), white, membranous, abruptly contracted into an awn.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and naturalized in the Açores}. [Az.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b G. pulchella} Foug., {\i Mem. Acad. Sci.} ({\i Paris}){\b  1786}: 5 (1788), also from North America, is perhaps becoming naturalized in C. Europe. It is an annual with purple ligules with a yellow apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 55.             Tagetes}            L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A. Hansen.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aromatic annual herbs. Leaves pinnatifid, glandular-punctate, mostly opposite. Capitula medium. Involucral bracts 5-10, in one row, connate nearly to apex. Receptacle flat, small, without scales. Outer florets ligulate, female; inner florets tubular, hermaphrodite. Achenes linear, 4-angled, slightly compressed, pubescent. Pappus of 5-10 membranous, often connate scales, one or more of them awned.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. minuta} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 887 (1753). Erect, glabrous, strong smelling annual up to 100 cm, with short branches. Leaves 3-15 × 3-10 cm, pinnatisect; segments 3-7, 2-8 × 0·2-0·6 cm, linear-lanceolate; only the lower leaves opposite. Capitula numerous in dense terminal corymbs. Involucre 8-12 × 1·5-2 mm, cylindrical, of 3-4 yellowish-green bracts. Ligules usually 1-3 mm, obovate-spathulate, yellowish-green. Tubular florets 4-5, 3-4 mm, green. Achenes 4-6 × 0·5-1 mm, linear, black, with appressed white hairs. Pappus of 5 scales 0·5-3 mm.{\i  Waste places and cultivated ground. Locally naturalized in S. Europe, casual elsewhere.} [Ga It Ju.] ({\i South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   Tribe       {\b  Anthemideae}         Cass.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves alternate, very rarely opposite, simple or pinnatisect. Capitula with or without ligules; outer florets usually female or sterile, the inner hermaphrodite or functionally male; corolla usually white or yellow. Receptacle with or without scales. Anthers usually obtuse at base. Style-branches truncate and papillose at apex. Pappus absent or a corona or auricle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 56.             Santolina}           L.
\par         

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By E. Guinea &  †T. G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aromatic dwarf shrubs. Leaves alternate, entire or dentate to pinnately lobed. Capitula small to medium, pedunculate. Involucral bracts in several rows, gradually increasing in length inwards. Receptacle slightly convex; scales present, half surrounding the achenes. Florets tubular, usually all hermaphrodite, yellow to whitish; tube often compressed and more or less winged, spurred at base or saccate and enclosing the apex of the achene. Achenes oblong, weakly 3- to 4(-5)-angled; pappus absent.
\par

\par
144}
\par