{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant glandular-viscid; stem leafy almost up to capitulum ......... {\b 3. viscosa} 
\par
1 Plant not glandular-viscid; stem leafless for some 
\par
  distance below capitulum
\par
2 Plant sericeous ........................................................................ {\b 1. oblongifolia}
\par
2 Plant tomentose to subglabrous, not sericeous
\par
3 Most leaves flat; stock slender ....................................................... {\b 2. elegans}
\par
3 Most leaves subcylindrical; stock stout
\par
4 Leaves entire, tuberculate-dentate or pinnatifid to
\par
  pinnatisect, with lobes less than 1·5 mm
\par
5 Pinnae or teeth remote, or leaves apparently entire but
\par
  with closely appressed teeth ................................................. {\b 4. rosmarinifolia}
\par
5 Pinnae or teeth crowded ................................................ {\b 5. chamaecyparissus}
\par
4 Leaves pinnatisect; lobes more than 1·5 mm
\par
6 Leaves grey-tomentose ................................................. {\b 5. chamaecyparissus}
\par
6 Leaves not tomentose 7 Lobes of leaves crowded;
\par
  peduncles not thickened above ...................................... {\b 5. chamaecyparissus} 
\par
7 Lobes of leaves remote; peduncles thickened above ........... {\b 4. rosmarinifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. oblongifolia} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 3}): 18 (1856). Plant sericeous. Non-flowering shoots long, semi-procumbent from a branched, woody stock, with short axillary shoots; flowering stems 15-30 cm, ascending, sparsely leafy below, leafless above, thickened below the solitary capitulum. Leaves erecto-patent, oblong-spathulate, flat, some pinnatifid with obtuse lobes, the upper on the flowering stems entire and softly mucronate, all narrowed into the petiole. Involucre 15-18 mm wide, subglabrous; bracts lanceolate, weakly carinate, the inner with rounded, lacerate-denticulate, scarious apex. Florets bright yellow. •{\i  Mountains of W.C. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. elegans} Boiss. ex DC., {\i Prodr.} 7: 296 (1838). Plant grey-tomentose. Stems (5-)10-20 cm, from a slender, creeping, branched stock; non-flowering shoots short, densely leafy; flowering stems erect, sparsely leafy. Leaves oblong-linear to oblong-spathulate, obtuse, the lower incise-crenate to pinnatisect, plicate, shortly petiolate, the upper entire, flat, sessile. Involucre 7-10 mm wide, subglobose, villous; bracts ecarinate, the outer ovate-lanceolate, the inner oblong, with scarious apex. Florets yellow. •{\i  S. Spain }({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. viscosa} Lag., {\i Gen. Sp. Nov.} 25 (1816). Plant glabrous or sparsely puberulent, glandular-viscid. Stems 15-40 cm, from a stout, ascending, much-branched stock; non-flowering shoots short, densely leafy; flowering stems paniculately branched, leafy almost up to the capitula, scarcely thickened at apex. Leaves crowded below, nearly all pectinate-pinnatisect, the lobes 2-ranked; uppermost leaves small, entire. Involucre 10-15 mm wide, subglobose; outer bracts ecarinate, ovate-lanceolate, acute or acuminate; inner oblong, with wide, lacerate, scarious apex. {\i Gypsaceous soils. • S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. rosmarinifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 842 (1753) (incl.{\i  S. pectinata }Lag.,{\i  S. viridis} Willd.). Stems (15-)35-45(-60) cm, erect or ascending from a procumbent, branched stock; non-flowering shoots with greyish-glaucous leaves and short axillary shoots; flowering stems usually simple, leafless above. Juvenile leaves erect to erecto-patent, narrowly linear, acute, very shortly and remotely tuberculate-denticulate to pectinate-pinnatifid; adult leaves with closely appressed teeth, the uppermost entire. Peduncles thickened above. Involucre 7-12 mm wide, hemispherical, subtruncate and umbilicate at the base; bracts lanceolate, acuminate, strongly carinate, the inner with wide, scarious, lacerate apex. Florets bright yellow. 2n = 18, 36.{\i  Iberian peninsula, S. France.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rosmarinifolia}: Plant glabrous to sparsely tomentulose.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b canescens} (Lag.) Nyman, {\i Consp. }369 (1879): Plant densely whitish- or greyish-tomentose. {\i S.E. Spain, above} 800{\i  m}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. chamaecyparissus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 842 (1753). Stems 10-50 cm, erect or ascending; non-flowering shoots green to grey-tomentose; flowering stems usually simple, leafless for some distance below the capitulum. Leaves densely pectinate-dentate to pinnatisect. Involucre 6-10 mm wide, hemispherical, subtruncate and not or weakly umbilicate at base; bracts lanceolate to ovate, carinate, the inner with rounded, lacerate, scarious apex. Florets cream to bright yellow.{\i  W. & C. Mediterranean region.} Bl Co Ga Hs It Ju Sa Si [He Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lobes of leaves not more than 2 mm
\par
2 Involucre usually tomentose; florets deep yellow
\par
  ........................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b chamaecyparissus} 
\par
2 Involucre usually glabrous; florets pale yellow ............. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b squarrosa} 
\par
1 Lobes of some leaves at least 2-5 mm
\par
3 Leaves often glabrous; peduncles not thickened above ({\b c}) subsp. {\b tomentosa}
\par
3 Leaves grey-tomentose; peduncles thickened above ...... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b insularis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b chamaecyparissus}: Very variable in habit. Leaves grey- to white-tomentose; lobes not more than 2 mm. Involucre usually tomentose; florets deep yellow.{\i  Pyrenees to N.W. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b squarrosa} (DC.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 368 (1879): Dwarf. Leaves glabrous to tomentose; lobes not more than 2 mm. Involucre usually glabrous; florets pale yellow.{\i  Spain, Islas Baleares, S. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b tomentosa} (Pers.) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} 363 (1882): Usually tall. Some or all leaves usually glabrous or glabrescent; lobes 2·5-7 mm. Involucre usually glabrous; florets usually whitish or pale yellow.{\i  Pyrenees to C. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b insularis} (Genn. ex Fiori) Yeo, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  70}: 18 (1975) ({\i S. chamaecyparissus} var. {\i insularis} Genn. ex Fiori): Usually tall. Leaves grey-tomentose; lobes more than 2·5 mm. Involucre usually tomentose; florets yellow.{\i  C. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 57.             Anthemis}           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R. Fernandes
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or dwarf shrubs, more or less hairy. Leaves alternate, usually divided. Capitula small to medium, solitary, terminal, pedunculate. Involucre usually more or less hemispherical; involucral bracts in several rows. Receptacle conical, hemispherical or ovoid; scales usually present, at least in upper part of receptacle. Outer florets usually ligulate and female, with compressed tube and patent, usually 2- to 3-dentate ligule. Inner florets hermaphrodite, tubular, 5-dentate, numerous, yellow; tube not saccate. Achenes terete or more or less compressed; pappus absent or represented by a corona or auricle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Measurements of length of stem include the peduncle; length of leaves includes both petiole and lamina; length of peduncle is taken from the uppermost divided cauline leaf to the base of the capitulum; length of ligules is that of the limb; measurements of achenes refer to the achenes of the tubular florets and include the corona or auricle unless the contrary is stated; number of striations on the achene (Subgen. {\i Cota}) refers to those of outer and inner sides (not to each of four faces of achenes), including also that corresponding to the median angle of each side.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The primary divisions of the leaves are referred to as{\i  segments} and the ultimate divisions as{\i  lobes}. Unless the contrary is stated the involucre is not umbonate and the ligules are white.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Mature achenes are essential for the identification of most species.
\par

\par
145}
\par