{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucre not or slightly umbonate; involucral bracts usually 
\par
  with brown margin and apex; ligules present or absent
\par
2 Achenes 1·25-1·75 mm; stems sometimes branched; leaf-
\par
  segments somewhat distant and patent .............................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b saxatilis}
\par
2 Achenes at least 1·5 mm; stems simple; leaf-segments 
\par
  crowded and ascending
\par
3 Capitula 25-45 mm in diameter; ligules present; disc 
\par
  10-15 mm in diameter; achenes 1·75-2·5 mm ..................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b cretica}
\par
3 Capitula up to 23 mm in diameter; ligules present or 
\par
  absent; disc 7-11 mm in diameter; achenes 1·5-1·75 mm ({\b b}) subsp. {\b calabrica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cretica} ({\i A. orientalis} subsp. {\i montana }Hayek, {\i A. montana} L.): stems 12-30(-40) cm, erect from the slightly curved base, usually less than 5 times as long as the non-flowering shoots. Leaves glandular-punctate, at first with dense, appressed, whitish indumentum, then glabrescent or subglabrous; lower leaves 4-8 cm, with (2-)3-4(-5) segments on each side; segments obovate-oblong to linear-cuneate. Capitula 25-45 mm in diameter. Involucre not or scarcely umbonate; outer bracts ovate-triangular, acute, the inner oblong, subacute to obtuse, with wide, brown to brownish-scarious margin and apex. Ligules up to 17 × 7 mm. Receptacular scales oblong-cuneate to lanceolate, abruptly acuminate.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b calabrica} (Arcangeli) R. Fernandes,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  70}: 8 (1975) ({\i A. montana} subsp.{\i  calabrica }Arcangeli): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but stems 6-18 cm, ascending and more slender; leaves 1·3-2·7 cm, with shorter and less divided segments. Capitula smaller. •{\i  S. Italy} ({\i Calabria}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b saxatilis} (DC.) R. Fernandes, {\i loc. cit.} (1975) ({\i A. saxatilis} DC., {\i A. montana }subsp.{\i  saxatilis }(DC.) Rouy): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but stems 4-25 cm; leaves green, sparsely hairy, with more or less patent, sometimes subdeflexed segments; capitula up to c. 30 mm in diameter; involucral bracts with narrower hyaline or brown scarious margin.{\i  Calcifuge. • Mountains of S.C. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b alpina} (L.) R. Fernandes,{\i  loc. cit.} (1975) ({\i Santolina alpina} L.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but stems usually at least 20 cm, and generally more than five times as long as the non-flowering shoots; leaves densely greyish-tomentose; segments 2(-3) on each side, shorter, wider, less divided; capitula up to 17 mm in diameter, subglobose in fruit.{\i  Calcicole. • C. Appennini.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Considered by some authors as merely a variant of ({\b a}), but differing considerably in the constant characters given above, and in being calcicole.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp. ({\b c}) is somewhat intermediate between subsp. ({\b a}) and {\b 11}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Some plants from Romania, referred by authors to{\i  A. cretica,} with lax indumentum of very thin hairs, leaves with 1-2(-3) distant, patent, narrowly linear or linear-spathulate, usually entire segments up to 2·3 cm on each side, capitula 20-30 mm in diameter, involucral bracts with hyaline or narrowly scarious margin, and achenes 2·5-3 mm, belong perhaps to another subspecies of{\i  A. cretica} or represent a distinct species ({\b A. kitaibelii} Sprengel,{\i  Syst. Veg. }{\b 3}: 592 (1826)).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. sterilis} Steven,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou }{\b 29}({\b 2}): 379 (1856). Perennial, perhaps sometimes biennial, with stout stock and non-flowering shoots forming dense, low cushions. Stems up to 15 cm, simple or with few branches, leafy up to about the middle. Leaves pinnatisect, glandular-punctate, very densely white-lanate at first; segments entire or 2- to 3-fid to subpinnatisect; lobes linear or oblong, obtuse or subobtuse, mucronulate. Capitula 15-20 mm in diameter. Ligules present. Involucre hemispherical-campanulate; bracts triangular to oblong, the inner with broad hyaline margin and apex. Disc 5-7 mm in diameter; florets pale yellow, the tube swollen and spongy in the lower half. Receptacle conical. Achenes 1·75-2 mm, not or very slightly ribbed, not granulate; corona 0·25-0·5 mm, white, opaque, somewhat rigid, erose-denticulate.{\i  Dry, stony places. • Krym.} Rs(K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. tranzcheliana} Fedorov in Schischkin & Bobrov, {\i Fl. URSS}{\b  26}: 866 (1961), also from Krym, is like {\b 7} but has stems 20-40 cm, longer and wider leaves with wider segments, the capitula 30-40 mm and the disc 8-15 mm in diameter, achenes 1·75-2·5 mm, the outer with low, flat, somewhat rugose ribs and a translucent, yellowish, tubular corona 1-1·5 mm enclosing the swollen lower half of the corolla-tube.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. abrotanifolia} (Willd.) Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Syn.}{\b  2}: 490 (1844). Caespitose dwarf shrub. Flowering stems 3-15 cm, with old petiole-bases at base. Leaves up to 2·2(-3·5) cm, oblong, 1- to 2-pinnatisect, glandular-punctate, subappressed-hairy; lobes linear to oblong-obovate, mucronate. Capitula 4-7(-9) mm in diameter; ligules 3 × 1·75 mm, usually absent. Involucre hemispherical, sericeous; outer bracts ovate-lanceolate, attenuate to the acute apex, without hyaline margin, the rest oblong, with hyaline or pale brownish-scarious margin and apex. Receptacle shortly conical; scales reaching the base of corolla-lobes, shortly acuminate. Achenes 1·25(-1·4) × 0·75 mm, obconical-pyramidal, scarcely ribbed; pappus absent or sometimes a very short and denticulate rim. c. 1900{\i  m. Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. panachaica} Halácsy,{\i  Consp. Fl. Graec.}{\b  2}: 57 (1902). Like {\b 8} but stems up to 20 cm; leaf-lobes narrowly linear; ligules 5·5-6·5 × 2·5-3 mm, always present; achenes at least 1·5 mm, slightly attenuate towards the base; pappus slightly longer.{\i  Stony places on mountains, }1000-1600{\i  m. S. Greece} ({\i Panakhaikon Oros}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Perhaps not specifically distinct from{\b  8}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. argyrophylla} (Halácsy & Georgiev) Velen.,{\i  Fl. Bulg., Suppl. }{\b 1}: 153 (1898) ({\i Achillea argyrophylla} Halácsy & Georgiev). Densely appressed-sericeous, with branched stock. Stems up to 20 cm, simple, leafy up to the middle. Leaves spathulate-cuneate, the lower and middle with 3-5 terminal, wide, roundish or obtuse lobes, attenuate into the petiole, the upper entire and sessile. Capitula 20-25 mm in diameter; ligules present. Involucral bracts acute to obtuse, with narrow, hyaline to brownish scarious margin. Receptacle conical; scales caducous. Achenes c. 1·5 mm, obpyramidal, smooth, with very short corona. {\i Calcicole. • S. Bulgaria} ({\i Rodopi}). Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. gerardiana} Jordan,{\i  Obs. Pl. Crit.}{\b  7}: 31 (1849). Perennial with few non-flowering shoots. Stems 20-40(-55) cm, 4½-10 times as long as the non-flowering shoots, often numerous, erect, straight, slender, rigid, simple or sometimes with 1-2(-3) branches below the middle. Leaves 1·5-4 cm, 1-to 2-pinnatisect, somewhat fleshy, glandular-punctate, green, more or less subappressed-hairy; segments more or less patent; lobes linear, acute, 0·5-1 mm wide; petiole very slender, pectinate at base. Peduncles 7-21 cm. Capitula up to 25 mm in diameter. Involucre hemispherical, umbonate, floccose-lanate; outer bracts ovate-triangular to ovate-lanceolate, acute, without scarious margin, the others oblong, obtuse, with wide hyaline margin and apex. Ligules 2-8 × 1·5-3 mm. Disc up to 10 mm in diameter in fruit. Receptacle usually conical; scales oblong-cuneate, shortly acuminate, shorter than florets. Achenes 1·5-2 mm, obpyramidal, not or slightly ribbed on the adaxial side, without tubercules or granules and with an acute rim or corona usually less than 0·25 mm. {\i Stony places; calcifuge. • S.E. France.} Ga.
\par

\par
150}
\par