{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 leaves. Pedicel-length varies much, and the values given are based on averages. Where fruits consist of ovoid mericarps, the longest diameters are given, but hooks, hairs etc. are not included.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Annual (Sect. {\i Kolgyda} &{\i  Jubogalium} pro parte)
\par 2 Leaf-margin retrorsely aculeolate; fruits more than 2 mm
\par 3 Peduncles and pedicels convergent and deflexed after 
\par   anthesis, fruit verrucose; leaves glabrous above ................. {\b 133. tricornutum}
\par 3 Peduncles or pedicels divaricate after anthesis, straight
\par   (or bent only just beneath the fruit); fruit with
\par   hooked bristles or smooth; leaves papillose-hairy above
\par 4 Corolla 0·8-1·3 mm in diameter, greenish-yellow; fruit
\par   (excluding setae) 2-3 mm, with hooked setae or more or
\par   less smooth ................................................................................ {\b 131. spurium}
\par 4 Corolla 1·5-1·7 mm in diameter, white; fruit 3-5 mm,
\par   always densely setose ................................................................. {\b 132. aparine}
\par 2 Leaf-margin antrorsely aculeolate
\par 5 Fruit more than 2·5 mm; partial inflorescences few-flowered;
\par   leaves more than 1·5 mm wide; corolla whitish to pink
\par 6 Fruit with hooked setae; leaves hairy above; flowers
\par   hermaphrodite, pink .............................................................. {\b 130. monachinii}
\par 6 Fruit verrucose; leaves glabrous above; flowers andro-
\par   monoecious, whitish ............................................................ {\b 134. verrucosum}
\par 5 Fruit less than 2 mm; leaves often less than 1·5 mm 
\par   wide; corolla usually yellowish to greenish or reddish
\par 7 Peduncles equalling or shorter than pedicels; partial
\par   inflorescences 1- to 3(-5)-flowered
\par 8 Mericarps cylindrical, ± curved, usually irregularly 
\par   covered with hooked setae especially towards the apex ............. {\b 145. murale}
\par 8 Mericarps ovoid, regularly covered with setae, rarely
\par   glabrous
\par 9 Flowers 1-2 in each leaf-whorl; leaves in whorls of 4 ........ {\b 142. minutulum}
\par 9 Flowers more than 4 in each leaf-whorl; leaves in 
\par   whorls of more than 4
\par 10 Some partial inflorescences 2(-3)-flowered, pedunculate;
\par    pedicels 1-3 mm, usually longer than the flowers and
\par     fruits; fruiting pedicels deflexed ........................................... {\b 143. recurvum}
\par 10 Partial inflorescences 1-flowered; peduncles scarcely
\par    distinguishable; pedicels up to 1 mm, usually shorter
\par    than the flowers and fruits; fruiting pedicels erect ........... {\b 144. verticillatum}
\par 7  Peduncles mostly longer than pedicels; partial inflorescences
\par    many-flowered
\par 11 Bracts ± exceeding the partial inflorescences,
\par    filiform to linear (Sect. {\i Jubogalium} pro parte) ................... {\b 129. setaceum}
\par 11 Bracts shorter than the partial inflorescences, linear-
\par    lanceolate
\par 12 Corolla-lobes long-apiculate (appendages 0·1-0·2 mm);
\par    partial inflorescences lax, the pedicels in flower and
\par    fruit about twice as long as the flowers and fruits ................ {\b 135. intricatum}
\par 12 Corolla-lobes acute or shortly-apiculate (appendages 
\par    less than 0·1 mm)
\par 13 Partial inflorescences lax, few-flowered; the 2 nodes
\par    below the central flower often with fewer than 11 flowers 
\par 14 Pedicels filiform, many times as long as flowers and 
\par    fruits .................................................................................. {\b 141. tenuissimum} 
\par 14 Pedicels less than 3 times as long as flowers and fruits
\par 15 Peduncles 1-3 times as long as pedicels; pedicels 
\par    relatively stout, divaricate after anthesis ............................... {\b 139. parisiense}
\par 15 Peduncles 3-7 times as long as pedicels; pedicels 
\par    filiform, somewhat deflexed after anthesis ........................ {\b 140. divaricatum}
\par 13 Partial inflorescences dense, many-flowered; the 2 
\par    nodes below the central flower often with more than 11
\par    flowers; pedicels 1-11/2 times as long as flowers and fruits 
\par 16 Plant greenish-yellow when dry; fruit granulate,
\par    glabrous .................................................................................. {\b 138. viscosum}
\par 16 At least the young leaves and flowers blackish when 
\par    dry; fruit hairy or glabrous
\par 17 Pedicels slender; partial inflorescences capitate,
\par    very dense .............................................................................. {\b 136. capitatum}
\par 17 Pedicels stout, rigid; partial inflorescences compara-
\par    tively lax ............................................................................. {\b 137. incrassatum}
\par 1  Perennial
\par 18 Leaves with 3 parallel veins from the base, without 
\par    hyaline apex; never in whorls of more than 4; some-
\par    times shrubby switch-plants (Sect. {\i Platygalium})
\par 19 Shrubby switch-plants; leaves indistinctly 3-veined, narrow
\par 20 Leaves 20-26 mm; longest internodes of the lateral 
\par    branches 3-6 cm ....................................................................... {\b 8. fruticosum}
\par 20 Leaves 5-10 mm; longest internodes of the lateral 
\par    branches 1-3(-4) cm ................................................................ {\b 9. ephedroides}
\par 19 Herbs; leaves with 3 or more distinct veins
\par 21 Ovary and fruit with hooked hairs, the hairs ± equalling
\par    the width of the mericarps; leaves subacute, not more than
\par     twice as long as wide
\par 22 Stipules distinctly smaller than the true leaves;
\par    corolla shallowly infundibuliform ........................................... {\b 1. paradoxum}
\par 22 Stipules and true leaves similar; corolla rotate
\par 23 Stems c. 20 cm, usually glabrous; inflorescence 
\par    corymbose ........................................................................... {\b 2. rotundifolium}
\par 23 Stems 30-50 cm, almost always with dense, patent hairs;
\par    inflorescence ovoid, elongate ....................................................... {\b 3. scabrum}
\par 21 Ovary and fruit usually glabrous or with appressed 
\par    hairs, rarely with hooked hairs which are shorter than
\par    the width of the mericarps; leaves obtuse, more than 
\par    twice as long as wide
\par 24 Ultimate branches of inflorescence monochasial ...................... {\b 4. baillonii}
\par 24 Ultimate branches of inflorescence ± dichasial
\par 25 Corolla shallowly infundibuliform ...................................... {\b 5. broterianum}
\par 25 Corolla rotate
\par 26 Leaves 15-40 × 2-8 mm, fruit with appressed pericarp,
\par    often with hooked hairs ................................................................. {\b 6. boreale}
\par 26 Leaves 35-80 × 9-25 mm; fruit with ± inflated pericarp,
\par    almost always glabrous .............................................................. {\b 7. rubioides}
\par 18 Leaves with only 1 main vein from the base, sometimes
\par    with hyaline apex; usually at least some leaves in 
\par    whorls of more than 4; never shrubby switch-plants
\par 27 Ovary and fruit with hooked hairs (Sect. {\i Hylaea})
\par 28 Corolla infundibuliform, white; inflorescence 
\par    corymbose ................................................................................ {\b 10. odoratum}
\par 28 Corolla rotate, greenish to whitish; inflorescence 
\par    elongate pyramidal .................................................................... {\b 11. triflorum}
\par 27 Ovary and fruit glabrous, or with hairs which are not hooked
\par 29 Fruit globose; leaves ± obtuse, blackish when dry;
\par    stems usually ± retrorsely aculeolate (Sect. {\i Aparinoides})
\par 30 Flowers 3-merous; partial inflorescences 1- to 
\par    3-flowered; leaves in whorls of 4 ............................................... {\b 18. trifidum}
\par 30 Flowers predominantly 4-merous; partial inflorescences
\par    many-flowered; leaves in whorls of up to 6
\par 31 Pedicels not divaricate in fruit; leaves linear to 
\par    linear-lanceolate ............................................................................. {\b 15. debile}
\par 31 Pedicels divaricate in fruit; leaves narrowly to
\par    broadly oblanceolate
\par 32 Leaves not more than 20 mm; stems slender ............................ {\b 16. palustre}
\par 32 Leaves usually 20-35 mm; stems stout ................................. {\b 17. elongatum}
\par 29 Fruit ovoid; leaves often acute or sometimes with a
\par    hyaline apex
\par 33 Ovary and fruit ± hairy
\par 34 Pedicels filiform, usually reddish (Sect.{\i  Jubogalium} pro parte)
\par 35 Leaves linear; pedicels up to 2 mm; corolla c. 1·5 mm
\par    in diameter ............................................................................... {\b 127. graecum}
\par 35 Leaves ovate; pedicels up to 4 mm; corolla 1·8-2·5 mm
\par    in diameter .................................................................................. {\b 128. canum}
\par 34 Pedicels not filiform, usually green
\par 36 Flowers sessile (Sect. {\i Galium} pro parte) 
\par 37 Corolla 4-6·5 mm long, deeply infundibuliform .............. {\b 20. boissieranum}
\par 37 Corolla 1·5-3 mm long, shallowly infundibuliform
\par 
\par 15}
\par