{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 bracts oblong or oblong-elliptical, subobtuse to rounded, with narrowly brown-edged, ciliate hyaline margin and apex. Ligules up to 13 × 3·5(-4·2) mm, frequently absent. Disc 5-13 mm in diameter. Receptacle subhemispherical; scales oblong, abruptly acuminate, shorter than to about equalling the florets. Achenes 1·5-2 mm (excl. corona), rather compressed, with acute, almost winged lateral angles and striate faces; corona ¼-½ as long as achene, erose, hyaline. {\i S.E. Europe.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. A. dubia} Steven,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  29}({\b 2}): 380 (1856). Greyish-lanate. Stems (6-)10-30(-40) cm, numerous, usually much-branched, leafy in the lower 1/3-1/2. Leaves up to 4 × 2 cm, obovate, more or less 2-pinnatisect, lanate, mainly beneath; segments ascending, elliptical, somewhat distant; lobes dentate, the teeth contiguous, inflexed, mucronate. Capitula 25-35 mm in diameter; peduncles up to 15 cm. Involucre lanate, slightly umbonate; outer bracts ovate-triangular, acute, ciliate at apex, the inner ones oblong or elliptical, c. 2 mm wide, with hyaline, rounded apex, narrowly brown-edged and long-ciliate. Ligules up to 11 × 4 mm; disc 10-14 mm in diameter. Receptacle subhemispherical; scales contracted into a short acumen, shorter than the florets. Achenes c. 1·5 mm (excl. corona), obsoletely striate, with acute, almost winged lateral angles; corona c. 1/3 as long as rest of achene.{\i  Meadows,} Quercus-{\i woods and dry hillsides. • Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. A. triumfetti} (L.) DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\i  5}: 483 (1815) ({\i Cota triumfetti} (L.) Gay). Sparsely hairy to grey-hairy, stout. Stem 30-90 cm, usually single, corymbosely branched at or below the middle. Leaves up to 14 cm, ovate-oblong to broadly ovate,2-pinnatisect; segments more or less patent, distant, oblong, pectinate or dentate; lobes oblong, mucronate-subulate; rhachis dentate. Capitula (25-)30-50 mm in diameter; peduncles long. Involucre hemispherical, at first umbonate, finally flat, pubescent or villous; bracts elliptic-oblong to oblong-lanceolate, acute, with scarious margin and scarious-ferruginous, ciliate apex. Ligules (11-)13-20 mm, frequently absent. Disc 12-17 mm in diameter, subglobose in fruit. Receptacle hemispherical; scales oblong-obovate or obovate-cuneate, with a short, rigid acumen about equalling florets. Achenes c. 2 mm (excl. corona), oblong, narrowly winged at lateral angles, 3- to 4(5)-striate on each face; corona (1/4-)1/3-1/2 as long as achene, oblique, erose, crenulate.{\i  Woods, rocky places on mountains. S. Europe. }Al Bu Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Rm Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. cossoniana} Reichenb. fil.,{\i  Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  16}: 63 (1854), described from E. Spain, with linear-lanceolate leaf-lobes, relatively longer ligules and corona may be considered, perhaps, as a subspecies of {\b 49}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. palumbi }Lojac.,{\i  Fl. Sic.}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 91 (1902), from Sicilia, which has been considered as a probable synonym of {\b 49}, requires further study.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. A. dumetorum} D. Sosn., {\i Monit. Jard. Bot. Tiflis }{\b 3}({\b 2}): 160 (1927) ({\i A. rigescens} auct., non Willd.). Perennial, greyish-green, not very densely hairy. Stems 40-80 cm, numerous, corymbosely branched above the middle or simple. Leaves oblong-obovate, with oblong to linear segments, lanceolate, acute lobes and narrow, dentate rhachis, green above, greyish beneath. Capitula 25-30(-35) mm in diameter; peduncles long. Outer involucral bracts triangular, the inner oblong, with obtuse, brownish-scarious, ciliate apex. Ligules 9-12 × 2·5-5 mm, cream-white. Receptacle hemispherical; scales oblong, attenuate-acuminate, equalling or longer than the florets.{\i  Stony slopes. Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. A. macrantha} Heuffel, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 16}: 362 (1833) ({\i A. triumfetti} var.{\i  rigescens} sensu Hayek, non (Willd.) Fiori). Robust, sparsely hairy to subglabrous. Stems 50-105 cm, usually corymbosely branched above middle. Leaves pinnatisect, green, thin, the basal up to 15 × 10 cm, the middle cauline up to 9 × 4 cm; segments oblong, distant, pinnatipartite to pinnatisect; lobes distant, mucronate-subulate; rhachis dentate. Capitula (45-)50-65 mm in diameter; peduncles 7-16 cm. Involucre not very convex, umbonate; bracts ovate to oblong-lanceolate, acute, with blackish margin and apex. Ligules (15-)20-30 × 2-4 mm, attenuate at apex. Disc up to 20 mm in diameter in fruit. Receptacle subhemispherical; scales lanceolate to oblong, brownish towards apex, shortly acuminate, slightly shorter than the florets. Achenes 2-2·5 mm, not very acute at lateral angles, not or weakly striate; corona 1/4-1/3 as long as achene, hyaline, sometimes purple. •{\i  Mountains of Bulgaria and Romania.} Bu Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. A. jailensis} Zefirov,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 18}: 251 (1957). Stems 20-50 cm, more or less numerous, simple or with 1 branch near the middle, rather leafy. Leaves up to 5 × 2·5 cm, obovate-oblong, glabrous above, appressed-hairy beneath, pinnatisect; segments more or less distant, narrowly oblong or linear, pinnatipartite or subpinnatisect; teeth mucronate-subulate. Capitula 30-50 mm in diameter; peduncles 5·5-14·5 cm. Involucre more or less umbonate, sparsely hairy; bracts elongate-triangular and acute to oblong-lanceolate and subacute, with median green vein and narrow, dark brown, fimbriate margin and apex. Ligules (13-)19-25 × 2·5-3·75 mm. Disc 13-17 mm in diameter, subglobose. Receptacular scales attenuate into an elongate, stiff point, about equalling florets. Achenes c. 2·75 mm, compressed, narrowly winged at lateral angles; corona c. 0·75 mm, hyaline, crenulate. 2n = 18. {\i Meadows and wood-margins. • Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. COTA (Ser. {\i Altissimae} Fedorov). Annuals or biennials. Involucral bracts not or narrowly brownish-edged at the hyaline margin. Ligules white. Achenes usually compressed and quadrangular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. A. altissima} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 893 (1753) ({\i A. cota} auct., ? an L.,{\i  Cota altissima} (L.) Gay). Robust, pubescent to nearly glabrous annual. Stem 20-120 cm, with sometimes subcorymbose branches. Leaves ovate, 2- to 3-pinnatipartite; segments patent; lobes linear, mucronate-spinulose. Capitula (20-)25-40(-50) mm in diameter; peduncles 1·5-4 cm at anthesis, up to 7·5 cm and somewhat clavate in fruit. Involucre hemispherical, finally umbonate; outer involucral bracts ovate-lanceolate, acute, without scarious margin, the inner oblong-lanceolate to elliptic-oblong, obtuse and with hyaline or brownish-scarious margin and apex. Ligules up to 20 mm. Disc up to 20 mm in diameter. Receptacle hemispherical; scales oblong-spathulate, truncate or emarginate, contracted into a rigid point as long as the scale, longer than florets. Achenes 2-2·5 mm, obpyramidal-subcompressed, very narrowly winged, (7-)8- to 10(-11)-striate on each side, those of ligules triangular, those of disc quadrangular; rim acute or a very short corona. 2n = 18.{\i  Cultivated land and waste places. S. Europe; a frequent casual in C. Europe.} Al Bu ?Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. A. coelopoda} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 11}): 12 (1849). Like {\b 53} but leaves with regularly pectinate segments and more patent lobes with a shorter and less acute mucro; receptacular scales attenuate or less abruptly contracted into a point usually shorter than the scale; achenes (2-)3(-4)-striate. {\i Macedonia.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par
157}
\par