{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  Distinguished from {\b 24}, with which it is sometimes confused, by the habit, the more divided leaves with lobes with a short, sometimes indistinct mucro and by the longer ligules.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. ANTHEMIS (Ser.{\i  Arvenses} Fedorov). Annual or biennial with much-branched stems. Peduncles sometimes clavate in fruit. Inner involucral bracts with hyaline or sometimes brownish-scarious margin and apex. Receptacle conical or sometimes hemispherical; receptacular scales subpersistent, ending in a short and slightly rigid point. Ligules white, rarely yellow, pink or absent. Achenes with smooth, granulate or rarely tuberculate ribs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. A. arvensis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 894 (1753). Sparsely hairy to densely pubescent annual or biennial, perhaps sometimes perennating. Stem (4·5-)10-50(-80) cm, usually more or less branched, often from the base, the basal branches as long as or longer than the main stem. Leaves obovate-oblong to obovate, 1- to 3-pinnatipartite or pinnatisect, not glandular-punctate, more or less hairy; lobes acute, mucronate. Involucral bracts hairy, oblong or oblong-obovate, obtuse, with hyaline to brown scarious margin and apex. Receptacular scales acuminate. Achenes turbinate, (9-)10(-11)-ribbed; ribs obtuse, separated by narrow, deep furrows, smooth.{\i  Most of Europe except the extreme north.} All except Az Fa Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Probably native only in S. Europe, but so long established elsewhere as a cornfield weed that the original limits of distribution cannot be ascertained.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Biennial or perennial; achenes with ribs and rim not or
\par
  slightly thickened; peduncles not clavate in fruit .......... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b sphacelata}
\par
1 Annual; at least the achenes of the outer tubular 
\par
  florets with rather thickened ribs and wide, obtuse rim
\par
2 Peduncles usually distinctly clavate in fruit ................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b incrassata}
\par
2 Peduncles not or slightly clavate in fruit
\par
3 Capitula 20-40 mm in diameter; receptacle 5-7 × 3-4 mm,
\par
  attenuate to the apex; achenes 1·5-2·5(-3) × 0·7-1·5 mm;
\par
  pappus absent .................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b arvensis}
\par
3 Capitula up to c. 20 mm in diameter; receptacle 3·5-5 
\par
  × 2-3 mm, ± contracted to a very acute apex; achenes up
\par
  to 1·75 mm, the peripheral nearly as long as wide, 
\par
  sometimes with a lacerate hyaline auricle up to 0·5 mm .. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b cyllenea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b arvensis}: Stems up to 80 cm, usually much branched. Leaves 1·5-5 × 0·6-1·5 cm; lobes oblong or linear. Peduncles not or scarcely clavate. Ligules 5-14 × 2·5-5 mm, rarely pink. Outer receptacular scales linear-subulate, the inner oblanceolate. Tubular florets c. 4 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Cultivated ground and waste places. Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b incrassata} (Loisel.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 361 (1879): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but leaves with wider, elliptical lobes; peduncles more or less clavate and somewhat arcuate; receptacle more elongate in fruit; receptacular scales somewhat wider, abruptly acuminate; ligules up to 11 × 4 mm; tubular florets 3-3·5 mm.{\i  Waste places. S. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b cyllenea} (Halácsy) R. Fernandes,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 70}: 11 (1975) ({\i A. cyllenea }Halácsy): Stems up to 22 cm, intricately branched, sometimes slightly thickened upwards. Leaves up to 2 cm. Ligules up to 6 × 3 mm. Receptacular scales oblanceolate, more rigid than in subsp. ({\b a}). Tubular florets c. 2·5 mm.{\i  Cultivated ground and roadsides.} Greece.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b sphacelata} (C. Presl) R. Fernandes, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  70}: 12 (1975) ({\i A. sphacelata} C. Presl): Biennial (or perhaps sometimes perennial). Stems up to 30 cm, from a woody stock, rigid, simple or more or less branched. Leaves not more than 2(-4·5) cm, pectinate-laciniate at base. Involucral bracts often with brown scarious margin and apex. Receptacle 2-5 × 2-3 mm, shortly conical; scales oblanceolate, abruptly acuminate, rigid. Ligules 3·5-6·5 × 2·25-3 mm. Tubular florets sometimes purple.{\i  Mountain pastures. • S. Italy, Sicilia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Corse referred to subsp.{\i  arvensis }var.{\i  humilis} Gay ex Rouy perhaps belong to subsp. ({\b d}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. brevifolia} Lojac.,{\i  Fl. Sic.}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 81 (1902), described from Sicilia, is probably only a variant of {\b 27}({\b d}) with longer, diffuse stems, leafy to the apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. A. ruthenica} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 330, 465 (1808). Lanate to pubescent annual. Stem 10-50 cm, frequently branched from the base. Leaves oblong, 1- to 2-pinnatisect; lobes triangular, acute. Capitula 15-35(-40) mm in diameter; peduncles not clavate in fruit. Involucral bracts more or less lanate, the outer lanceolate, acute, the inner oblong, obtuse, with a wide hyaline margin and apex. Ligules 8-17 × 3-7·5 mm. Receptacle in fruit up to 9 × 3·5 mm, very acute; scales oblanceolate to obovate-cuneate, lacerate or dentate at apex, acuminate. Corolla-tube strongly swollen and spongy below the middle in fruit. Achenes 1·5-2 mm; achenes of outer tubular florets subcylindrical, usually not more than ½ as wide as long, with rather thick, obtuse ribs and obtuse, but not thickened rim slightly higher or with a short auricle on the adaxial side. 2n = 18.{\i  Dry places and cultivated ground. E.C. & S.E. Europe.} Au Bu Cz Ge ?Gr Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. A. auriculata} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 4}): 5 (1844) ({\i A. sismondaeana} G. C. Clementi). Appressed-hairy. Stems 8-35 cm, 1 to many, usually branched. Leaves oblong, 1- to 2-pinnatisect; lobes lanceolate to shortly oblong, acute to obtuse, mucronate. Capitula 15-35 mm in diameter; peduncles long, not clavate in fruit. Involucre hemispherical; outer bracts triangular to lanceolate, the inner oblong, rounded, with hyaline or pale brown scarious margin and apex. Ligules up to 12 mm. Disc up to 12 × 13 mm in fruit; tubular florets swollen and spongy below the middle. Receptacle up to 10 × 3 mm, elongate-conical in fruit; scales oblanceolate- to obovate-cuneate, lacerate at apex with somewhat rigid acumen. Achenes 1·5-2 mm (excl. auricle), subcylindrical-obconical, with somewhat raised to nearly obsolete ribs; auricle 0·5-1·75 mm, oblong or rounded, spongy at the base, shorter in the inner achenes. {\i Dry hillsides and Pinus woods. S. part of Balkan peninsula, N. Aegean region.} Bu Gr ?Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. parnesia} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Fl. Or.}{\b  3}: 305 (1875), from S. Greece, is perhaps a variant of {\b 29}. It is distinguished by the more slender stems up to 10 cm, involucral bracts with brownish-scarious margin and apex, less swollen corolla-tube, and auricle up to 1 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. A. werneri} Stoj. & Acht.,{\i  Sborn. Balg. Akad. Nauk.}{\b  61}: 85 (1941). Greyish-green appressed-hairy. Stems up to 20 cm, many, branched below the middle. Leaves oblong, pinnatisect to pinnatifid or entire and spathulate; segments 2-3 on each side, linear-lanceolate to oblong, obtuse, callose-mucronulate. Peduncles clavate in fruit. Involucre obconical; outer bracts triangular-lanceolate, the inner oblong, with hyaline margin and apex. Ligules deflexed, up to 3 × 2 mm. Disc 4-8 mm in diameter; tubular florets swollen and spongy below the middle. Receptacle 3 × 2·2 mm, acutely conical; scales spathulate-lanceolate, about as long as or slightly longer than florets. Achenes 1·8-2 mm, turbinate-obconical, scarcely striate, with a short auricle. •{\i  N. Aegean region} ({\i Ayios Evstratios}); Gr.
\par

\par
153}
\par