{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. A. syriaca} Bornm., {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  10}: 470 (1912). Annual, sparsely hairy or subglabrous, with divaricate, decumbent branches from the base. Leaves sessile, oblong, 1- to 2-pinnatipartite; lobes ovate to oblong, mucronate. Peduncles not or slightly clavate in fruit. Involucre nearly flat; bracts subglabrous, the outer ovate-lanceolate, acute, the others oblong-lanceolate, with narrow scarious margin and acute or subacute apex. Ligules 10 × 2·5 mm, oblong-linear, sometimes suffused with red or purple, deflexed. Disc up to 13 mm in diameter. Receptacle depressed-hemispherical; scales brownish-purple towards the apex, cuneate, attenuate to a rigid, curved or flexuous subulate point slightly shorter than the scale, equalling or shorter than the florets. Achenes 2-2·5 × 1·5 mm, compressed, with acute angles, 7- to 9-striate at each side, those of ligules triangular, those of tubular florets quadrangular; corona short, whitish.{\i  Stony places and cultivated land. Kriti.} Cr ?Gr. ({\i Lebanon.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. A. segetalis} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Neap. Syll. App. Quinta }54 (1842) ({\i A. brachycentros }Gay ex Koch). Puberulent or glabrous annual up to 50 cm. Stem more or less branched. Leaves ovate-oblong, 1- to 2-pinnatipartite; lobes narrowly linear to oblong. Capitula (15-)22-40(-50) mm in diameter; peduncles up to 15 cm, not clavate in fruit. Involucre hemispherical, finally umbonate; outer bracts ovate-lanceolate, acute, the inner oblong-lanceolate, with fimbriate-ciliate scarious margin and apex. Ligules 10-16 × 3·5-6 mm, oblong to broadly elliptical. Disc (7-)9-16 mm in diameter. Receptacle hemispherical; scales oblong-cuneate, with a rigid acumen less than half as long as the scale, as long as or shorter than the florets. Achenes (1·5-)2-2·5 mm, compressed, with acute lateral angles, (3-)5- to 7-striate on each side, those of ligules sub-triangular, those of tubular florets sub-quadrangular; corona up to 0·5 mm, paler than achene, entire or crenulate. 2n = 18.{\i  Cultivated land and waste places. • Balkan peninsula, Italy.} Al Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. dalmatica} Scheele, {\i Linnaea}{\b  18}: 464 (1845) (?{\i A. coronata} H. Lindb. fil.,{\i  A. brachycentros} var. {\i coronata} (H. Lindb. fil.) Hayek), from the coast of Jugoslavia, seems to be only a variant or subspecies of {\b 56}, differing in the softer leaves and slightly larger achenes with a longer (0·5-1 mm), lacerate, brownish corona.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. A. austriaca} Jacq., {\i Fl. Austr.}{\b  5}: 22 (1778) ({\i A. cotiformis} Velen.). Erect, usually much-branched annual or biennial (7·5-)10-60 cm. Leaves sparsely to densely hairy, obovate to oblong, regularly pinnatipartite; segments linear, pectinate; lobes oblong-linear to lanceolate, acute, mucronate-cuspidate. Capitula (10-)20-40 mm in diameter; peduncles 6-12 cm, not clavate in fruit. Involucre subhemispherical; bracts subhirsute, the outer lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, the inner oblong to elliptic-oblong, acute, with wide, hyaline, sometimes brownish-scarious, ciliate margin and apex. Ligules (9-)10-15 × 3-4 mm, sometimes more or less deeply 2- to 3-fid. Disc 9-15 mm in diameter. Receptacle subhemispherical; scales oblong, attenuate into a short acumen, subequalling the florets. Achenes 1·75-2·5 mm with acute lateral angles, obsoletely (2-)3-striate at each side, with acute rim or very short corona. 2n = 18.{\i  E.C. & S.E. Europe; casual further north and west.} Al Au Bu Cz ?Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. A. brachmannii} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 6}): 84 (1846). Annual, appressed-hairy. Stem 20-30 cm, simple or branched. Leaves oblong, pinnatipartite; segments subpectinate, the basal short, sometimes entire; lobes oblong-linear, mucronate. Capitula 30-40 mm in diameter; peduncles 4·5-8 cm, not clavate in fruit. Involucre hemispherical; bracts sparsely hairy, with narrow, brown, scarious, fimbriate margin and apex, the outer ovate, acute, the others ovate to oblong, acute or subacute. Ligules up to 17 × c. 8 mm. Receptacle hemispherical; scales oblong-cuneate, contracted into a rigid point less than half as long as scale, shorter than florets. Achenes 2·5-3 × 1 mm, subconical, obtusely 4-angular, weakly striate; corona c. 1/3 as long as and the same colour as achene, rigid, crenulate. {\i Stony places on mountains. • S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Subgen.{\b  Ammanthus} (Boiss. & Heldr.) R. Fernandes. Slender annuals, with numerous simple or branched stems from a basal rosette. Receptacular scales hyaline, narrowly lanceolate or linear, caducous, or absent. Ligules, if present, very short, white. Achenes cylindrical, curved, the peripheral persistent and with obscure ribs, the inner caducous, distinctly ribbed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. A. filicaulis} (Boiss. & Heldr.) W. Greuter, {\i Candollea }{\b 23}: 148 (1968) ({\i Ammanthus filicaulis} Boiss. & Heldr.). Appressed hairy. Stems 2-14 cm, ascending or decumbent, very slender, usually simple, purplish. Basal leaves up to 3 cm, pinnatipartite; segments 2 on each side, lanceolate or elliptical, entire to 3-fid; lobes shortly mucronate; cauline leaves pinnatipartite, with entire to 3-fid segments, or spathulate and 3- to 5-lobed or entire and linear. Peduncles slightly clavate in fruit. Involucre hemispherical or hemispherical-conical, appressed-hairy; outer bracts linear-oblong, subacute, with narrow hyaline margin, the others oblong-ovate, obtuse, with wide hyaline, long-ciliate margin. Ligules 5-7, c. 3 × 2·5 mm, broadly elliptical to suborbicular, sometimes absent. Disc 4-8 mm in diameter. Receptacle shortly ovoid, roundish at apex, without scales. Outer achenes up to 3 mm, cylindrical, slightly curved, persistent, with erose-denticulate corona c. 1 mm; inner achenes c. 2·5 mm, cylindrical-obconical, with corona 0·75-1 mm, caducous.{\i  Calcareous maritime rocks. • E. Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. A. tomentella} W. Greuter,{\i  loc. cit.} (1968) (? non{\i  Ammanthus tomentellus} auct., ? an Gandoger). Like {\b 59} but involucral bracts acute, the outer ovate-triangular, the inner ovate-lanceolate; receptacle shortly ovoid, obtuse, with hyaline, glabrous, narrowly linear or setaceous, caducous scales about equalling the florets, sometimes absent in the outer florets; ligules absent; achenes longer; corona opaque, thicker, undulate, saucer-shaped.{\i  Stony calcareous slopes. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  Incertae Sedis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. A. ammanthus} W. Greuter,{\i  op. cit.} 145 (1968) ({\i Ammanthus maritimus} Boiss. & Heldr.). Diffuse, appressed-hairy to glabrescent annual. Stems 1·5-24(-36) cm, usually numerous, radiating from the axils of basal leaves, decumbent, more or less branched, rather slender, rigid. Leaves fleshy, the basal and lower cauline up to 2·5 × 0·8 cm, long-petiolate, pinnatipartite, the others shortly petiolate to sessile, obovate- or ovate- to linear-spathulate, and 3- to 7-lobed to entire, the lobes usually obtuse, with or without a very short mucro. Capitula 4-7(-12) mm in diameter; peduncles not clavate. Involucre obconical to hemispherical; bracts oblong, with sometimes pink, scarious margin and apex. Receptacle low, convex. Ligules absent. Florets at first yellow, finally purplish, with the lower half of tube cylindrical, swollen and spongy. Achenes c. 1·75 mm, obconical-turbinate, distinctly 10-ribbed; corona 0·3-0·5 mm, hyaline, more or less erose-lacerate.{\i  Maritime sands and grassy places near the sea. • S. Aegean region}. Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ammanthus}: Receptacle without scales. Achenes caducous.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b paleacea} W. Greuter, {\i op. cit. }146 (1968): Receptacle with hyaline, spathulate-lanceolate, acute, long-hairy scales. Achenes more or less persistent.{\i  E. coast of Kriti}.
\par

\par
158}
\par