{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Outer involucral bracts triangular, acute, the others oblong to oblong-lanceolate, obtuse to subacute, rarely acute, with scarious, pale brownish or dark brown, fimbriate-ciliate apex. Ligules female, yellow, rarely absent. Disc hemispherical. Receptacular scales oblong-lanceolate, attenuate-acuminate. Achenes 1·75-2 mm, slightly striate on the faces; corona very short, usually less than ¼ as long as achene.{\i  Dry places. Most of Europe, but absent from much of the west and north and most of the islands.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Si Su Tu [Br Fe].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A very variable species. Perhaps at least some of the taxa with yellow ligules, considered in recent Russian floras as independent species, will prove to be local variants either of subsp.{\i  tinctoria} or of subsp.{\i  subtinctoria}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 All or most involucral bracts with a distinct dark 
\par
  brown or blackish margin and apex; corona c. 0·5 mm ....... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b fussii}
\par
1 All involucral bracts without a distinct dark brown 
\par
  margin and apex or the inner diffusely brownish at apex;
\par
  corona usually less than 0·5 mm
\par
2 Leaves green, usually sparsely lanate beneath, frequen-
\par
  tly with flat teeth; capitula 25-45 mm in diameter .......... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b tinctoria}
\par
2 Leaves densely greyish- or whitish-lanate beneath, with
\par
  inflexed teeth; capitula 19-30(-35) mm in diameter
\par
3 Ligules golden-yellow; leaves 1·5-2·5(-3·5) cm .............. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b australis}
\par
3 Ligules pale yellow; leaves often more than 2·5 cm .. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b subtinctoria}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tinctoria}: Stems (20-)40-60(-90) cm, often subcorymbosely branched above the middle. Leaves subglabrous above; segments pectinate-pinnatifid or -dentate, the lobes acutely mucronate, flat or sometimes inflexed. Involucre umbonate, more or less lanate. Ligules 5-15 mm, rarely absent. Disc (10-)13-18 mm in diameter. Receptacular scales usually slightly longer than the florets. 2n = 18.{\i  Mainly in C. & S. Europe.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b subtinctoria} (Dobrocz.) Soó, {\i Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  12}: 366 (1966) ({\i A. subtinctoria} Dobrocz.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but stems, leaves beneath and involucre greyish- or whitish-lanate; segments narrower and relatively longer, with teeth ending in a longer mucro; capitula smaller, with the involucral bracts paler at apex; ligules pale yellow; receptacular scales about as long as the florets.{\i  E. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b australis} R. Fernandes,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  70}: 14 (1975): Stems up to 45 cm, frequently simple, densely lanate like the leaves and involucre. Leaves appressed to the stem, less divided than in subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}) and more rigid, often with the teeth inflexed. Disc 11-15 mm. Involucre not or slightly umbonate, with thicker and wider bracts than in subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}). S.C. Europe.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b fussii} (Griseb.) Beldie, {\i Fl. Veg. Munt. Bucegi }270 (1967) ({\i A. tinctoria} var.{\i  fussii} Griseb.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but the involucral bracts all acute or subacute with a distinct dark-brown or blackish margin and apex; outer receptacular scales suffused with brown towards the apex; corona longer. •{\i  S. Carpathians}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Somewhat intermediate between {\b 42}({\b a}) and {\b 44} and perhaps a local variant of the latter.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from E.C. Europe have leaves with long, narrow segments and sometimes also dense greyish indumentum and pale yellow ligules (at least in the dry state) as in subsp. ({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. markhotensis} Fedorov in Schischkin & Bobrov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  26}: 867 (1961) and {\b A. zephyrovii} Dobrocz.,{\i  Ukr. Bot. Zur.}{\b  18}({\b 2}): 70 (1961) are taxa of uncertain status closely related to{\b  42}({\b b}). The former has leaves 3-4 cm, with wide segments and flat lobes and capitula 20-25(-30) mm in diameter with golden-yellow ligules, and the latter has leaves of similar size but crowded near the middle of the stem, and capitula 15-17(-25) mm in diameter with pale yellow ligules. Both occur in Krym.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. A. gaudium-solis} Velen.,{\i  Fl. Bulg., Suppl.}{\b  1}: 152 (1898). Sparsely lanate, robust perennial. Stems 40-90 cm, 1-few, simple or with 2-4 branches at or above middle. Leaves oblong, pinnatipartite; segments oblong-linear, deeply pectinate-dentate, the teeth or lobes ovate to linear-lanceolate, thickened and whitish-mucronate at apex; rhachis dentate. Capitula 40-50 mm in diameter; peduncles long. Involucral bracts without a dark margin, the outer lanceolate, subacute, the inner oblong-linear with scarious, obtuse apex. Ligules up to 12 × 4-5 mm, deep yellow. Disc up to 20 mm in diameter. Receptacle hemispherical; scales oblong-linear, gradually acuminate, the acumen nearly as long as the scale. Achenes c. 2 mm, very narrowly winged at lateral angles, striate, with an entire hyaline corona c. 1 mm. •{\i  S. Bulgaria} ({\i E. Rodopi}). Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. A. sancti-johannis} Turrill, {\i Gard. Chron}. ser. 3, {\b 80}: 270 (1926) ({\i A. gaudium-solis} var.{\i  sancti-johannis }(Turrill) Hayek). Like {\b 43} but caespitose; leaves pinnatisect with pinnatipartite segments; all involucral bracts acute, with green back and black-brown, ciliate-incised margin and apex; ligules up to 15 × 6 mm, orange-yellow; disc 15-25 mm in diameter; achenes up to 2·5 mm, with an irregularly dentate corona c. 1 mm.{\i  Clearings in woods. • S.W. Bulgaria} ({\i Rila Planina}). Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. A. cretacea} Zefirov, {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 16}: 371 (1954). Greyish- or whitish-lanate perennial. Stems 10-25 cm, decumbent, numerous, simple or branched. Leaves up to 3·5 cm, oblong, pinnatisect; segments oblong, pectinate-dentate, somewhat distant; teeth mucronate. Capitula 12-20(-25) mm in diameter; peduncles 2-8 cm. Involucre hemispherical-subcampanulate, whitish-lanate; bracts rigid and rather thick at base, the outer lanceolate, very acute, without a scarious margin, the inner ovate-oblong to oblong with obtuse or subobtuse hyaline apex, narrowly edged with pale brown, fimbriate. Ligules 4-7 × 2·25 mm, bright yellow. Disc 7-13 mm in diameter, deeper yellow than ligules. Receptacle subhemispherical; scales about equalling the florets. Corona c. ¼ as long as achene. {\i Stony calcareous slopes. S.W. Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. parviceps} Dobrocz. & Fedorov in Zerov et al., {\i Vyzn. Rosl. Ukr. }676 (1965), from Krym, is like {\b 45} but has erect or ascending stems 25-50 cm and pale yellow ligules. Its taxonomic rank is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. A. monantha} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.} 3: 2187 (1803). Green perennial with very sparse indumentum. Stems 25-40 cm, usually solitary, simple or with few branches at base, leafy below the middle. Leaves 1-4 × 0·5-1·5 cm, oblong-ovate, with flat segments. Capitula 25-30 mm in diameter. Ligules pale yellow. 2n = 18.{\i  Grassy or stony slopes and roadsides. • Mountains of Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. A. parnassica} (Boiss. & Heldr.) R. Fernandes,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  70}: 15 (1975) ({\i Cota parnassica} Boiss. & Heldr., {\i A. tinctoria} var.{\i  parnassica} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Boiss., {\i A. tinctoria} var. {\i pallida} DC.). Perennial with a woody rhizome. Stems 10-40(-60) cm, numerous, simple or with 1-2(-4) branches, canescent-hairy to lanate, rather leafy towards the apex. Leaves 1·5-2·5(-4) cm, oblong, pinnatipartite, sparsely hairy above, sericeous to lanate beneath; segments linear-oblong, pectinate or dentate; lobes or teeth contiguous, ascending, frequently inflexed. Capitula up to c. 40 mm in diameter. Inner involucral
\par

\par
156}
\par