{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b secundiramea}: Stems (3·5-)10-40(-55) cm, numerous, purple or reddish below, glabrous or sometimes hairy upwards. Leaves up to 4·5 × 1·7 cm, light green to glaucescent, glabrous; lobes usually oblong to obovate, obtuse. Peduncles up to 10 cm in fruit, pale green and shining. Capitula 17-22 mm in diameter; ligules 5-9 × 2·5-4 mm. Disc 6-9 mm in diameter, rather elongate in fruit. Achenes 1-1·5 mm.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b intermedia} (Guss.) R. Fernandes,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  70}: 13 (1975) ({\i A. intermedia} Guss.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but stems 3-15(-25) cm, usually glabrous, deeper red; capitula up to 25 mm in diameter; disc up to 10 mm in diameter; receptacle hemispherical-conical; achenes c. 1·5 mm. •{\i  N.E. & E. coast of Sicilia and adjacent islets}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b urvilleana} (DC.) R. Fernandes, {\i loc. cit.} (1975) ({\i A. secundiramea} var.{\i  urvilleana }DC.): Much-branched from the base. Capitula smaller than in subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}). Receptacle hemispherical-conical or nearly hemispherical, with obovate scales, wider than in subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}). Achenes c. 1·5 mm. •{\i  Malta, ?Pantelleria, ?Lampedusa}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. A. muricata} (DC.) Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Syn.}{\b  2}: 490 (1844) ({\i Lyonnetia muricata} DC.). Like {\b 36}({\b a}) but stems and branches not more than 25 cm; lower involucral bracts relatively longer, the inner with wider hyaline margin; ligules absent; achenes 1·5-2 × 1·25-1·5 mm, subprismatic, with very conspicuous and prominently tuberculate-verruculose ribs; the outer with an oblique or nearly horizontal, lobed or crenate, rather thick auricle up to 1 mm, becoming progressively shorter and only a denticulate margin on the inner achenes. 2n = 18. {\i Grassy hillsides. • W. Sicilia.} Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. A. macedonica} Boiss. & Orph. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 3}({\b 6}): 97 (1859). Glabrescent annual or biennial with more or less numerous rigid stems. Stems 15-32 cm, usually more or less branched, the branches erect. Leaves up to 2 cm, 1- to 2-pinnatisect, with more or less patent segments, glandular-punctate, sparsely hairy to glabrous; lobes linear, mucronate. Capitula 15-25 mm in diameter; peduncles long, slender, not clavate in fruit. Involucre hemispherical, glabrous; outer bracts triangular-ovate, acute, the inner oblong, obtuse, with hyaline margin and apex. Ligules equalling or slightly longer than the diameter of the disc. Disc 7-9 mm in diameter, convex to subovoid. Receptacle oblong-ovoid to elongate-conical, subacute or acute; scales oblong-subcuneate, about equalling florets. Achenes 1-1·75 mm, turbinate, subquadrangular with distinct to obscure ribs, at least the outer conspicuously granulate, with acute rim or with a corona up to c. 0·5 mm. {\i Stony slopes and roadsides. • C. & S. Bulgaria, N.E. Greece.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. MARUTA (Cass.) Griseb. Annuals with branched stems. Involucral bracts with pale brown or hyaline margin. Receptacle conical to hemispherical; receptacular scales narrowly lanceolate to linear-subulate, sometimes absent in the lower part, more or less caducous. Achenes turbinate, circular in transverse section, with or without ribs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. A. cotula} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 894 (1753). Fetid annual (7-)20-50(-70) cm, thinly tomentose to glabrescent. Stems corymbosely branched above. Leaves 1·5-6·5 × 0·5-3 cm, ovate or ovate-oblong in outline, irregularly 2- to 3-pinnatisect, the lobes narrowly linear, acuminate, with hyaline mucro, sparsely hairy, sometimes fleshy. Capitula 12-30 mm in diameter; peduncles (2·5-)6-15 cm, not clavate. Involucre hemispherical; bracts more or less oblong, acute to obtuse, with pale brown, scarious margin. Receptacle 5-8 × 1·5-3 mm, narrowly conical, without scales in the lower half; scales linear-subulate, shorter than to equalling the florets. Ligules 5-14 mm, sterile, sometimes absent. Achenes (1-)1·3-1·8 mm, turbinate, slightly constricted at the apex, 8- to 11-ribbed, the ribs tuberculate or verruculose; pappus absent. 2n = 18.{\i  Waste places and disturbed ground. Most of Europe northwards to England and S. Finland; casual further north.} All except Fa Is Rs (N) Sb; not native in Fe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. pseudocotula} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 1}({\b 6}): 86 (1846) has been doubtfully recorded from Karpathos. It is like {\b 39} but has the peduncles clavate in fruit and the outer achenes persistent and with an auricle up to ½ as long as the achene.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. bourgaei} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Pugillus }56 (1852) appears to be known only from the original collection from S.W. Spain. It is characterized by the receptacle with scales throughout and the strongly tuberculate, turbinate achenes which are only 1 mm long.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. A. lithuanica} (DC.) Besser ex Trautv.,{\i  Acta Horti Petrop.}{\b  8}: 448 (1883). Like {\b 39} but usually taller; leaves with narrow segments; capitula not more than 16 mm in diameter, with narrower scales; corolla-tube not swollen but constricted in the lower half; achenes slightly longer, distinctly constricted and obtuse above nearly or quite smooth, with more protruding base. •{\i  Lithuania and White Russia. }Rs (B, C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CHIA Yavin. Annuals. All involucral bracts with wide dark brown or blackish scarious margin and apex. Receptacle hemispherical or ovoid; receptacular scales caducous, thinly membranous, brown or blackish towards apex. Ligules white. Achenes with smooth ribs, those of ligules and sometimes those of the outer tubular florets with a large hyaline auricle, the others with a short, thick corona.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. A. chia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 894 (1753). Caespitose, sparsely pubescent. Stems 5-40 cm, many, simple or sparingly branched, erect or ascending. Leaves petiolate or sessile, 1- to 2-pinnatisect, with patent segments; lobes triangular or ovate, acute or obtuse mucronate. Capitula up to 45 mm in diameter; peduncles long not clavate. Involucre nearly flat, subglabrous; outer bracts triangular-lanceolate, acute, the inner oblanceolate or oblong to obovate, obtuse to acute. Ligules longer than the diameter of the disc. Tubular florets swollen and spongy in the lower 1/3 in fruit. Receptacular scales oblong to lanceolate, subobtuse to acute, but not mucronate. Achenes 2-2·5 mm (excl. auricle), subcylindrical to obconical, with 7-10 rather prominent, narrow ribs.{\i  Cultivated ground and waste places. C. & E. Mediterranean region. }Al Cr Gr It Ju Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen.{\b  Cota} (Gay ex Guss.) Rouy. Receptacle hemispherical or subhemispherical; scales all over the receptacle, persistent more or less rigid, acuminate. Achenes more or less compressed, triangular or triangular-oblong in outline, rhombic in transverse section, usually more or less acute at the lateral angles.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ANTHEMARIA Dumort. Perennials. Involucral bracts with or without a dark brown or blackish margin and apex. Ligules yellow or white. Achenes more or less compressed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. A. tinctoria} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 896 (1753) ({\i Cota tinctoria} (L.) Gay). Sparsely hairy to white-lanate. Stems usually more or less branched. Leaves 2-pinnatisect with oblong to linear segments.
\par

\par
155}
\par