{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. alpestris} (Hoffmanns. & Link) R. Fernandes,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  70}: 9 (1975) ({\i Chamaemelum alpestre} Hoffmanns. & Link). Like {\b 11} but stems 10-35(-40) cm, more numerous, often branched; leaf-lobes usually wider; ligules usually absent; disc 8-13 mm in diameter at anthesis; involucre less convex, the bracts usually all acute, with narrower, often brown scarious margin; receptacle usually hemispherical; achenes (1·5-)2-2·5 mm, more strongly angled, usually with a short corona.{\i  Mountains of C. & W. Spain and N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. A. maritima} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 893 (1753). Subglabrous to more or less pubescent dwarf shrub. Stems 12-70 cm, stout, rooting at base, corymbosely branched or simple, sometimes with dead petioles at base, densely leafy upwards. Leaves 1·3-4 × 0·7-2 cm, 1(-2)-pinnatifid, fleshy, glandular-punctate; segments obovate-cuneate. Peduncles (2-)3·5-10(-13) cm. Capitula (17-)24-40 mm in diameter. Involucre hemispherical, more or less lanate to glabrous; outer bracts triangular, acute, the inner oblong, obtuse, with wide hyaline margin. Ligules (5-)6·5-15 × (3·5-)4-7·5 mm, broadly elliptical to oblong. Disc 6-16 mm in diameter; lower half of corolla-tube subglobose, swollen and spongy in fruit. Receptacle conical or ovoid-oblong with obtuse apex; scales cuneate-oblong, attenuate or truncate at apex, with stiff, short acumen, about equalling the florets. Achenes 1·75-2 mm, with more or less prominent ribs, and acute rim prolonged on the adaxial side into an auricle up to 1 mm. 2n = 36.{\i  Maritime sands. W. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Bl Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. aeolica} Lojac., {\i Fl. Sic.}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 84 (1902), from Sicilia, considered by some authors as a variant of {\b 13} with 2-pinnatifid leaves, but distinct in its taller, annual stem, leafy to the capitulum, requires further study.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. virescens} Velen.,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. ,Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ({\i Math.-Nat. Kl}.) {\b 1903}({\b 28}): 5 (1904) ({\i A. georgieviana }Davidov). Probably biennial. Stems 40-60 cm, numerous, corymbosely branched above, glabrous. Leaves 2-pinnatisect, obovate in outline, very sparsely hairy, the middle c. 5 × 4·5 cm; lobes narrowly linear, mucronate. Involucre deeply umbonate, glabrous; bracts coriaceous, the outer oblong-triangular, acute, without a hyaline margin, the others oblong-lanceolate to elliptic-oblong, with lacerate margin and rather lacerate-hyaline apex. Ligules 10-12 × 2·75-3 mm, yellow, sterile. Disc 11-13 mm in diameter; corolla-tube conical or subcylindrical, swollen and spongy in the lower half. Receptacle hemispherical-conical, short, acute; receptacular scales oblong-lanceolate, with rigid keel and acumen, shorter than florets. Achenes 1-1·5 mm, weakly 4-angled to subcylindrical, granulate-scabrid on the angles, with an acute rim.{\i  Grassy places, cultivated ground and wood-margins. • S.E. Bulgaria.} Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. A. orbelica} Pancic,{\i  Nov. Elem. Fl. Bulg.} 27 (1886). Biennial, sparsely hairy to subglabrous. Stems 30-80 cm, numerous, stout, branched above the middle, the branches sometimes again branched, all rather sulcate-striate. Leaves up to 8 cm, 1- to 3-pinnatisect; segments and lobes narrowly linear. Peduncles slender. Involucre deeply umbonate; bracts pale yellowish-green, glandular, the outer triangular-lanceolate, the others oblong-lanceolate to lanceolate, all acute and with narrow, pale brown scarious margin. Ligules 10-12 × 4-4·5 mm. Disc 10-11 mm, rather convex in fruit; tubular florets swollen and spongy below the middle. Receptacle 7 × 4 mm, distinctly conical; receptacular scales oblong-cuneate or attenuate into the acumen, shorter than to about as long as the florets. Achenes 1·5-1·75 mm, the outer trigonous, curved, ribbed, distinctly granulate along ribs, the others sub-obpyramidal, 4-angular, straight, thinner, less granulate, all with an acute rim. •{\i  Woods. S. Bulgaria} ({\i Rodopi}). Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. A. hydruntina} Groves, {\i Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot}.){\b  21}: 523 (1885). Perennial with a woody base. Stems 25-45 cm, often caespitose, simple furcate, or with 3-6 corymbose branches above the middle rigid, appressed-whitish-hirsute or -lanate towards the base. Leaves up to 4 × 2 cm, oblong, 2-pinnatisect, glandular-punctate, lanate to sparsely hirsute; lobes linear to oblong, acute. Capitula (5-)7-8 mm in diameter at anthesis, up to 12 mm and subglobose in fruit. Involucre umbonate, pale yellowish-green, glabrous or sparsely pubescent below; bracts ovate to oblong, more or less acute, with hyaline margin and apex. Receptacle finally conical; scales oblong, obtuse, with a short acumen, glandular, shorter than florets. Tubular florets swollen and spongy below the middle. Achenes 1·5-1·75 mm, obconical, slightly ribbed, somewhat granulate, with acute rim higher on the adaxial side.{\i  Dry, open habitats. • S. Italy.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. A. tuberculata} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 59 (1838). More or less lanate to glabrescent perennial (sometimes biennial or annual). Stems (7-)13-33(-45) cm, many, frequently branched above the middle. Leaves 1- to 2-pinnatifid, glandular-punctate, at least the lower petiolate; lobes linear to elliptical. Capitula 22-30(-45) mm in diameter with ligules, or ligules absent; peduncles (3·5-)7-16 mm. Involucral bracts triangular-lanceolate to oblong, acute with brown margin and apex. Receptacle hemispherical. Achenes subprismatic, with more or less prominent, tuberculate ribs and denticulate rim which is sometimes a little higher on the adaxial side.{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tuberculata}: Leaves up to 5 cm. Ligules present or not. Disc 8-13 mm in diameter, rather convex and up to 16 mm in diameter in fruit. Receptacular scales linear-lanceolate to narrowly linear, attenuate-subulate, blackish at the apex of the acumen. Achenes 1·75-2·25 mm. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b turolensis} (Pau ex A. Caballero) R. Fernandes & Borja,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  70}: 10 (1975) ({\i A. turolensis} Pau ex A. Caballero): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but rather densely lanate; leaves up to 2·5 cm; capitula not more than 3 cm in diameter, with ligules; receptacular scales somewhat shorter, frequently not blackish at apex; achenes not more than c. 1·75 mm. •{\i  Serrania de Cuenca}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. A. ismelia} Lojac.,{\i  Fl. Sic.}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 78 (1902). Robust biennial. Stems 20-60 cm and up to 5 mm thick at base, corymbosely branched above. Leaves up to 13 × 6 cm, 1- to 2-pinnatisect glandular-punctate beneath, with patent segments, the lobes obtuse or rounded. Capitula up to 60 mm in diameter; peduncles 4·5-12·5 cm, bracteate nearly to the apex. Involucre more or less umbonate in fruit; outer and middle bracts triangular-lanceolate, acute, with brown margin, the inner ovate-oblong, with a wider margin and a lacerate, obtuse apex. Ligules up to 27 × 8·5 mm; disc 12-20 mm in diameter. Receptacle obtuse scales narrowly oblong, attenuate to the dark brown acumen equalling the florets. Achenes 2·5-2·75 mm, obpyramidal, with prominent, rather tuberculate ribs; corona up to 0·75 mm. {\i Stony or rocky ground. • W. Sicilia.} Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. A. tenuiloba} (DC.) R. Fernandes,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  70}: 10 (1975) ({\i A. byzantina} C. Koch,{\i  Lyonnetia tenuiloba} DC.). Caespitose perennial. Stems (2·5-)6-30(-40) cm, ascending, with 0-3(-4) branches. Leaves 1-pinnatisect to almost 2-pinnatisect more or less densely appressed-hairy and greyish, the cauline up to 3 × 2 cm; lobes linear-lanceolate or oblong, 0·5-2 mm wide, acute. Peduncles up to 15 cm. Capitula up to 25 mm in diameter with ligules, or ligules absent; disc 6-11(-13) mm in diameter. Involucre hemispherical; bracts acute or the inner obtuse, with or without a hyaline or sometimes brownish
\par

\par
151}
\par