{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  Similar in general aspect to {\b 33}({\b b}) but with more slender peduncles, smaller capitula, more acute receptacle, narrower achenes with obsolete ribs and shorter, thicker auricle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. A. flexicaulis} Rech. fil., {\i Bot. Jahrb.} {\b 80}: 415 (1961). Annual. Stems 5-35 cm, numerous, more or less branched, appressed hairy, glabrescent. Leaves up to 4 × 2 cm, fleshy, more or less pubescent to glabrescent, the lower broadly obovate-spathulate to spathulate, attenuate into the petiole, with subpalmately partite to more or less lobed lamina, the segments or lobes dentate, the uppermost lanceolate- or linear-spathulate, sessile. Peduncles arcuate-ascending, clavate in fruit. Involucre hemispherical-obconical; bracts acute, the inner more or less hyaline margined. Ligules deflexed, shorter than the diameter of the disc. Disc 6-10 mm in diameter; corolla-tube swollen in the lower 2/3. Receptacle conical; scales hyaline. Achenes 1·5-1·75 mm, subconical-cylindrical, obliquely truncate, without or with an auricle up to 0·5 mm. {\i Stony or rocky places near the sea. • W. Aegean region} ({\i Evvoia, Skiros}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. A. scopulorum} Rech. fil.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  85}: 61 (1936). Annual, branched from the base or with 1-many stems up to 30 cm, more or less branched, densely leafy, glabrescent towards the purplish, usually robust base, whitish-tomentose above, like the young leaves, peduncles and involucres. Leaves up to 6 cm, 2-pinnatisect, glabrescent; segments patent or subdeflexed; lobes shortly obovate-cuneate, entire or 2- to 3-dentate at apex, the ultimate divisions obtuse, callose-mucronulate. Capitula 30-40 mm in diameter; peduncles not clavate in fruit. Involucre more or less hemispherical; bracts soft, the outer oblong-lanceolate, the inner oblong, subacute to roundish, with wide hyaline margin and apex. Ligules 13 × 6 mm, sometimes absent. Disc up to 17 mm in diameter. Receptacle conical, very acute; scales hyaline, truncate and dentate at the apex or attenuate into a short, soft acumen. Achenes 2-2·25 mm (excl. auricle), subobpyramidal, the outer conspicuously ribbed; auricle up to 1·25 mm.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • Kikladhes.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. A. tomentosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 893 (1753). Stems 2-30(-45) cm, 1-many, the central erect and rather shorter than the lateral, simple or divaricately branched. Leaves up to 4·5 cm, 1- to 2-pinnatifid with cuneate-ovate to oblong, sometimes linear lobes. Capitula 15-37 mm in diameter. Involucre hemispherical or obconical at anthesis; bracts lanate or more or less densely hairy; outer bracts triangular-lanceolate, acute; inner oblong or oblong-lanceolate, acute or subacute, with a hyaline margin and apex. Ligules shorter than the diameter of the disc, sometimes absent. Corolla-tube not swollen. Receptacle 4-5 × 2·5-4 mm, shortly conical; scales oblong to oblanceolate, shortly acuminate. Achenes 1·5-2 mm (excl. auricle), obconical or obscurely obpyramidal, with more or less prominent ribs.{\i  C. & E. Mediterranean region.} Gr It Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tomentosa} ({\i A. tomentosa} subsp. {\i peregrina} (L.) Hayek; incl. ? {\i A. guicciardii} Heldr. & Sart., {\i A. muenterana }Heldr. ex Boiss.): Usually tomentose or lanate. Peduncles clavate. Disc (8-)9·5-13 mm in diameter. Outer achenes very obliquely truncate, with the rim acute on the adaxial side and obtuse on the abaxial side, or sometimes with an auricle 0·3-1 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b heracleotica} (Boiss. & Heldr.) R. Fernandes,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  70}: 12 (1975) ({\i A. peregrina} var. {\i heracleotica} Boiss. & Heldr.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but appressed-pubescent, with rigid, sometimes purplish stems; involucral bracts more appressed, indurate and thicker at base; peduncle less clavate; disc 6-8 mm in diameter; auricle relatively longer and wider. •{\i  Mountains of Greece and Aegean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Many specimens with narrow leaf-lobes and rather long rim or auricle of the achenes have been referred to {\b A. peregrina} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2}: 1223 (1759), a very obscure species, but variation in width of leaf-lobes is not well correlated with variation in length of auricle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. A. rigida} (Sibth. & Sm.) Boiss. & Heldr. in Heldr.,{\i  Sched. Herb. Graec. Norm.}{\b  1856}: no. 1503 (1857) ({\i A. cretica} (L.) Nyman, non L.). More or less hairy annual. Stems thick, finally rigid, up to 13(-15) cm, usually numerous and simple. Leaves oblong, 1-to 2-pinnatifid; lobes lanceolate, linear-spathulate to oblong-cuneate, acute or obtuse. Peduncles somewhat thickened and frequently arcuate, the 1-2 central ones very short, scape-like. Involucre usually obconical; bracts triangular-lanceolate, subequal, indurate-thickened at the base, more or less hairy, without or the inner with a narrow scarious margin. Ligules rarely present. Disc 3-9 mm in diameter; tubular florets yellow, rarely whitish suffused with pink, not swollen below. Receptacle 1-3·5 × 3-3·5 mm, shortly conical; scales lanceolate to obovate-cuneate, mucronate, shortly acuminate. Achenes 1·25-1·5 mm (excl. auricle), obconical, not or obscurely ribbed, with an auricle up to 0·5 mm, or sometimes an acute rim.{\i  Maritime sands and other dry places. Aegean region.} Cr Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Sicilia referred to this species belong to a variant of {\b 36} without ligules. Perhaps {\b A. asperula} Bertol.,{\i  Fl. Ital. }{\b 9}: 368 (1854), an obscure species described from Corse, might also be ascribed to the Sicilian variant.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. A. chrysantha} Gay in Durieu,{\i  Expl. Sci. Algérie} ({\i Bot.}) t. 60, fig. 1(1846-1849). A much-branched, densely-tomentose annual. Main stem up to 25 cm, usually corymbosely branched, densely leafy. Leaves fleshy, broadly ovate, 1- to 2-pinnatisect, the segments 2- to 3-lobed or -partite, the lobes usually oblong to obovate, obtuse or rounded, not mucronate. Peduncles somewhat clavate in fruit. Involucre slightly convex, lanate-tomentose; disc rather convex; outer bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, without scarious margin, the inner oblong, subacute, scarious and ciliate at the margin. Receptacle hemispherical to oblong-ovoid, rounded at the apex; scales elliptical to obovate or oblong-obovate, mucronate, shorter than florets. Ligules subrectangular, yellow, usually rather shorter than the diameter of the disc. Achenes 1·5-1·75 mm, obconical, with 10 granulate ribs, and a denticulate rim or sometimes a short crenulate auricle.{\i  S.E. Spain} ({\i near Cartagena}). Hs. ({\i Algeria}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. A. secundiramea} Biv., {\i Sic. Pl. Cent.}{\b  2}: 10 (1806). Usually much-branched, somewhat shiny annual. Leaves 1- to 2-pinnatisect, thick, glandular-punctate beneath. Involucre hemispherical, glabrous or sparsely hairy; bracts lanceolate, acute, the outer more than half as long as the middle. Receptacular scales obovate-oblong to obovate, cuneate, very shortly mucronate, hyaline, shorter than or equalling the florets. Ligules usually present. Tubular florets swollen and spongy in the lower 2/3. Outer achenes obconical, distinctly ribbed, more or less granulate, with a very short crenulate rim, the others nearly smooth, denticulate at apex.{\i  Grassy, sandy or stony places near the sea. C. Mediterranean region.} Co Ga It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Peduncles rather elongate and clavate; receptacle conical 
\par
  rather long in fruit; disc conical or sub-conical 
\par
  in fruit ...................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b secundiramea} 
\par
1 Peduncles not or slightly elongate, usually not clavate
\par
  in fruit; receptacle shortly conical or hemispherical-
\par
  conical; disc hemispherical in fruit
\par
2 Stems ascending or erect, sparingly branched, and not 
\par
  leafy to the apex; receptacular scales obovate-cuneate  ({\b b}) subsp. {\b intermedia} 
\par
2 Stems procumbent, diffuse, much-branched, leafy to the
\par
  apex; receptacular scales broadly obovate ..................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b urvilleana}
\par

\par
154}
\par