{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 narrow margin. Receptacle shortly conical, acute; scales obovate-oblong to oblanceolate, obtuse, the outer sparsely hairy on the back, about equalling the florets. Achenes obconical, not or slightly ribbed, not or slightly granulate at the base; corona up to 0·5 mm on the adaxial side, hyaline, or absent.{\i  Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tenuiloba} ({\i A. montana} subsp. {\i tenuiloba} (DC.) Nyman, {\i A. orientalis} var.{\i  tenuiloba} (DC.) Hayek): Capitula distinctly umbonate. Achenes 1-1·5(-1·75) mm; corona absent or very short. {\i Dry, open habitats. E. & S. parts of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cronia} (Boiss. & Heldr.) R. Fernandes, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  70}: 10 (1975) ({\i A. cronia} Boiss. & Heldr., {\i A. orientalis} subsp.{\i  cronia} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Hayek): Capitula not or somewhat umbonate. Achenes 1·5-2·5 mm; corona up to 0·5 mm on the adaxial side, hyaline. {\i Stony and grassy places on mountains. • W. & S. parts of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   A. jordanovii} Stoj. & Acht.,{\i  Notizbl. Bot. Gart. Berlin}{\b  13}: 518 (1937), described from S.E. Bulgaria (Strandza Pl.), has capitula c. 12 mm in diameter, with ligules, involucral bracts not hyaline at margin, receptacular scales oblong or narrowly lanceolate, shortly mucronate, hirsute on the back and achenes c. 1·8 mm, obconical-pyramidal, with corona c. 0·3 mm; it is perhaps a local variant of {\b 19}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. A. anatolica} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 11}): 10 (1849). Caespitose, densely appressed-greyish-yellow-hairy perennial. Stems up to 20 cm, slender, simple or sparingly branched. Cauline leaves c. 1·5 × 0·7 cm, patent or deflexed, ovate, 1- to 2-pinnatifid; segments very crowded, subflabellate; lobes obtuse. Capitula 19-30 mm in diameter with ligules, or ligules absent; peduncles 4·5-6 cm. Involucre hemispherical; bracts acute, with narrowly brown-scarious or sometimes hyaline margin and apex. Receptacle shortly conical; scales obovate, shortly acuminate. Achenes c. 2 mm, subprismatic, distinctly ribbed, the peripheral granulate; auricle up to 0·5 mm, hyaline. {\i Stony places on mountains. N.E Greece. }Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. A. spruneri} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  op. cit.}{\b  3}({\b 3}): 24 (1856) ({\i A. orientalis }var. {\i spruneri} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Hayek). Densely sericeous perennial. Stems up to 42 cm, simple or branched. Leaves 2-pinnatisect, densely sericeous-tomentose; lobes ovate-oblong to oblong-linear, obtuse. Capitula up to 14 mm in diameter; ligules absent. Involucre not very convex; outer bracts ovate, acute, the inner oblong, obtuse or subobtuse, with narrow, hyaline margin. Receptacle convex; scales truncate or attenuate to a short acumen, shorter than the florets.{\i  Stony places on mountains. • S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Like discoid variants of {\b 19} but with denser, slightly crispate indumentum, wider lobes of leaves, obtuse inner involucral bracts with wider scarious margin, roundish receptacle and larger, distinctly ribbed achenes with shorter auricle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. A. orientalis} (L.) Degen,{\i  Iter Turc.} ({\i Exsicc}.) (1890) ({\i A. pectinata} (Bory & Chaub.) Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  A. complanata} auct., non (Sibth. & Sm.) Halácsy). Stock woody, branched. Stems (7-)11-27(-36) cm, usually numerous, caespitose, with 0-5 branches. Leaves oblong to linear-oblong, glandular-punctate, sparsely hairy, pectinate, sessile; segments entire or rarely pinnatisect, narrowly linear to setaceous, mucronate-subulate, distant or more or less approximate, frequently with 1-2(-3) short lobes in their axils. Involucral bracts glabrous, triangular to oblong, the inner with wide hyaline margin and apex. Ligules 6·5-10 × 3-4 mm, rarely present. Disc 6-12 mm in diameter, conical-convex; florets rather glandular, with the tube constricted at the middle, swollen only at base or not at all. Receptacle conical; scales hyaline, obovate or broadly elliptical, obtuse, with somewhat rigid acumen, reaching the base of the corolla-lobes. Achenes granulate, not or obsoletely ribbed, with acute rim, the peripheral c. 1·25 mm, cylindrical-turbinate, the inner c. 1·5 mm, obconical. {\i Greece, Turkey-in-Europe.} Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. A. pindicola} Heldr. ex Halácsy,{\i  Consp. Fl. Graec.}{\b  2}: 57 (1902). Subcanescent or sparsely hairy to glabrescent perennial. Stems up to 40 cm, with erect branches. Leaves 1- to 2(-3)-pinnatisect, the cauline up to 6·5 cm; segments narrowly linear, acute, patent or nearly so; petiole very narrow, long. Capitula up to 45 mm in diameter. Involucre hemispherical, slightly umbonate; outer involucral bracts ovate-lanceolate, very acute, with narrow brown margin; inner oblong-lanceolate, subacute, with a wider scarious brown margin. Ligules up to 17 × 4·5 mm. Disc 9-13 mm in diameter; corolla-tube swollen and spongy below the middle. Receptacle conical; scales oblong, equalling the florets. Achenes c. 2 mm, not ribbed, with short, erose corona; those of ligules minutely tuberculate at the angles, those of disc obpyramidal, somewhat granulate. {\i Mountain rocks. • C.Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. A. meteorica} Hausskn., {\i Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver.} nov. ser., {\b 15}: 25 (1896). Glabrescent, without leaf-rosettes. Stems up to 22 cm, somewhat branched from the base, the main branches with erecto-patent lateral branches, straight, slender, rigid. Leaves 1-pinnatisect, strongly glandular-punctate; segments patent, linear to oblong, mucronate-subulate, entire or 2-fid. Involucre finally flattish, glabrous; outer bracts triangular, without hyaline margin, the others oblong, with wide hyaline margin. Ligules 4-5 × 3 mm, deflexed. Disc 6-9 mm in diameter; corolla-tube swollen and spongy in the lower half. Receptacle conical, acute; scales obovate-cuneate, attenuate to a somewhat rigid acumen shorter than the florets. Achenes c. 1·5 mm, obpyramidal, with granulate ribs and acute rim, higher on the adaxial side particularly in those of ligules. {\i Dry, stony slopes. • N. & C. Greece, S. Jugoslavia}. Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. A. rumelica} (Velen.) Stoj. & Acht., {\i Notizbl. Bot. Gart. Berlin}{\b  13}: 516 (1937) ({\i A. tenuiloba} var.{\i  rumelica} (Velen.) Stoj. & Acht.). More or less hairy, caespitose perennial (rarely biennial). Stems 8-20 cm, numerous, erect or ascending, simple or with 1-3 branches from below the middle. Leaves green or greyish, 1-pinnatisect with entire or 2- to 3-fid segments- lobes linear-spathulate to oblong-ovate, obtuse, mucronulate. Capitula up to 25 mm in diameter; peduncles 4-13 cm. Involucre hemispherical-subcampanulate, appressed-hairy; outer bracts ovate-triangular, subacute, the inner oblong, obtuse, with hyaline margin and apex. Ligules up to 10 mm. Disc up to 10 mm in diameter, convex-conical in fruit. Receptacle conical, acute; scales oblong to oblong-obovate, truncate, shortly apiculate, about equalling the florets. Achenes 1·5-2 mm, obpyramidal, scarcely ribbed; auricle hyaline, very short. {\i Dry hillsides. • S.E. Bulgaria.} Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. regis-borisii} Stoj. & Acht., op. cit. 519 (1937), described from N.E. Bulgaria, is like {\b 25} in most characters, but approaches {\b 19} in its hairy involucral bracts and in having a hyaline corona.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. A. stribrnyi} Velen.,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ({\i Math.-Nat. Kl}.) {\b 1895}({\b 37}): 6 (1895). Like {\b 25} but stems subglabrous, simple or branched above the middle; leaves very sparsely hairy to glabrous, with narrower segments, the lobes subacute; capitula slightly smaller; disc up to 8 mm in diameter; achenes smaller. •{\i  S. Bulgaria} ({\i Rodopi}). Bu.
\par

\par
152}
\par