{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. A. glaberrima} (Rech. fil.) W. Greuter,{\i  op. cit.} 148 (1968) ({\i Ammanthus glaberrimus} Rech. fil.). Glabrous or sparsely hairy  annual. Stems 2-30 cm, flexuous. Leaves pinnatisect to 3-fid or entire, more or less petiolate, fleshy; segments distant, ovate- cuneate, more or less deeply divided or entire; lobes subobtuse to acute. Capitula up to 10 mm in diameter. Involucre appressed- hairy; bracts obtuse, the outer ovate to oblong, the inner broadly  elliptical, with wide hyaline margin. Ligules c. 2 mm, broadly elliptical, pink. Receptacle shortly conical, acute; scales lanceolate-cuneate to narrowly linear, acute, hyaline, rather shorter than florets, glabrous, caducous. Achenes 1-1·25 mm (excluding corona) and nearly as wide as long, obsoletely ribbed, cylindrical- turbinate; corona up to 0·5 mm on the adaxial side, rather shorter to almost absent on abaxial side, erose-lacerate, hyaline.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • N.W. Kriti} ({\i island of Gramvousa}). Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 58.           Achillea}            L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By I.B.K. Richardson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Leaves entire to 3-pinnatifid, alternate. Capitula usually small, pedunculate, rarely shortly so. Involucral bracts in few rows, the outer somewhat shorter than the inner, with a scarious margin. Receptacle convex or conical; scales present. Outer florets ligulate, female, the ligules more or less 3-dentate, patent or rarely short and erect. Inner florets hermaphrodite, 5-lobed, white, yellow or pink; corolla-tube compressed. Achenes compressed, oblong or obovate; pappus absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: F. Ehrendorfer,{\i  Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. }{\b 24}: 141-152 (1959). A. Heimerl,{\i  Monographia Sectionis 'Ptarmica' Achilleae Generis.} Wien. 1884. W. M. Hiesey &  M. A. Nobs,{\i  Bot. Gaz.}{\b  131}: 245-259 (1970). J. Prodan,{\i  Achileele  României.} Cluj. 1931.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Interspecific hybridization is common throughout the genus so that identification is often difficult.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   In this account, divided leaves are said to be terete when the lobes are directed in more than one plane. Corymbs are considered as several when the stem branches near the top, even though the corymbs may be contiguous. Measurements of involucre and capitulum refer to flowering material, and characters of involucral bracts refer to those in the middle of the involucre.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ligules yellow; inflorescences usually with more than 15 capitula  
\par
2 Middle cauline leaves ± terete  
\par
3 Lobes of leaves suborbicular .............................................. {\b 51. santolinoides}
\par
3 Lobes of leaves ovate to linear  
\par
4 Involucre c. 2 mm in diameter; ligules pale yellow .. ({\b 31-34}). {\b nobilis} group
\par
4 Involucre 3-5 mm in diameter; ligules bright yellow
\par
5 Involucre c. 3 mm in diameter; ligules c. 2 mm ..................... {\b 36. tomentosa}
\par
5 Involucre 3·5-5 mm in diameter; ligules c. 3 mm ................ {\b 37. chrysocoma}
\par
2 Middle cauline leaves plane
\par
6 Middle cauline leaves simple, serrate ....................................... {\b 42. ageratum}
\par
6 Middle cauline leaves divided  
\par
7 Ligules c. 3 mm ................................................................... {\b 39. absinthoides}
\par
7 Ligules not more than 2·5 mm
\par
8 Involucral bracts at least 3 mm; ligules 1·5-2·5 mm
\par
9 Involucre 2-3 mm in diameter; leaves pinnatisect,
\par
  ± pubescent ............................................................................ {\b 30. crithmifolia}
\par
9 Involucre c. 5 mm in diameter; leaves pinnatifid,
\par
  usually sericeous ..................................................................... {\b 38. holosericea}
\par
8 Involucral bracts not more than 2·8 mm; ligules not 
\par
  more than 1·7 mm
\par
10 Inflorescences with not more than 15 capitula 
\par
11 Leaves ± pubescent .............................................................. {\b 40. leptophylla} 
\par
11 Leaves glabrous .................................................................... {\b 41. glaberrima}
\par
10 Inflorescences mostly with more than 15 capitula
\par
12 Middle cauline leaves pectinate 
\par
13 Leaves pinnatisect, those on non-flowering shoots 
\par
   linear and entire in lower half ................................................ {\b 43. ochroleuca} 
\par
13 Leaves pinnatifid, rarely entire in lower part of leaf ............... {\b 44. depressa} 
\par
12 Middle cauline leaves variously divided, but not pectinate
\par
14 Leaves grey ........................................................................... {\b 45. aegyptiaca}
\par
14 Leaves green
\par
15 Involucre 2·8-4 mm in diameter
\par
16 Ligules pale yellow ............................................................. {\b 30. crithmifolia}
\par
16 Ligules deep yellow
\par
17 Lobes of basal leaves 1- to 2-pinnatifid with ± lanceolate,
\par
   obtuse teeth ............................................................................... {\b 48. coarctata} 
\par
17 Lobes of basal leaves serrate or 1-pinnatifid with 
\par
   ovate, acute teeth 
\par
18 Leaves weakly glandular-punctate, the cauline about 
\par
   twice as long as internodes ...................................................... {\b 46. clypeolata} 
\par
18 Leaves distinctly glandular-punctate, the cauline 4-5 
\par
   times as long as internodes ......................................................... {\b 47. thracica}
\par
15 Involucre not more than 2·5 mm in diameter
\par
19 Leaves tomentose; ligules deep yellow
\par
20 Ligules 0·5-1 mm ................................................................... {\b 49. micrantha}
\par
20 Ligules c. 1·5 mm .............................................................. {\b 50. biebersteinii}
\par
19 Leaves puberulent to pubescent; ligules pale yellow
\par
21 Involucral bracts glabrous, shiny ........................................ {\b 30. crithmifolia}
\par
21 Involucral bracts ± hairy, dull .................................. ({\b 31-34}). {\b nobilis} group
\par
1  Ligules white to pink or purplish-red; inflorescences 
\par
   with 1 to many capitula 
\par
22 Capitula usually solitary 
\par
23 Leaves entire or crenate ......................................................... {\b 1. ageratifolia} 
\par
23 Leaves divided  
\par
24 Leaves grey, sericeous ............................................................. {\b 7. umbellata} 
\par
24 Leaves green, subglabrous to sericeous-tomentose
\par
25 Leaves sericeous-tomentose ...................................................... {\b 4. barrelieri}  
\par
25 Leaves subglabrous to pubescent ................................................ {\b 3. oxyloba} 
\par
22 Capitula mostly in clusters
\par
26 Leaves entire or divided less than ½ way to midrib
\par
27 Leaves spathulate to obtriangular; stems simple
\par
28 Stems densely brown-hairy above ........................................... {\b 16. lingulata}
\par
28 Stems glabrous or with white hairs above 
\par
29 Leaves ± glabrous; involucre c. 5 mm in diameter .................. {\b 5. erba-rotta}
\par
29 Leaves ± grey-tomentose; involucre 5-8(-10) mm in diameter ... {\b 2. serbica}
\par
27 Leaves linear-lanceolate to lanceolate; stem usually branched  
\par
30 Leaves not more than 0·3 cm wide, entire ............................... {\b 5. erba-rotta}
\par
30 Leaves more than 0·3 cm wide, serrate   
\par
31 Leaves not glandular-punctate ................................................. {\b 17. ptarmica}
\par
31 Leaves glandular-punctate 
\par
32 Leaves up to 9 cm, acute; involucre 4-8 mm in diameter ... {\b 18. cartilaginea}
\par
32 Leaves not more than 5 cm, usually subobtuse;
\par
   involucre c. 12 mm in diameter ................................................ {\b 19. pyrenaica}
\par
26 Leaves divided more than ½ way to midrib 
\par
33 Primary segments of cauline leaves mostly undivided,
\par
   sometimes serrate   
\par
34 Primary segments of middle cauline leaves serrate 
\par
35 Involucre 5-8 mm in diameter; ligules 4-6 mm; rhachis
\par
   entire .................................................................................... {\b 15. macrophylla} 
\par
35 Involucre 3-4 mm in diameter; ligules 2-4 mm; rhachis
\par
   ± toothed ........................................................... ({\b 22-29}). {\b millefolium} group
\par
34 Primary segments of middle cauline leaves mostly entire 
\par
36 Involucre 2-3 mm in diameter 
\par
37 Middle cauline leaves ovate in outline, glabrous ........ {\b 35. chamaemelifolia} 
\par
37 Middle cauline leaves lanceolate to linear in outline,
\par
   ± pubescent ............................................................................. {\b 43. ochroleuca} 
\par

\par
159}
\par