{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 2 Abaxial face of achene blackish-brown, strongly rugose;
\par
  capitula 3-10 ............................................................................... {\b 2. conoclinia}
\par
1 Lateral ribs of achene about as long as the median rib,
\par
  not or slightly incurved above; pappus present
\par
3 Ligules less than 2/3 the diameter of the involucre,
\par
  sometimes absent
\par
4 Ligules present; basal and lower cauline leaves with 
\par
  lobes at base and in distal 1/4 only ................................................... {\b 6. rosella}
\par
4 Ligules absent or very short; basal and lower cauline 
\par
  leaves with lobes throughout their length ................................ {\b 7. tempskyana}
\par
3 Ligules at least 2/3 the diameter of the involucre
\par
5 Annual; achene with strongly inflated ribs; pappus c.
\par
  1/3 as long as achene, 3-lobed ..................................................... {\b 8. parviflora}
\par
5 Ribs of achene not strongly inflated; pappus not more 
\par
  than 1/4 as long as achene, usually truncate
\par
6 Annual; achene with well-separated ribs; resin-glands ±
\par
  orbicular ........................................................................................ {\b 5. perforata}
\par
6 Biennial or perennial; achene with contiguous or 
\par
  slightly separated ribs
\par
7 Flowering stems unbranched; resin-glands of achene ±
\par
  orbicular ....................................................................................... {\b 3. caucasica}
\par
7 Flowering stems usually corymbosely branched above;
\par
  resin-glands of achene elongated 
\par
8 Plant eglandular, usually glabrous; resin-glands of 
\par
  achene 2, longitudinally elongated ............................................... {\b 4. maritima}
\par
8 Plant usually glandular-puberulent; resin-gland of 
\par
  achene 1, transversely elongated ............................................. {\b 1. trichophylla}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. trichophylla} (Boiss.) Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 6}): 88 (1846) ({\i Tripleurospermum tenuifolium} (Kit.) Freyn). Biennial, rarely perennial. Stems 50-150 cm, erect, more or less corymbosely branched above; stems and leaves usually with numerous capitate glands, sometimes with scattered hairs. Leaf-segments long, narrow, acutely apiculate. Capitula (4-)10-60, 3-5 cm in diameter; ligules 1-1·7 cm; involucral bracts with a wide, colourless to pale brown scarious margin. Achenes with abaxial face pale or medium brown, smooth or weakly rugose; ribs stramineous, thick, the lateral usually distinctly longer than the median, strongly incurved above; pappus usually absent; resin-gland solitary, transversely elongated.{\i  Hedges, roadsides and cultivated fields. S.E. & E.C. Europe.} Al Au Bu Gr Hu Ju Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. conoclinia} (Boiss. & Balansa) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 374 (1879) {\i T. conoclinium} (Boiss. & Balansa) Hayek). Like {\b 1} but smaller and more frequently perennial; stems 30-50 cm; stems and leaves sparsely hairy but not glandular; capitula 3-10; involucral bracts with a dark brown margin; achenes with abaxial face blackish brown, strongly rugose, the lateral ribs always distinctly longer than the median; pappus absent.{\i  Scrub. near Istanbul.} Tu. ({\i N.W. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Closely related to {\b 1} but apparently distinct. Some plants of {\b 1} from Albania resemble {\b 2} in involucre and indumentum.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. M. caucasica} (Willd.) Poiret in Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot. Suppl.}{\b  3}: 604 (1814) ({\i T. caucasicum} (Willd.) Hayek). Perennial. Stems 15-50 cm, simple, subglabrous, erect or ascending from a short fibrous creeping rhizome. Leaves glabrous; lower cauline 4-7 × 1·5-2·5 cm, 2-pinnatisect into fairly long acute segments. Capitulum 1(-3), 3-5 cm in diameter; ligules 1·5-2 cm; involucral bracts narrowly triangular to oblong, with a wide, blackish-brown scarious margin. Achenes c. 2·5 × 1 mm; 1-2 slender supernumerary ribs often present; abaxial surface dark brown and smooth or somewhat rugose; resin-glands 2, small, orbicular; pappus 0·3-0·5 mm, pale, membranous, entire or somewhat lobed.{\i  Alpine meadows. Mountains of W. & C. Bulgaria and E. Albania}. Al Bu ?Ju. ({\i Caucasian region.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. M. maritima} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 891 (1753) ({\i T. maritimum} (L.) Koch). Biennial to perennial. Stems 10-80 cm, procumbent, ascending or erect, usually corymbosely branched above. Stems and leaves glabrous or with a few scattered hairs. Leaf-segments usually relatively short and fleshy, obtuse or shortly mucronate. Capitula (3-)10-50, 3-5 cm in diameter. Achenes 1·8-3·5 × 1-2 mm; ribs inflated and more or less contiguous, pale to dark blackish-brown; 1-2 supernumerary ribs often present; resin-glands large and longitudinally elongated; abaxial face blackish-brown and transversely rugose; pappus truncate,short.{\i  Open habitats, usually near the sea. Coasts of W. & N. Europe.} Be Br Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb Hs Is Lu No Po Rs (N, B) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Variable in size, habit and characters of leaf and involucre.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ligules 1·8-2 cm; involucral bracts oblong, all ± equal
\par
  in length, with a pale to medium brown scarious margin
\par
  at least 0·5 mm wide ...................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b subpolaris} 
\par
1 Ligules 1-1·6 cm; outer involucral bracts much shorter
\par
  than inner
\par
2 Involucral bracts broadly triangular, with a blackish-
\par
  brown scarious margin 0·4-1 mm wide .................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b phaeocephala}
\par
2 Involucral bracts oblong or narrowly triangular, with 
\par
  a pale or dark brown scarious margin not more than
\par
  0·3 mm wide ..................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b maritima}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b maritima}: Stems 15-80 cm. Resin-glands on achene usually much more than twice as long as wide. 2n = 18+0-4B.{\i  Coasts of W. & N.W. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b subpolaris} (Pobed.) Rauschert, {\i Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}) {\b 9}: 257 (1974) ({\i T. subpolare} Pobed.): Stems 30-40 cm. Resin-glands on achene 1½-2 times as long as wide.{\i  Seashores, waste places and cultivated land. N. Fennoscandia and N.W. Russia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b phaeocephala} (Rupr.) Rauschert,{\i  loc. cit.} (1974) ({\i T. phaeocephalum} (Rupr.) Pobed.): Stems 10-40 cm. Resin-glands on achene usually more than twice as long as wide. 2n = 18. {\i Arctic Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. M. perforata} Mérat, {\i Nouv. Fl. Env. Paris} 332 (1812) ({\i M. inodora} L., nom. illegit., {\i T. inodorum} Schultz Bip.). Annual. Stems 30-80 cm, erect or ascending, corymbosely branched above and sometimes also branching from base. Stems and leaves glabrous when mature, sometimes sparsely pubescent when young. Leaf-segments narrow and acutely apiculate, thin, not fleshy. Capitula (1-)10-200, 3-4·5 cm in diameter; ligules 1-1·8 cm; involucral bracts oblong or narrowly triangular with a narrow, colourless to dark brown scarious margin. Achenes 1·3-2·2 × 0·5-1·1 mm; ribs separated by at least 1/3 of their width; resin-glands more or less orbicular or bluntly angled (but not longitudinally elongated); abaxial face blackish-brown and transversely rugose; pappus very short and truncate. 2n = 18+0-1B, 36.{\i  Cultivated land, waste places and saline steppes. Most of Europe}. All except Az Bl Co Cr Fa Is Sa Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. M. rosella} (Boiss. & Orph.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 374 (1879) ({\i T. rosellum} (Boiss. & Orph.) Hayek). Perennial. Stems 15-40 cm, subglabrous, ascending from a short rhizome, leafy only in lower 1/2-2/3. Leaves subglabrous; basal and lower cauline leaves 5-10 cm, pinnatisect only at base and in distal 1/4, with rhachis 0·7-1 mm wide extending for c. 2/3 of length of leaf; basal segments very narrow, pectinate and amplexicaul; distal segments 12-25, 0·5-1 cm, acute. Capitulum 1(-2), c. 2·5 cm in diameter; ligules c. 0·7 cm, pink; involucral bracts with a narrow pale brown scarious margin, the outer c. 4/5 as long as the inner. Achenes c. 2 mm; ribs pale and slightly separated; abaxial surface brown and somewhat rugose; resin-glands 2, of medium size, separate or laterally connate; pappus c. 0·4 mm.{\i  Mountain slopes,} c. 900{\i  m. S. Greece} ({\i Parnon Oros}). Gr.
\par

\par
166}
\par