{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 36 Involucre 4-8 mm in diameter
\par
38 Leaves ± glabrous, green .......................................................... {\b 5. erba-rotta}
\par
38 Leaves hairy, usually greyish
\par
39 Involucral bracts with a narrow, pale brown margin ......... {\b 13. abrotanoides}
\par
39 Involucral bracts with a wide, dark brown margin
\par
40 Stems up to 40 cm; ligule c. 6 mm; inflorescences with
\par
   6-25 capitula ............................................................................ {\b 11. clavennae}
\par
40 Stems not more than 10(-15) cm; ligules not more than 
\par
   5 mm; inflorescences with 3-6(-20) capitula
\par
41 Involucral bracts sparsely pubescent; leaves whitish,
\par
   with spathulate lobes .................................................................. {\b 7. umbellata}
\par
41 Involucral bracts densely hairy; leaves grey-green,
\par
   with lanceolate lobes
\par
42 Plant not caespitose; leaves tomentose ............................................ {\b 6. nana}
\par
42 Plant caespitose; leaves sericeous ........................................... {\b 8. barbeyana} 
\par
33 Primary segments of middle cauline leaves divided 
\par
43 Middle cauline leaves c. 5 cm wide ..................................... {\b 21. grandifolia}
\par
43 Middle cauline leaves not more than 2 cm wide
\par
44 Inflorescences mostly with more than 25 capitula
\par
45 Involucral bracts glabrous, shiny ........................................ {\b 30. crithmifolia}
\par
45 Involucral bracts ± hairy, dull
\par
46 Middle cauline leaves lanceolate to linear in outline,
\par
   usually terete and with more than 15 pairs of lobes
\par
   ............................................................................. ({\b 22-29}). {\b millefolium} group
\par
46 Middle cauline leaves elliptical to ovate in outline,
\par
   usually plane and with not more than 10 pairs of lobes
\par
   .................................................................................... ({\b 31-34}). {\b nobilis} group
\par
44 Inflorescences with 2-25(-30) capitula
\par
47 Primary segments of cauline leaves mostly with a single,
\par
   distally directed tooth near the base ......................................... {\b 20. impatiens}
\par
47 Primary segments of cauline leaves not as above
\par
48 Leaves with suborbicular lobes (Kriti) ........................................ {\b 52. cretica}
\par
48 Leaves with lanceolate to linear lobes
\par
49 Ligules 5-6 mm
\par
50 Leaves ± tomentose; lobes ± obtuse ...................................... {\b 11. clavennae}
\par
50 Leaves subglabrous; lobes acute
\par
51 Peduncles with brown hairs; plant not strongly aromatic;
\par
   involucre 8-12 mm in diameter ......................................................... {\b 9. atrata}
\par
51 Peduncles with white hairs; plant strongly aromatic;
\par
   involucre 5-7 mm in diameter .................................................... {\b 10. clusiana}
\par
49 Ligules 2-4 mm
\par
52 Leaves appressed-pubescent; lobes linear-lanceolate;
\par
   involucral bracts with a pale brown margin ........................ {\b 13. abrotanoides}
\par
52 Leaves ± tomentose; lobes lanceolate; involucral 
\par
   bracts with a pale or dark brown margin
\par
53 Involucral bracts lanceolate, with a pale brown margin .............. {\b 14. fraasii}
\par
53 Involucral bracts ovate, with a dark brown margin
\par
54 Ligules c. 4 mm; leaves with few, obtuse lobes .................... {\b 11. clavennae}
\par
54 Ligules c. 2 mm; leaves with many, acute lobes ................. {\b 12. ambrosiaca}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. ageratifolia} (Sibth. & Sm.) Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  3}: 215 (1875) ({\i A. ageratifolia} subsp.{\i  aizoon} (Griseb.) Heimerl). Caespitose. Stems up to 30 cm, erect, each bearing a solitary capitulum. Leaves grey-tomentose; basal 2-4 cm, spathulate, entire or crenulate, rarely pectinate-pinnatifid at the base; cauline c. 1 × 0·2 cm, few. Involucre (5-)8-12(-15) mm in diameter; bracts c. 5 mm, sericeous, with a wide, pale margin. Ligules 7-9 mm, ovate, white. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain rocks. • C. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. serbica} Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 364 (1819) ({\i A. ageratifolia} var.{\i  serbica} (Nyman) Hayek). Like {\b 1} but involucre 5-8(-10) mm in diameter; corymbs mostly with 2-5 capitula; ligules 5-7 mm. 2n = 18. •{\i  From E. Albania to W. Bulgaria.} Al Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. oxyloba} (DC.) Schultz Bip., {\i Flora}({\i Regensb.}) {\b 38}: 15 (1855). Subglabrous to pubescent. Stems up to 20 cm, ascending. Leaves oblong-elliptical in outline, 1(-2)-pinnatifid; basal 3-5 cm, petiolate; cauline 1-3 × 0·5-1·5 cm, sessile. Corymbs with 1(-3) capitula. Involucre c. 10 mm in diameter; bracts with a wide, brown margin. Ligules 6-10 mm, ovate, white. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain rocks, pastures and screes. • S.E. Alps; Appennini; E. & S. Carpathians.} Au ?Cz It Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Cauline leaves 1-pinnatifid; involucral bracts 6-8 mm .. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b oxyloba} 
\par
1 Cauline leaves 2-pinnatifid or almost absent; involucral
\par
  bracts 4-6 mm
\par
2 Leaves mostly basal, the lobes linear ........................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b mucronulata}
\par
2 Leaves mostly cauline, the lobes lanceolate ........................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b schurii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b oxyloba}: At least the cauline leaves 1-pinnatifid, the lobes linear. Involucral bracts 6-8 mm, lanceolate. {\i S.E. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b mucronulata} (Bertol.) I. B. K. Richardson,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 271 (1976) ({\i Anthemis mucronulata} Bertol.): Leaves mostly basal, 2-pinnatifid, the lobes linear. Involucral bracts 4-6 mm, ovate.{\i  Appennini}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b schurii} (Schultz Bip.) Heimerl,{\i  Monogr. Ptarm.} 25 (1884) ({\i Anthemis schurii} Schultz Bip.): Leaves mostly cauline, 2-pinnatifid, the lobes lanceolate. Involucral bracts 4-5 mm, ovate.{\i  E. & S. Carpathians}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. barrelieri} (Ten.) Schultz Bip., {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}){\b  38}: 15 (1855). Sericeous-tomentose. Stems up to 15 cm, ascending, each bearing a solitary capitulum. Leaves elliptical to lanceolate in outline, 2-pinnatifid; basal 2-7 cm, petiolate; cauline 1-2 × c. 0·4 cm, sessile, the lobes lanceolate. Involucre c. 10 mm in diameter; bracts c. 4 mm, ovate, obtuse, with a wide, brown margin. Ligules 7-9 mm, broadly ovate, white.{\i  Mountain rocks, pastures and screes. • C. & S. Appennini.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. erba-rotta} All., Auct. {\i Syn. Stirp. Horti Taur.} 17 (1773). Sub-glabrous to glabrous. Stems simple, erect or ascending. Leaves simple or divided, ovate to spathulate, rarely lanceolate in outline. Corymbs with 3-15 capitula. Involucre 5-6 mm in diameter; bracts 2·5-4 mm, ovate to lanceolate, with a brown margin. Ligules 4-5 mm, suborbicular to obovate, white. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain rocks, screes and stony pastures. • Alps; S. Appennini; E.C. Greece.} Au Ga Gr He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Polymorphic, particularly in division of the leaves. six subspecies are recognized, but intermediate populations are frequent, particularly in the W. Alps and Appennini.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant caespitose
\par
2 Leaves simple, entire ....................................................... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b rupestris}
\par
2 Leaves dentate to pinnatifid ............................................. ({\b e}) subsp. {\b calcarea}
\par
1 Plant not caespitose
\par
3 Leaves dentate .............................................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b erba-rotta}
\par
3 Leaves pinnatifid
\par
4 Leaves divided to c. ½-way ............................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b ambigua}
\par
4 Leaves divided almost to midrib
\par
5 Cauline leaves shortly petiolate or sessile; peduncles
\par
  somewhat glandular ........................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b moschata}
\par
5 Cauline leaves long-petiolate; peduncles densely 
\par
  glandular ......................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b olympica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b olympica} (Heimerl) I. B. K. Richardson,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 271 (1976) ({\i A. moschata }subsp.{\i  olympica} Heimerl): Plant not caespitose. Upper part of stem densely glandular hairy. Leaves deeply 1-pinnatifid, the cauline long-petiolate. Peduncles 10-20 mm.{\i  Calcicole. E.C. Greece} ({\i Olimbos}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b moschata} (Wulfen) I. B. K. Richardson,{\i  loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i A. moschata} Wulfen): Plant not caespitose. Upper part of stem more or less glandular. Leaves deeply 1-pinnatifid, the
\par

\par
160}
\par