{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b millefolium}: Leaves more or less pubescent; ultimate segments of upper leaves ovate to lanceolate. Involucre 3-4 × 2-3 mm; bracts with a pale to dark brown margin. Ligules usually white. 2n = 54.{\i  Throughout the lowland range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sudetica} (Opiz) Weiss in Koch, {\i Syn. Deutsch}. Fl. ed. 3, {\b 2}: 1404 (1895) ({\i A. sudetica} Opiz): Leaves velutinous-pubescent; ultimate segments of upper leaves linear. Involucre c. 5 × 3 mm; bracts with a dark brown to blackish margin. Ligules usually pink. 2n = 54.{\i  Mountains of C. Europe.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Robust plants from C. & S.W. France have been called {\b A. monticola} Martrin-Donos,{\i  Pl. Crit. Tarn} 31 (1862). They have 2n = 72.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. inundata} Kondrat. in Wissjul.,{\i  Fl. RSS Ucr. }{\b 11}: 553 (1962), from wet meadows in C. & S. Ukraine, may merit recognition. It is like {\b 24}({\b a}) but has stems 60-100 cm; middle cauline leaves c. 7 × 1·5 cm, lanceolate, plane, deeply 2-pinnatifid; involucre 4-5 × c. 3 mm with pubescent bracts. It is perhaps an ecological variant of{\b  25}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. A. pannonica} Scheele,{\i  Linnaea }{\b 18}: 471 (1845) ({\i A. millefolium} subsp.{\i  pannonica} (Scheele) Hayek, subsp. {\i collina} var.{\i  lanata} Koch). Stems 25-70 cm, erect, simple or branched above. Middle cauline leaves 3-6 × 0·4-0·6(-1) cm, narrowly lanceolate to linear in outline, 2(-3)-pinnatisect, pubescent to sericeous, the rhachis 0·6-1 mm wide, entire; primary segments 2·5-4 mm, ovate in outline, the rhachis 0·5-1 mm wide; secondary segments 1- to 3-fid with setaceous lobes. Involucre c. 4 × 2-3 mm; bracts often pubescent near the margins. Ligules white. 2n = 72.{\i  Dry, stony places. • C. & S.E. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz ?Ge Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (W, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. A. setacea} Waldst. & Kit., {\i Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  1}: 82 (1801-1802). Stems 15-30(-45) cm, erect or ascending, simple, with 12-20 internodes. Middle cauline leaves c. 3 × 0·5 cm, narrowly lanceolate in outline, 3-pinnatisect, pubescent to sericeous, the rhachis c. 0·5 mm wide, entire; primary segments c. 2 mm, more or less orbicular in outline, the rhachis c. 0·4 mm wide; lobes filiform, patent. Involucre c. 3 × 1·5-2·5 mm; bracts more or less evenly pubescent. Ligules white. 2n = 18.{\i  Dry places. S., S.E. & S.C. Europe, westwards to S.W. Switzerland, and extending northwards to} 56°{\i  N. in C. Russia.} Au Bu Cz Ge Gr He ?Hs Hu It Ju Po ?Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Records from the Iberian peninsula probably all refer to {\b 24}({\b a}), {\b 31} and hybrids described under {\b 33}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. A. asplenifolia} Vent.,{\i  Descr. Pl. Jard. Cels} t. 95 (1803). Stems (30-)40-100 cm, erect, usually branched above, with 4-9(-12) internodes. Middle cauline leaves 4-8(-10) × c. 1 cm, lanceolate in outline, (2-)3-pinnatifid, more or less glabrous, glandular-punctate, the rhachis 0·8-1·5 mm wide, somewhat toothed; primary segments c. 5 mm, ovate in outline, the rhachis 0·5-1 mm wide. Involucre 2·5-3·5 × 2-3·5 mm; bracts more or less glabrous. Ligules pink to purplish-red, rarely white. 2n = 18. {\i Wet lowland meadows. • From Czechoslovakia southwards to C. Jugoslavia and S. Romania.} Au Cz Hu Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. A. roseo-alba} Ehrend., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 106}: 368 (1959) ({\b 26} × {\b 27}). Stems (15-)30-50(-100) cm, erect, simple or branched, with (4-)9-13(-20) internodes. Middle cauline leaves 1-4 × 0·4-0·8 cm, narrowly lanceolate to linear in outline, (2-)3-pinnatifid, pubescent to subglabrous, the rhachis 0·6-0·8 mm wide, entire; primary segments c. 5 mm, ovate to lanceolate in outline, the rhachis c. 0·6 mm wide. Involucre (2·5-)3-4 × 2·5 mm; bracts subglabrous. Ligules pale pink or white. 2n = 18, 36.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Waste places and disturbed ground. • S. & C. Europe from N. Italy to Jugoslavia.} Au Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Introgression with {\b 27} occurs. Plants like {\b 28} also occur elsewhere in Europe. They are probably transient hybrids between {\b 26} and {\b 27}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. A. collina} J. Becker ex Reichenb., {\i Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 850 (1832) ({\i A. millefolium} subsp. {\i collina }(J. Becker ex Reichenb.) Weiss). Stems 30-70 cm, erect, usually branched above. Middle cauline leaves 3-5 × 0·5-1 cm, lanceolate in outline, 2- to 3-pinnatisect, sericeous beneath, more or less glabrous above, the rhachis c. 0·8 mm wide, entire; primary segments 2·5-4 mm, ovate in outline, the rhachis 0·3-0·5 mm wide. Involucre c. 4 × 2 mm; bracts pubescent. Ligules white. 2n = 36.{\i  Waste places and disturbed ground. • From Czechoslovakia southwards to N. Italy, and Macedonia.} Al Au Bu Cz Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Allopolyploid, probably involving {\b 26} and {\b 27}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. A. crithmifolia} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung. }{\b 1}: 68 (1801). Stems 20-60 cm, simple, erect. Middle cauline leaves 4-6 × 0·8-2 cm, ovate to lanceolate in outline, plane, pinnatisect, more or less pubescent, the rhachis entire; primary segments 5-10 mm, lanceolate to linear in outline, mostly with a few lanceolate teeth. Leaves on non-flowering shoots much dissected, with linear ultimate lobes. Corymbs with many capitula. Involucre 3·5-5 × 2-3 mm; bracts glabrous, shiny. Ligules c. 2 mm, white to pale yellow. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain scrub and meadows. • Balkan peninsula, extending northwards to S.E. Czechoslovakia.} Al Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from S. Romania with primary leaf-segments with numerous linear lobes have been called {\b A. getica} Grec.,{\i  Consp. Fl. Roman.} 310 (1898). Similar plants have also been found in Bulgaria, but their taxonomic status is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Specimens from Macedonia with leaves more like those of {\b 33} may warrant taxonomic recognition. Further investigation is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 31-34}).{\b  A. nobilis} group. Cauline leaves elliptical to ovate in outline, usually plane and with not more than 10 pairs of primary segments. Corymbs with many capitula. Ligules white or pale yellow.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   For a discussion of the taxonomy of this group, see M. Bässler,{\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 139-162 (1963).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Middle cauline leaves not more than 0·6 cm wide ....................... {\b 31. odorata}
\par
1 Middle cauline leaves more than 1 cm wide
\par
2 Plant with stolons; rhachis usually entire .................................. {\b 33. virescens}
\par
2 Plant without stolons; rhachis toothed
\par
3 Primary segments of middle cauline leaves elliptical 
\par
  in outline, regularly pinnatifid to pinnatisect ................................. {\b 32. nobilis}
\par
3 Primary segments of middle cauline leaves lanceolate 
\par
  in outline, irregularly pinnatifid .................................................. {\b 34. ligustica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. A. odorata} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2}: 1225 (1759). Plant without stolons. Stems up to 20(-30) cm, erect or ascending, simple. Middle cauline leaves c. 1 × 0·3-0·6 cm, elliptical in outline, 1- to 2-pinnatisect, more or less plane pubescent, the rhachis c. 0·7 mm wide, entire; primary segments 1·5-3(-4) mm, ovate to lanceolate in outline, regularly serrate to pinnatifid. Involucre 2-3 × 1·5-2 mm; bracts pubescent. Ligules c. 1 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Dry, stony places. Mountains of S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. A. nobilis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 899 (1753). Plant without stolons. Stems (10-)15-60 cm, erect, usually simple. Leaves 1·5-3 × 1-1·5 cm, ovate in outline, pinnatisect, more or less plane, pubescent, the rhachis toothed; primary segments (4-)6-8 mm, elliptical in
\par

\par
163}
\par