{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. A. clypeolata} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  2}: 193 (1813). Shortly tomentose. Stems up to 60 cm, erect, simple. Leaves pinnatisect, plane, weakly glandular-punctate; basal up to 15 cm, petiolate, the lobes ovate, serrate to pinnatifid, with acute teeth; cauline all more or less distant, about twice as long as the internodes, the upper 1-2 cm, sessile. Corymbs with many capitula; peduncles c. 2 mm, tomentose. Involucre c. 3 mm in diameter; bracts c. 1·5 mm. Ligules c. 1 mm, yellow. 2n = 18+0-1 B. •{\i  Balkan peninsula, extending to S.E. Romania.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Several species described from Bulgaria are close to {\b 46} and are probably of hybrid origin.{\b  A. vandasii} Velen., {\i Fl. Bulg.} 265 (1891) (?{\b 46} × {\b 48}), is sometimes smaller in the vegetative parts;{\b  A. stojanoffii} Prodan,{\i  Bul. Acad. Stud. Agron. Cluj}{\b  1}: 48 (1930), has larger involucres and sometimes white ligules; {\b A. serbanii} Prodan,{\i  op. cit.}{\b  2}: 30 (1931) is the hybrid{\i  A. stojanoffii} × {\b 32}({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. A. thracica} Velen.,{\i  Fl. Bulg.} 264 (1891). Like {\b 46} but leaves puberulent, distinctly glandular-punctate; cauline leaves crowded above, 4-5 times as long as the internodes; lobes oblong.{\i  Dry places. S. Bulgaria.} Bu [Cz].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Perhaps conspecific with {\b 46}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. A. coarctata} Poiret in Lam., {\i Encycl. Meth. Bot., Suppl. }{\b 1}: 94 (1810). Sericeous-tomentose. Stems 25-70 cm, erect, usually simple. Leaves pinnatisect; basal up to 30 cm, petiolate, the lobes 1- to 2-pinnatifid; middle cauline up to 8 cm, plane, with 1-pinnatifid lobes and usually dentate rhachis; upper cauline with simple, lanceolate lobes. Corymbs with many capitula; peduncles 2-4 mm, densely brown-villous. Involucre 3-4 mm in diameter; bracts 1-2 mm, brown-tomentose to villous. Ligules 0·5-1 mm, yellow. 2n = 18, 36. {\i Dry hillsides and sandy soils. S.E. Europe, eastwards to S.W. Ukraine.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (W) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. A. micrantha} Willd.,{\i  Tract. Achilleis} 33 (1789). More or less tomentose. Stems up to 50 cm, simple or branched, erect. Leaves pinnatisect with pinnatifid, mucronate lobes, lanceolate to linear in outline; basal up to 12 cm, petiolate; cauline plane, sessile, the uppermost pinnatifid with entire lobes. Corymbs with 15 to many capitula; peduncles 2-4 mm. Involucre c. 2 mm in diameter; bracts c. 2 mm, with a scarious margin. Ligules 0·5-1 mm, yellow. {\i Dry grassland and sandy places. S. part of U.S.S.R.} Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. A. biebersteinii} C. Afan., {\i Not. Syst. }({\i Leningrad}) {\b 19}: 361 (1959) ({\i A. micrantha} sensu Bieb., non Willd.). Like {\b 49} but stems simple; peduncles up to 2 mm; ligules c. 1·5 mm. {\i S. Bulgaria} ({\i Rodopi});{\i  perhaps on the borders of Europe in the Caucasian region.} Bu Rs (E). ({\i S.W. & S.C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. A. santolinoides} Lag., {\i Gen. Sp. Nov.} 30 (1816). Tomentose, more or less glabrescent dwarf shrub. Stems up to 40(-60) cm, ascending, much-branched above. Leaves up to 1·5 × 0·3 cm, terete, sessile, patent, rarely glabrous, 1- to 2-pinnatifid, the lobes suborbicular, spinulose. Corymbs with 4-9 capitula; peduncles 3-15 mm. Involucre 4·5-6 mm in diameter; bracts 2-3 mm ovate, obtuse, usually tomentose, with a scarious margin. Ligules 1-2 mm, orbicular or wider than long, yellow.{\i  Waste ground. S.E. Spain}. Hs. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 52. A. cretica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 899 (1753). Like {\b 51} but leaves 2-8 cm; peduncles (5-)10-15(-25) mm; ligules 3-4 mm, ovate-oblong, white. 2n = 18. {\i Rocky places. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 59.             Chamaemelum}         Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Leaves 1- to 3-pinnatisect, alternate. Capitula medium, pedunculate. Involucral bracts in 2 to several rows, gradually decreasing in size outwards. Receptacle hemispherical to conical, with scales. Outer florets usually ligulate, female or sterile; ligulate florets with a compressed, 2-winged tube and white, patent, entire or minutely 2- to 3-dentate ligule; inner florets hermaphrodite, tubular, yellow, the tube saccate at base and enclosing the apex of the achene. Achenes slightly compressed, weakly striate on inner face; pappus absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Most of the cauline leaves 1-pinnatisect ........................................ {\b 2. mixtum} 
\par
1 Most of the cauline leaves 2- to 3-pinnatisect
\par
2 Perennial; involucral bracts greenish or hyaline;
\par
  receptacular scales hyaline ................................................................ {\b 1. nobile}
\par
2 Annual; involucral bracts and receptacular scales with
\par
  dark brown margin and apex ........................................................ {\b 3. fuscatum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. nobile} (L.) All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem.} {\b 1}: 185 (1785) ({\i Anthemis nobilis} L.). More or less pubescent, decumbent, aromatic perennial (5-)10-30 cm. Leaves oblong in outline, sessile, 2- to 3-pinnatisect, with linear, mucronate lobes. Involucre 4-6 mm; bracts oblong to obovate, largely scarious, shining and sparsely hairy. Ligules c. 10 mm, sometimes absent. Achenes c. 1 mm.{\i  Roadsides and damp grassland. W. Europe northwards to N. Ireland; formerly frequently cultivated for lawns, for ornament and for infusions and locally naturalized.} Az Br Ga Hb Hs Lu [Au Be Bu Ge He It Po Rs (B, C, W, K)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. mixtum} (L.) All.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1785) ({\i Anthemis mixta} L., {\i Ormenis mixta} (L.) Dumort.). Somewhat pubescent annual 10-60 cm, often much-branched, with divaricate branches. Leaves oblong in outline, the lower 1- to 2-pinnatisect, the upper 1-pinnatisect to serrate, sessile; lobes linear-lanceolate, entire or serrate, mucronate. Involucre 3-5 mm; bracts oblong, obtuse greenish, with a wide scarious margin, somewhat lanate. Ligules c. 10 mm. Achenes c. 1 mm. {\i Cultivated fields, roadsides and maritime sands. Mediterranean region and S.W. Europe, extending northwards to W.C. France.} Al Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. fuscatum} (Brot.) Vasc.,{\i  Anais Inst. Vinho Porto }{\b 20}: 276 (1967) ({\i Anthemis fuscata} Brot.). Glabrous annual 5-30 cm, simple or sparingly branched, with ascending branches. Leaves oblong in outline, usually 2-pinnatisect, the lower petiolate, the upper sessile and sometimes 1-pinnatisect; lobes acute. Involucre 3-4 mm; bracts ovate, with dark brown margin and apex, deflexed in fruit. Ligules 7-10 mm. Achenes c. 1 mm.{\i  W. Mediterranean region, extending to Portugal and N.W. Spain.} Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 60.             Matricaria}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Tripleurospermum} Schultz Bip.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By Q.O.N. Kay.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs. Leaves alternate, irregularly 2- to 3-pinnatisect, with numerous linear segments. Capitula medium, pedunculate. Involucral bracts in several rows, with a scarious margin. Receptacle hemispherical to conical, more or less solid; scales absent. Outer florets usually ligulate, female, white or rarely pink; inner florets tubular, 5-lobed, hermaphrodite, yellow. Achenes more or less compressed laterally, with 3 conspicuous, smooth ribs on the adaxial face and 1-2, rarely more, resin-glands at the apex of the abaxial face; pappus a small corona, sometimes absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lateral ribs of achene distinctly longer than the median
\par
  rib, strongly incurved above; pappus absent
\par
2 Abaxial face of achene pale to medium brown, smooth or
\par
  weakly rugose; capitula (4-)10-60 ........................................... {\b 1. trichophylla}
\par

\par

\par
165}
\par