{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  round the florets, villous on the inside. Ligules yellow.{\i  Cultivated fields and other open habitats. S. Spain.} Hs. ({\i North Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 63.            Anacyclus}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Leaves (1-)2- to 3-pinnatisect, alternate. Capitula pedunculate. Involucral bracts in few rows, the outer shorter than the inner. Receptacle convex or conical; scales present. Outer florets ligulate, female or sterile, the ligules entire or minutely 3-dentate, patent or rarely short and erect. Inner florets 5-lobed, yellow, sometimes weakly zygomorphic; corolla-tube compressed or winged. Achenes compressed, obovate, the outer 2-winged, the inner often unwinged; pappus absent, or scarious and denticulate, or of distinct scarious scales.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ligules short, erect, not exceeding the involucre
\par
2 Outer achenes with divaricate lobes at top of wings ................. {\b 3. valentinus}
\par
2 Outer achenes with erect lobes at top of wings ............................ {\b 1. clavatus}
\par
1 Ligules 10-15 mm, patent, exceeding the involucre
\par
3 Ligules yellow; inner involucral bracts with a conspicuous 
\par
  scarious appendage at the apex ...................................................... {\b 2. ralliatus}
\par
3 Ligules white or purple beneath; inner involucral bracts 
\par
  without a conspicuous scarious appendage at the apex
\par
4 Annual; ligules white; wings extending beyond apex of
\par
  achenes ........................................................................................... {\b 1. clavatus}
\par
4 Perennial; ligules purplish beneath; wings shorter than
\par
  achenes ....................................................................................... {\b 4. pyrethrum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. clavatus} (Desf.) Pers., {\i Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 465 (1807) ({\i A. tomentosus} DC.). More or less villous annual up to 50 cm. Leaves oblong or oblanceolate in outline, with linear, mucronulate lobes. Capitula 15-20 mm in diameter (excluding ligules). Peduncles clavate after flowering. Involucral bracts lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, acute or acuminate, without an appendage, greenish, with a narrow white or purplish scarious margin, sericeous-villous. Ligules usually 7-14 mm, white, oblanceolate, rarely very short. Outer achenes broadly winged, each wing with an erect, rounded lobe projecting beyond the apex of the achene; inner achenes unwinged; pappus absent. 2n = 18. {\i Disturbed ground. Mediterranean region, extending to Portugal and N.W. Spain.} Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. radiatus} Loisel.,{\i  Fl. Gall.} 582 (1807). Like {\b 1} but up to 60 cm; involucral bracts oblong, the inner with a large, scarious, fimbriate appendage at apex; ligules yellow, sometimes purplish beneath; outer achenes with acute lobes at the top of the wings; inner very narrowly winged. 2n = 18. {\i Sandy or stony ground. Mediterranean region, extending to Portugal.} Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. valentinus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 892 (1753). Like {\b 1} but ligules very short, erect, not exceeding the involucre; outer achenes broadly winged, the wings with rounded, divaricate lobes at the top; pappus a small, scarious, denticulate rim.{\i  E., C. & S. Spain, S.France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. pyrethrum} (L.) Link,{\i  Enum. Horti Berol. Alt.}{\b  2}: 344 (1822). More or less villous perennial with a stout stock and rosettes of leaves from the axils of which arise decumbent stems 10-45 cm. Leaves oblong to ovate in outline; lobes oblong, obtuse, mucronulate; cauline leaves much smaller than basal. Capitula c. 15 mm in diameter (excluding ligules). Involucral bracts oblong-ovate, obtuse, sparsely villous; margin purplish or whitish. Ligules white, purple beneath. Outer achenes with wings not reaching their apex; inner very narrowly winged. S.E. Spain. Hs. ({\i North Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 64.              Lonas}           Adanson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual herbs. Leaves alternate. Capitula small, in dense terminal corymbs. Involucral bracts in many rows. Receptacle elongate, with scales. All florets tubular, hermaphrodite. Achenes prismatic, with 5 prominent ribs and a gland near the apex; pappus cyathiform, lacerate-dentate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. annua} (L.) Vines & Druce,{\i  Acc. Morison. Herb.} 71 (1914). Glabrous. Stem usually 10-30 cm. Lower leaves 3-fid, petiolate, the lobes more or less toothed; upper pinnatifid, with linear, acuminate segments, sessile or shortly petiolate. Inflorescence of 2-10 shortly pedunculate capitula. Involucre campanulate; bracts with scarious margins; receptacular scales like the bracts. Florets yellow.{\i  Dry places. Sicilia, S.E. Italy.} It Si [Ga]. ({\i North Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 65.            Otanthus}           Hoffmanns. & Link 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Leaves alternate. Inflorescence corymbose, with several medium capitula. Involucral bracts in few rows. Receptacle subconical, with scales. Florets all tubular and hermaphrodite, the tube prolonged downwards into 2 spurs which almost enclose the ovary. Achenes compressed, 4- to 5-ribbed, partly enclosed by the thick, corky, persistent corolla; pappus absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. maritimus} (L.) Hoffmanns. & Link,{\i  Fl. Part.}{\b  2}: 365 (1834) ({\i Diotis maritima} (L.) Desf. ex Cass.). Densely white-lanate; stems up to 50 cm, ascending, stout, woody. Leaves 5-17 mm, oblong to oblong-lanceolate, entire or crenulate, fleshy, sessile. Capitula globose; involucral bracts 4-5 mm, numerous, ovate, the outer lanate, the inner glabrous with lanate apex; florets yellow. Achenes c. 4 mm, curved. 2n = 18.{\i  Maritime sands. S. & W. Europe, northwards to S.E. Ireland.} Al Bl †Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hb Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Bu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 66.               Chrysanthemum}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Capitula pedunculate, solitary or 2-5 on branches. Involucral bracts in 2-3 rows. Receptacle convex, without scales. Ligulate florets female. Tubular florets hermaphrodite; corolla-tube laterally expanded and 2-winged. Achenes without vallecular secretory canals or epicarpic mucilaginous cells, those of ligulate florets 3-angled with the ribs often winged, those of tubular florets cylindrical to cylindrical-triquetrous, ribbed, the posterior rib sometimes winged. Pappus absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b C. carinatum}  Schousboe,{\i  Vextr. Marokko} 198 (1800), with yellow ligules, reddish, dark-coloured or whitish at the base, and achenes of the ligulate florets lacerate at the apex, is cultivated for ornament in a large part of Europe and has occasionally been reported as an escape.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves (except the upper) deeply incise-dentate; achenes 
\par
  of ligulate florets without adaxial wing ......................................... {\b 1. segetum}
\par
Leaves (except the lower) 2-pinnatisect; achenes of 
\par
  ligulate florets with adaxial wing ............................................. {\b 2. coronarium}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. segetum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 889 (1753). Glabrous, blue-green, somewhat fleshy. Stems 20-60(-80) cm, simple or branched. Leaves oblong to obovate-oblong, the lower and middle cauline deeply incise-dentate, the upper subentire, somewhat amplexicaul. Involucre 13-20 mm in diameter; outer bracts ovate, obtuse, yellowish-green, with pale brown marginal band, the apex
\par

\par

\par
168}
\par