{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 suborbicular, white.{\i  Alpine meadows and rocky slopes. • E. & S. Carpathians; mountains of Balkan peninsula from C. Jugoslavia to N. Greece.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (W) ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. A. ptarmica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 898 (1753). Stem 30-150 cm, single, usually branched, glabrous below, puberulent above. Leaves 3-9 × 0·4-0·8 cm, lanceolate, acute, undivided, regularly serrate, more or less glabrous, at least above, sessile, all cauline. Corymbs with (1-)3-10(-15) capitula; peduncles 10-80 mm. Involucre 8-12 mm in diameter; bracts c. 3 mm, ovate, obtuse, more or less pubescent, with a brown margin. Ligules c. 5 mm, orbicular, white. 2n = 18.{\i  Damp grassland. Europe southwards to N. Spain, N. Italy, S.W. Romania and S.C. Russia.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge ?Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su [Is].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. A. cartilaginea} Ledeb. ex Reichenb.,{\i  Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 849 (1832) (incl.{\i  A. salicifolia} Besser, {\i A. septentrionalis} (Serg.) Botsch.). Like {\b 17} but leaves up to 1·7 cm wide, usually 2-serrate, densely puberulent and glandular-punctate on both surfaces; involucre 4-8 mm in diameter; bracts often subglabrous; ligules c. 3 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Damp grassland, river-banks and scrub. U.S.S.R., extending locally westwards to E. Germany and S.W. Romania.} Ge Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) [Fe].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. A. pyrenaica} Sibth. ex Godron in Gren. & Godron,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 166 (1851). Stems 20-60 cm, usually branched and puberulent above. Leaves up to 5 × 0·8 cm, lanceolate, acute to subobtuse, undivided, regularly serrate, puberulent, glandular-punctate, sessile, all cauline. Corymbs with (1-)2-6 capitula; peduncles 10-40 mm. Involucre c. 12 mm in diameter; bracts c. 4 mm, ovate, pubescent, with a brown margin. Ligules c. 5 mm, orbicular, white. 2n = 18.{\i  Damp grassland. • Pyrenees and mountains of S.C. France. }Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. A. impatiens} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 898 (1753). Stems 45-100 cm, erect, branched and puberulent above, glabrous below. Leaves up to 8 cm, lanceolate and acute in outline, pinnatifid, the lobes serrulate; middle cauline 2-pinnatifid, the primary lobes usually each with a single distally directed tooth near the base; lower usually 2-pinnatifid, upper 1-pinnatifid. Corymbs with (1-)3-10 capitula; peduncles 10-30 mm. Involucre 6-8 mm in diameter; bracts c. 4 mm, lanceolate, subobtuse, with an indistinct brownish margin. Ligules 4-5 mm, obovate, white.{\i  Damp grassland. C. Romania.} Rm. ({\i Siberia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   European plants probably represent a different subspecies from the typical, less robust plants from Siberia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from the W. Alps ({\i A. alpina} auct. plur., ?an L., {\i Ptarmica serrata} DC.) which are like {\b 20} but with the lower leaves 1-pinnatifid and the lobes more or less serrate, are hybrids, such as {\b 17} × {\b 20} or {\b 17} × {\b 15}, which escape from cultivation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. A. grandifolia} Friv., {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 19}: 433 (1836). Stems 30-100 cm, erect, branched above. Middle cauline leaves c. 10 × 5 cm, ovate, plane, deeply pinnatifid to pinnatisect with pinnatifid segments, pubescent; primary segments 20-40 mm, lanceolate, the rhachis c. 2 mm wide; secondary segments shortly lanceolate, subacute. Corymbs with many capitula. Involucre c. 4 × 3 mm; inner bracts pubescent. Ligules white. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain woods. • S. & C. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 22-29}). {\b A. millefolium} group. Cauline leaves lanceolate to linear in outline, usually more or less terete and with more than 15 pairs of primary segments. Corymbs usually with many capitula. Ligules 1-2 mm, white or pink to purplish-red.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In the key, leaf-characters refer to middle cauline leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves plane ................................................................................... {\b 22. distans}
\par
1 Leaves terete
\par
2 Leaf-rhachis 1-1·5 mm wide, often distinctly toothed
\par
3 Leaves pubescent; involucre 4-5 mm .............................................. {\b 23. stricta}
\par
3 Leaves glabrous; involucre 2·5-3·5 mm ................................. {\b 27. asplenifolia}
\par
2 Leaf-rhachis 0·5-1 mm wide, rarely toothed
\par
4 Upper surface of leaves glabrous
\par
5 Leaves hairy beneath ...................................................................... {\b 29. collina}
\par
5 Leaves glabrous beneath
\par
6 Internodes 4-9(-12); leaf-rhachis 0·8-1·5 mm wide ............... {\b 27. asplenifolia}
\par
6 Internodes (4-)9-13(-20); leaf-rhachis 0·6-0·8 mm wide .......... {\b 28. roseo-alba}
\par
4 Upper surface of leaves hairy
\par
7 Leaves (2-)3-pinnatifid ............................................................. {\b 28. roseo-alba}
\par
7 Leaves 2- to 3-pinnatisect
\par
8 Leaves 0·5-1·2(-2·5) cm wide, ± pubescent; involucral
\par
  bracts usually subglabrous ...................................................... {\b 24. millefolium}
\par
8 Leaves 0·4-0·6(-1) cm wide, usually sericeous;
\par
  involucral bracts pubescent at least near the margins
\par
9 Leaves 2(-3)-pinnatisect, the rhachis 0·6-1 mm wide;
\par
  involucre c. 4 mm, the bracts often pubescent near the
\par
  margins only .............................................................................. {\b 25. pannonica}
\par
9 Leaves 3-pinnatisect, the rhachis c. 0·5 mm wide; involucre
\par
   c. 3 mm, the bracts ± evenly pubescent ......................................... {\b 26. setacea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. A. distans} Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.} {\b 3}: 2207 (1803).Stems up to 120 cm, erect, simple or branched above. Middle cauline leaves up to 8 × 2 cm, lanceolate in outline, plane, deeply pinnatifid, more or less pubescent, the rhachis dentate; primary segments 10-20 mm, ovate to lanceolate, 1(-2)-serrate or pinnatifid, the rhachis 1-2 mm wide. Involucre 4-7 × 3-4 mm; bracts more or less pubescent near the margins. Ligules 1-4 mm.{\i  Wood-margins, scrub and mountain pastures. • From the S.W. Alps eastwards to the E. Carpathians and Bulgaria.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga ?He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b distans} ({\i A. dentifera} DC.): Leaf-segments separated by a sinus, the rhachis dentate. Ligules 1-2·5(-3) mm, white, rarely pink. 2n = 54. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tanacetifolia} Janchen,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  91}: 292 (1942): Leaf-segments contiguous. Ligules 2·5-4 mm, pink.{\i  S. Alps; Albania; Bulgaria.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. A. stricta} (Koch) Schleicher ex Gremli, {\i Excurs. Fl. Schweiz} ed. 4, 236 (1881) ({\i A. tanacetifolia} var.{\i  stricta} Koch) ({\b 22} × {\b 24}). Stems 15-100 cm, erect, simple or branched above. Middle cauline leaves 5-10 cm, lanceolate in outline, deeply pinnatifid, more or less pubescent, the rhachis 1-1·5 mm wide, distinctly toothed; primary segments broadly lanceolate in outline, (1-)2-pinnatifid, the rhachis 0·5-1(-1·5) mm. Involucre 4-5 × 2·5-3·5 mm; bracts subglabrous. Ligules white or pink. 2n = 54.{\i  Grassland and disturbed ground. • Carpathians, Alps, N. & C. Appennini.} Au Cz He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Introgression with {\b 22}({\b a}) occurs, often making identification difficult.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. A. millefolium} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 899 (1753). Stems 8-60 cm, erect or ascending, usually simple. Middle cauline leaves 3-5 × 0·5-1·2 cm, lanceolate in outline, 2(-3)-pinnatisect, more or less pubescent, the rhachis 0·5-1 mm wide, entire. Involucral bracts subglabrous, rarely pubescent.{\i  Grassland and waste places. Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region.} All except Bl Cr Sb Si ?Tu; naturalized in Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A very polymorphic species in which 2 subspecies are recognized here.
\par

\par
162}
\par