{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 38 Leaves densely puberulent beneath; corolla-lobes at 
\par 
   least 1·5 mm .............................................................................. {\b 21. baeticum}
\par 
38 Leaves glabrous or papillose beneath; corolla-lobes 
\par 
   less than 1·3 mm ................................................................ {\b 22. concatenatum}
\par 
36 Flowers pedicellate
\par 
39 Stems at least partially retrorsely aculeolate (Sect.
\par 
  {\i  Trachygalium} pro parte)
\par 
40 Corolla rotate, greenish-yellow ......................................... {\b 14. viridiflorum}
\par 
40 Corolla ± infundibuliform, white ................................................. {\b 12. rivale}
\par 
39 Stems never retrorsely aculeolate
\par 
41 Internodes of inflorescence much longer than the leaves;
\par 
   partial inflorescences usually many-flowered (Sect.{\i  Galium} pro parte)
\par 
42 Corolla usually reddish; both leaf-surfaces ± equally 
\par 
   hairy ....................................................................................... {\b 24. maritimum}
\par 
42 Corolla yellow, rarely whitish; lower leaf-surface 
\par 
   much more densely hairy than upper ......................... ({\b 25-27}).{\b  verum} group
\par 
41 Internodes of inflorescence slightly longer or shorter
\par 
   than the leaves; partial inflorescences few-flowered
\par 
43 Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate, the margin recurved ............ {\b 30. degenii}
\par 
43 Leaves broadly lanceolate, the margin flat (Sect.
\par 
  {\i  Leptogalium}) ......................................................................... {\b 125. stojanovii}
\par 
33 Ovary and fruit glabrous, smooth or papillose
\par 
44 Stems at least partially retrorsely aculeolate or with
\par 
   patent papillae
\par 
45 Corolla infundibuliform to cup-shaped; leaves shining
\par 
   above (Sect. {\i Trachygalium} pro parte)
\par 
46 Corolla-tube as long as or longer than the lobes;
\par 
   leaves mostly 30-40 × 4-8 mm ....................................................... {\b 12. rivale}
\par 
46 Corolla-tube not more than half as long as the lobes;
\par 
   leaves mostly 10-20 × 2-3 mm .............................................. {\b 13. uliginosum}
\par 
45 Corolla rotate; leaves dull above
\par 
47 Leaves in whorls of 4-6; stems with patent papillae up
\par 
   to the ultimate inflorescence-branches (Sect.{\i  Galium}) ......{\b 19. saturejifolium}
\par 
47 Leaves usually in whorls of more than 6, ± retrorsely 
\par 
   aculeolate on the main part of the stem, but not up to
\par 
   the ultimate inflorescence-branches (Sect.{\i  Leptogalium} pro parte)
\par 
48 Corolla-lobes apiculate; flowers usually red, purple 
\par 
   or yellow
\par 
49 Leaves mostly 6 in a whorl, usually 5-7 times as long 
\par 
   as wide ...................................................................................... {\b 86. corsicum}
\par 
49 Leaves mostly 7-8 in a whorl, often 7-10 times as long as wide
\par 
50 Flowers usually less than 2 mm in diameter, usually 
\par 
   yellow or dark-purple; awn of corolla-lobe (1/3-)1/2-
\par 
   2/3 as long as lobe
\par 
51 Inflorescence broadly ovoid to pyramidal, with long 
\par 
   lateral branches; flowers often yellow; pedicels often
\par 
   less than 1·5 mm ...................................................................... {\b 87. obliquum}
\par 
51 Inflorescence ovoid-oblong, with short lateral branches;
\par 
   flowers dark purple; pedicels often more than 1·5 mm ............... {\b 88. rubrum}
\par 
50 Flowers c. 2 mm or more in diameter, bright purple,
\par 
   pink or whitish; awn of corolla-lobe 1/10-1/2 as long as lobe
\par 
52 Plants more than 20 cm; inflorescence ovoid; leaves 
\par 
   narrowly oblanceolate ......................................................... {\b 89.} × {\b centroniae}
\par 
52 Plants less than 20 cm; inflorescence corymbose;
\par 
   leaves broadly oblanceolate ............................................... {\b 90}. ×{\b  carmineum}
\par 
48 Corolla-lobes acute, not apiculate; flowers often white
\par 
53 Corolla purple, pinkish or yellow; leaves mostly in whorls
\par 
    of up to 6, scarcely more than 6 times as long as wide
\par 
54 Corolla purple; fruit dull ...................................................... {\b 91. balearicum}
\par 
54 Corolla yellow, partly suffused with red; fruit 
\par 
   shining ................................................................................... {\b 92. valentinum}
\par 
53 Corolla white, rarely lightly suffused with yellow or
\par 
   red; leaves often in whorls of more than 6, usually 
\par 
   more than 6 times as long as wide
\par 
55 Leaves in whorls of (7-)8-9(-10); pedicels mostly less
\par 
   than 1·2 mm ........................................................................... {\b 97. papillosum}
\par 
55 Leaves in whorls of (5-)6(-8); pedicels mostly more 
\par 
   than 1·2 mm
\par 
56 Inflorescence broadly ovoid; stems often with patent hairs ......{\b 95. rivulare}
\par 
56 Inflorescence broadly pyramidal; stems never with 
\par 
   patent hairs
\par 
57 Plant not blackening on drying; stems less than 1 mm
\par 
   in diameter, slender ..................................................................... {\b 94. helodes}
\par 
57 Plant blackening on drying; stems more than 1 mm in 
\par 
   diameter, stout .......................................................... {\b 96. asturiocantabricum} 
\par 
44 Stems not retrorsely aculeolate nor with patent papillae
\par 
58 Corolla ± infundibuliform to cup-shaped, the lobes
\par 
   scarcely apiculate
\par 
59 Plants ± caespitose, never glaucous-pruinose; stems
\par 
   usually less than 15 cm (Sect. {\i Orientigalium})
\par 
60 Leaves 1-3 mm wide, obtuse or with a short apiculus c. 0·5 mm
\par 
61 Leaves on vegetative shoots shorter than those on flowering
\par 
   shoots, crowded,imbricate,with a short apiculum ..................... {\b 82. incanum}
\par 
61 Leaves on vegetative and flowering shoots similar,
\par 
   without an apiculum
\par 
62 Leaves linear-lanceolate, acute; inflorescence ovoid,
\par 
   many-flowered ........................................................................... {\b 80. saxosum}
\par 
62 Leaves oblanceolate, obtuse; inflorescence with few,
\par 
   axillary flowers .................................................................. {\b 81. cometerhizon}
\par 
60 Leaves 0·5-1 mm wide, with a long hyaline apex c. 1 mm
\par 
63 Corolla 1·2-1·8 mm long; leaves narrowly lanceolate,
\par 
   ciliate ....................................................................................... {\b 83. cyllenium}
\par 
63 Corolla 1·9-2·2 mm long; leaves linear, usually not ciliate
\par 
64 Midrib prominent beneath; flowers ± sessile ................. {\b 84. palaeoitalicum}
\par 
64 Midrib indistinct beneath; pedicels 0·5-5 mm .................... {\b 85. pyrenaicum}
\par 
59 Plants scarcely caespitose, sometimes glaucous
\par 
   pruinose; stems usually more than 30 cm
\par 
65 Partial inflorescences oblong, leafy up to the 
\par 
   ultimate branches, divaricate after anthesis; leaves
\par 
   fresh green on both surfaces, ± hairy (Sect. {\i Galium}) ............ {\b 23. humifusum}
\par 
65 Partial inflorescences corymbiform, bracteate and not 
\par 
   leafy, and usually ebracteate on the ultimate branches,
\par 
   not divaricate after anthesis; leaves usually ± glaucous
\par 
66 Upper surface of leaf usually fresh to dark green, the
\par 
   lower surface paler and often ± bluish green or 
\par 
   glaucous-pruinose; leaves often more than 25 mm;
\par 
   pedicels ± capillary (Sect. {\i Leiogalium} Ser. {\i Nemoralia})
\par 
67 Stems not rooting at the base; plants without stolons
\par 
68 Corolla subrotate, the lobes shortly apiculate
\par 
69 Leaves linear, 0·5-3 mm wide ......................................... {\b 68. kitaibelianum}
\par 
69 Leaves linear-lanceolate, 3-5 mm wide .................................. {\b 70. aristatum}
\par 
68 Corolla ± cup-shaped, the lobes acute
\par 
70 Leaves pale green beneath; stems 4-angled below, often
\par 
   hairy ................................................................................. {\b 69. pseudaristatum}
\par 
70 Leaves bluish-green beneath, often pruinose; stems 
\par 
   terete (or obscurely 4-angled) below, glabrous
\par 
71 Leaves membranous, elliptic-lanceolate, the margin 
\par 
   with slender teeth ................................................................... {\b 77. sylvaticum}
\par 
71 Leaves coriaceous, linear-lanceolate, the margin with 
\par 
   more robust teeth 
\par 
72 Young shoots and ovaries pruinose .................................... {\b 78. longifolium} 
\par 
72 Young shoots and ovaries green .......................................... {\b 79. bulgaricum}
\par 
67 Stems rooting at the base; plants with (sometimes short)
\par 
    stolons; corolla-lobes often apiculate
\par 

\par 
16}
\par