{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. M. tempskyana} (Freyn & sint.) Rauschert,{\i  Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}) {\b 9}: 258 (1974) ({\i T. tempskyanum} (Freyn & sint.) Hayek). Perennial. Stems 30-65 cm, glabrous, erect or ascending, branching corymbosely in upper 1/3, leafy in lower 4/5. Leaves glabrous, with numerous short, narrow segments; lower cauline leaves 3-4 × 1·5-2 cm. Capitula 4-8(-20), the terminal 1-1·3 cm in diameter; ligules absent or very short; involucral bracts with a narrow, colourless or pale brown scarious margin; outer bracts about equalling the inner. Achenes 1·8-2 mm; ribs distinctly separated; abaxial face brown and rugose; resin-glands usually laterally connate; pappus 0·2-0·4 mm, entire or lobed.{\i  Scrub. • Mountains of C. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  M. disciformis} (C. A. Meyer) DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 51 (1838) is recorded from Bulgaria, where its status is uncertain. It is like {\b 7} but has numerous capitula and smooth or almost smooth achenes less than 1·4 mm, without a pappus or with 3-4 short lobes. It is native from the S. Caucasus to Afghanistan.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. M. parviflora} (Willd.) Poiret in Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot., Suppl.}{\b  3}: 608 (1814) ({\i T. parviflorum} (Willd.) Pobed.). Annual. Stems 10-50 cm, erect or ascending, simple or branched from the base. Stems and leaves sparsely hairy. Capitula 1-8, 2-2·5 cm in diameter; ligules 0·6-0·8 cm; involucral bracts oblong, with a pale to dark brown scarious margin 0·25-0·5 mm wide. Achenes 1·9-2·3 mm; ribs whitish and strongly inflated; abaxial surface pale brown and smooth, sometimes with thin supernumerary ribs or longitudinal striations; pappus 0·7-0·9 mm, membranous and reticulately veined, 3-lobed. Semi-deserts.{\i  S.E. Russia.} Rs (E). ({\i C. & S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 61.            Chamomilla}          S.F. Gray
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By Q.O.N. Kay.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves alternate, irregularly 2- to 3-pinnatisect, with numerous linear segments. Capitula small to medium, pedunculate or subsessile. Involucral bracts in two or more rows, with a scarious margin. Receptacle conical, hollow; scales absent. Ligulate florets, when present, female, white; inner florets hermaphrodite, tubular, 4- or 5-lobed. Achenes mucilaginous when wet, slightly compressed, obliquely truncate above; dorsal face convex; ventral face with 3-5 narrow, whitish, longitudinal ribs; pappus absent, or a small corona or auricle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ligules usually present; tubular florets 5-lobed
\par
2 Stems (2-)10-60 cm; capitula 10-25 mm in diameter (in
\par
  cluding ligules); plant glabrous ....................................................... {\b 1. recutita}
\par
2 Sterns 8-15 cm; capitula 7-10 mm in diameter (including
\par
  ligules); plant ± hairy .................................................................... {\b 2. tzvelevii} 
\par
1 Ligules absent; florets 4-lobed
\par
3 Florets greenish; involucral bracts with a colourless 
\par
  or pale margin; mature achenes at least 1·2 mm ....................... {\b 3. suaveolens}
\par
3 Florets yellow; involucral bracts with a brown margin; mature
\par
   achenes not more than 0·9 mm (excluding auricle, if present) ......... {\b 4. aurea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. recutita} (L.) Rauschert, {\i Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}) {\b 9}: 255 (1974) ({\i Matricaria recutita} L., {\i M. chamomilla} L. pro parte). Glabrous. Stems (2-)10-60 cm, erect or ascending, much-branched above. Leaves 4-7 cm; segments acute, well separated. Peduncles 3-10 cm; capitula (1-)8-120(-900), 10-25 mm in diameter; involucral bracts with a pale margin. Ligules 6-9 × 2-3 mm, soon deflexed, rarely absent; tubular florets 5-lobed, yellow; upper part of tube campanulate above a marked constriction. Achenes c. 1 mm, pale greyish-brown, with 4-5 ribs on the ventral face; pappus usually very small or absent, but sometimes, especially in achenes of the ligulate florets, a conspicuous, irregularly toothed auricle, as long as or longer than the achene. 2n = 18. {\i Cultivated fields, waste places and saline steppes; sometimes cultivated as a medicinal plant. Most of Europe, but probably native only in the south and east.} All except Az Fa Hb Is Rs (N) Sb; casual in some of these.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. tzvelevii} (Pobed.) Rauschert, {\i op. cit.} 256 (1974) ({\i Matricaria tzvelevii} Pobed.). More or less hairy. Stems 8-15 cm, much branched from the base, wiry. Leaves 1·5-2 cm; segments few, rather fleshy, shortly cylindrical and mucronate. Capitula numerous, 7-10 mm in diameter; involucral bracts with a pale scarious margin. Ligulate florets female; ligules 1·5-3 × 1·5 mm, 3-dentate; tubular florets 5-lobed, yellowish; tube constricted below. Achenes c. 1·5 mm, with 5 ribs on the ventral face; pappus absent.{\i  Roadsides and sandy or saline soils. • Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. suaveolens} (Pursh) Rydb.,{\i  N. Amer. Fl.}{\b  34}: 232 (1916) ({\i Matricaria matricarioides} (Less.) Porter pro parte). Stems (2-)8-45 cm, erect or ascending, rather fleshy, branched above and often also from the base; branches rigid, glabrous below, sometimes sparsely pubescent below the capitulum. Leaves 2-6 × 1-2 cm, rather crowded, glabrous; segments numerous, flattened, acute and aristate. Peduncles 0·2-3 cm; capitula 5-40(-300), 5-9(-12) mm in diameter, enlarging as they mature; involucral bracts with a colourless margin. Florets all tubular, 4-lobed, greenish; corolla 1·1-1·4 mm. Achenes 1·2-1·5 mm, pale brown, with 3-4 ribs on the ventral face; pappus a short membranous rim. 2n = 18.{\i  Farmyards, roadsides and cultivated ground. Widespread in Europe but absent from much of the south.} [Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.] ({\i N.E. Asia, ?W. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. aurea} (Loefl.) Gay ex Cosson & Kralik, {\i Cat. Pl. Syrie Palaest.} 10 (1854) ({\i Matricaria aurea} (Loefl.) Schultz Bip.,{\i  Perideraea aurea} (Loefl.) Willk.). Stems 4-25 cm, slender, decumbent or ascending and often flexuous, branched from the base, glabrous below, sometimes very sparsely pubescent below the capitulum. Leaves 0·5-2·5 × 0·3-1 cm; segments numerous, capillary, mucronulate. Peduncles 0·5-2·5 cm; capitula 1-60, 4-7 mm in diameter; involucral bracts with a brown margin. Florets all tubular, 4-lobed, yellow; corolla 0·7-0·9 mm (slightly exceeding the auricle, if present). Achenes 0·6-0·9 × 0·15-0·2 mm (excluding auricle), pale to dark brown, with 3-5 ribs on the ventral face; pappus either a short membranous rim, or a conspicuous irregularly toothed, scarious auricle 0·6-0·8 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Roadsides, waste places and cultivated ground. S. Portugal, C. & S.E. Spain, Lampedusa, Malta.} Hs Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A variable species. Plants with auriculate achenes are recorded from Malta, Lampedusa and Cyprus, and have not been observed elsewhere.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 62.              Cladanthus}             Cass.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual herbs. Leaves alternate, 1- to 2-pinnatisect. Capitula medium to large, sessile. Involucral bracts in 2 rows. Receptacle conical to oblong, with scales and hairs. Outer florets ligulate, sterile; inner florets tubular, gibbous at base and with a shortly 5-lobed limb, hermaphrodite. Achenes obovoid-oblong, subterete; pappus absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. arabicus} (L.) Cass.,{\i  Dict. Sci. Nat.}{\b  9}: 343 (1817). Puberulent and strong-smelling. Leaves 2-3 cm, with linear lobes, petiolate, the upper in a whorl, closely subtending the capitula. Primary stem short, with 2-6 branches arising immediately below the capitulum, each terminated by a capitulum and again branching. Capitula hemispherical; involucral bracts 7-10 mm,ovate-oblong, with a wide scarious appendage; receptacular scales folded
\par

\par
167}
\par