{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 outline, usually regularly pinnatifid to pinnatisect. Involucre c. 2·5 × 1·5 mm; bracts pubescent. Ligules c. 1 mm.{\i  Dry places. S. & C. Europe and S. half of U.S.S.R.} Al Au Bu ?Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nobilis}: Ligules white. 2n = 18. {\i Throughout the range of the species, except the Balkan peninsula and the S.E. part of C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b neilreichii} (A. Kerner) Velen.,{\i  Fl. Bulg.} 263 (1891) ({\i A. neilreichii} A. Kerner): Ligules pale yellow. 2n = 45. {\i Balkan peninsula and E.C. Europe, extending to N. Italy; Krym}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. A. virescens} (Fenzl) Heimerl in A. Kerner,{\i  Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung.}{\b  3}: 123 (1884). Plant with stolons. Stems (10-)20-60 cm, simple, erect. Middle cauline leaves c. 2 × 1 cm, elliptical in outline, somewhat terete, pinnatisect, pubescent, the rhachis entire; primary segments 5-8 mm, lanceolate in outline, usually irregularly 1(-2)-pinnatifid. Involucre c. 3 × 2 mm; bracts not more than 2·5 mm, shortly tomentose, dull. Ligules c. 1·5 mm. 2n = 36. {\i Dry waste places.  N. Italy; Jugoslavia.} It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A somewhat ill-defined species, probably of allopolyploid origin, involving {\b 32} and members of the {\i A. millefolium} group. Similar hybrids occur elsewhere in S. Europe, from Spain to Romania. {\b A. kotschyi} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 3}({\b 3}): 19 (1856) (incl. {\i A. urumofii} Halácsy), described from S.W. Asia, has been recorded from Bulgaria and Greece. It is like {\b 33} but is lanate and has a more or less toothed rhachis and may merit subspecific status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. A. ligustica} All., {\i Auct. Syn. Stirp. Horti Taur.} 17 (1773). Plant without stolons. Stems (30-)50-100 cm, simple, erect. Middle cauline leaves 2-3 × c. 1·5 cm, ovate in outline, plane, 2-pinnatifid to -pinnatisect, pubescent, the rhachis somewhat toothed; primary segments lanceolate in outline, irregularly pinnatifid. Involucre 2·5-3(-4) × 1·5-2 mm; bracts appressed-pubescent. Ligules c. 1·5 mm. 2n = 18, c. 54.{\i  Dry grassland and scrub. Mediterranean region.} Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. A. chamaemelifolia} Pourret,{\i  Mém. Acad. Sci. Toulouse} {\b 3}: 305 (1788). Stems up to 50 cm, branched at the base, erect or ascending. Middle cauline leaves 2-3 × 1·5-2 cm, ovate in outline, plane, pinnatisect, glabrous, the rhachis entire; primary segments up to 12 mm, linear, entire. Corymbs with 15 to many capitula. Involucre 3-4 × 2-3 mm; bracts subglabrous. Ligules 1·8-2·5 mm, white.{\i  Mountain rocks. • E.Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. A. tomentosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 897 (1753). Tomentose to sericeous. Stems up to 40 cm, simple, erect. Leaves (except the uppermost) more or less terete; basal up to 8 cm, shortly petiolate, 2-pinnatisect, the lobes linear; upper cauline sessile, mostly 1-pinnatisect. Corymbs with (12-)15 to many capitula; peduncles 2-5 mm. Involucre c. 3 mm in diameter; bracts 2·5-3 mm, with a pale brown margin. Ligules (1·2-)2 mm, bright yellow. {\i Dry hillsides and waste places. • S.W. Europe, extending eastwards to C. Italy}. Ga He Hs It [Cz].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. A. chrysocoma} Friv., {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 18}: 336 (1835). Like {\b 36} but involucre 3·5-5 mm in diameter, the bracts 3-4 mm, with a dark brown margin; ligules c. 3 mm.{\i  Mountain pastures. • Albania and Macedonia.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. A. holosericea} Sibth. & Sm., {\i Fl. Graec. Prodr.} {\b 2}: 194 (1813). Stems 15-60 cm, erect, simple, pubescent. Leaves 1-pinnatifid, more or less sericeous; basal 3-20 cm, petiolate, lanceolate in outline, the lobes ovate to lanceolate, more or less serrate; cauline 1-3 cm, plane, sessile, the lobes with more or less entire margins. Corymbs with 10 to many capitula; peduncles 2-5 mm. Involucre c. 5 mm in diameter; bracts c. 4 mm, ovate, obtuse, with a narrow brown margin. Ligules 1·5-2·5 mm, broadly orbicular, yellow. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S. & S.W. parts of Balkan peninsula. }Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. A. absinthoides} Halácsy,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.Nat. Kl. }({\i Wien}){\b  61}: 243 (1894). Shortly sericeous. Stems 30-70 cm, simple or branched, erect. Leaves plane, pinnatisect, the lobes entire to 5-fid, linear. Corymbs with 15 to many capitula; peduncles 8-12 mm. Involucre 3-4 mm in diameter; bracts c. 2·5 mm, ovate. Ligules c. 3 mm, pale yellow. {\i Mountain rocks. • N.W. Greece} ({\i Tzoumerka, N. of Arta}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. A. leptophylla} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 335 (1808). Pubescent to lanate, somewhat caespitose. Stems up to 25 cm, simple or branched from a woody stock, erect or ascending. Leaves pinnatisect, plane; basal up to 5 cm, petiolate, the lobes 3-fid; upper cauline sessile, with simple lobes. Corymbs with 3-15 capitula; peduncles 2-10 mm. Involucre 4-5 mm in diameter; bracts c. 2·5 mm, with a pale scarious margin. Ligules c. 1·5 mm, yellow.{\i  Dry places. S.E. Europe, from N.E. Bulgaria to W. Kazakhstan, and extending northwards to} c. 53° {\i N. in S.E. Russia.} Bu Rm Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. A. glaberrima} Klokov,{\i  Ind. Sem. Hort. Bot. Charkov.}{\b  6} (1925). Like {\b 40} but glabrous; stems up to 35 cm; lobes of basal leaves mostly simple, ovate to lanceolate. {\i Granite rocks. • S.E. Ukraine} ({\i near Donets}). Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. A. ageratum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 897 (1753). Stems 10-80 cm, erect, simple or branched, woody at base, hirsute. Leaves up to 5 × 1·2 cm, glabrous or hirsute, glandular-punctate; middle and upper cauline plane, simple, serrate, obtuse, sessile; basal more or less pinnatifid, petiolate. Corymbs with 15 to many capitula; peduncles 1-5 mm. Involucre c. 3 mm in diameter; bracts c. 2 mm, ovate, subobtuse, with a more or less scarious margin. Ligules c. 1 mm, yellow. 2n = 18.{\i  Damp places. W. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Bl Co Ga ?Gr Hs It ?.Ju Lu Sa [Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. A. ochroleuca} Ehrh.,{\i  Beitr. Naturk.}{\b  7}: 166 (1792) ({\i A. pectinata} Willd., non Lam.). Stems up to 50 cm, erect, simple or branched, woody at base, hirsute. Leaves up to 4 cm, lanceolate to linear in outline, plane, more or less pubescent, glandular-punctate, sessile, pectinate-pinnatisect; those of non-flowering shoots divided only in the distal half, the lower part linear, entire. Corymbs with many capitula; peduncles c. 2 mm. Involucre c. 2 mm in diameter; bracts c. 1·5 mm, with a somewhat scarious margin. Ligules 1-1·5 mm, yellow or whitish. 2n = 18.{\i  Dry places. E.C. Europe, E. Romania and S. Ukraine.} Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. A. depressa} Janka,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  23}: 204 (1873). Like {\b 43} but stems up to 30 cm, usually branched; leaves 1-2(-3) cm, pectinate-pinnatifid throughout most or all of their length; corymbs with 15 to many capitula; involucre 2-3 mm in diameter; bracts c. 2 mm; ligules yellowish. •{\i  E.C. Europe and Balkan peninsula. }Bu Cz Gr Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. A. aegyptiaca} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 900 (1753). Greyish-tomentose. Stems up to 20(-50) cm, usually simple, erect. Leaves plane; basal up to 10 cm, pinnatisect with deeply crenate or serrate lobes, petiolate; upper cauline 1-pinnatisect, sessile. Corymbs with 15 to many capitula; peduncles 1-2 mm. Involucre 2·5-4 mm in diameter; bracts c. 2·5 mm, lanceolate, acute. Ligules 0·5-1 mm, reniform,yellow. 2n = 18.{\i  Rocky places. S.Greece and S.Aegean region.} Gr.
\par

\par
164}
\par