{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 scarious; inner bracts similar but widened at the appendage. Florets yellow. Inner achenes 10-ribbed; outer achenes with 2 lateral wings; lateral faces with 1-2 ribs; adaxial face with 3 prominent, whitish ribs. 2n = 18.{\i  Cultivated fields and waste places; somewhat calcifuge. Perhaps native in the Aegean region; extensively naturalized in W. and parts of N. Europe and more locally elsewhere; now becoming rarer in many districts.} *Cr *Gr [Az Be Bl Br Co Da Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rs (B, C, W, E) Sa Si Su Tu]. (S.W. Asia.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. coronarium} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 890 (1753). Glabrous or slightly hairy. Stems 20-70(-80) cm, branched. Leaves oblong to obovate, mostly 2-pinnatisect with oblong or lanceolate, incisedentate segments, semi-amplexicaul. Involucre (13-)15-18(-20) mm in diameter; outer bracts ovate, with a brownish marginal band and a narrow, whitish scarious margin; inner without marginal band but with a wider scarious margin and rounded scarious apical appendage. Florets yellow, or ligules yellow at base and white distally. Inner achenes laterally compressed, with adaxial wing, prominent ribs on abaxial face and rounded superficial ribs on lateral faces, sometimes the central achenes cylindrical, unwinged; outer achenes 3-angled, with the angles winged; abaxial face with 3 slender ribs; lateral faces without ribs. All achenes covered with sessile, non-mucilaginous glands. 2n = 18.{\i  Cultivated ground and waste places. Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal; widely cultivated for ornament and occasionally naturalized elsewhere.} Bl Co Cr Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Au Az Cz Ga Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 67.             Heteranthemis}          Schott
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Chrysanthemum} but whole plant more or less covered with viscid, glandular hairs; corolla-tube not laterally expanded and 2-winged; outer achenes 3-winged, the wings with apical spines; inner achenes laterally compressed, 1- to 2-winged, with apical spines, the adaxial wing strongly developed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. viscidehirta} Schott,{\i  Isis} {\b 1818 }({\b 5}): 822 (1818) ({\i Chrysanthemum viscidehirtum} (Schott) Thell., {\i Pinardia anisocephala} Cass.). Annual. Stems up to 50 cm, very hairy, with glandular and eglandular hairs. Leaves obovate to oblong, densely to sparsely viscid-hairy; basal and lower cauline shallowly pinnatifid or toothed; middle cauline sometimes pinnatifid. Involucre 25-40 mm in diameter; outer bracts ovate; inner bracts obovate, incurved,obtuse. Florets yellow.{\i  Damp, sandy places. S.W.Spain, . Portugal}. Hs Lu. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 68.           Dendranthema}       (DC.)Desmoulins 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbaceous perennials, sometimes woody at base. Capitula solitary or in lax corymbs. Involucral bracts in 3 rows. Receptacle strongly convex, slightly punctate-tuberculate. Ligulate florets female, white or purplish; inner florets hermaphrodite, tubular-obconical; tube unwinged. Achenes all similar, cylindrical-obconical, 5- to 8-ribbed, without vallecular secretory canals, with or without epicarpic mucilaginous cells. Pappus absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Somewhat woody at base; leaves conspicuously glandular-
\par
  punctate, the lower cauline ovate, (1-)2-pinnatisect ................... {\b 1. zawadskii} 
\par
Herbaceous; leaves not conspicuously glandular-punctate,
\par
  the lower cauline oblong to suborbicular, subpinnatifid .............. {\b 2. arcticum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. zawadskii} (Herbich) Tzvelev in Schischkin & Bobrov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  26}: 376 (1961) ({\i Chrysanthemum zawadskii} Herbich). Rhizomatous perennial, somewhat woody at base. Stems 15-60 cm, simple or branched, densely leafy, appressed-hairy. Leaves densely glandular-punctate, sparsely appressed-hairy to glabrous; basal and lower cauline (1-)2-pinnatisect, the lamina 10-35 × 10-40 mm, the lobes entire or toothed, acute or obtuse, the petiole 30-80 mm, narrowly winged; middle cauline similar to lower but petiole broadly winged. Capitula 10-20 mm in diameter, solitary, or 2-5 in a lax corymb. Ligulate florets 15-30 mm, white or purplish. Achenes 1·8-2·5 mm, with epicarpic mucilage-cells. 2n = 54.{\i  Stony slopes; somewhat calcicole. Carpathians; Ural; a few stations in N. & C. Russia.} Cz Po Rs (N, C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. D. arcticum} (L.) Tzvelev, {\i op. cit.} 386 (1961) ({\i Chrysanthemum arcticum} L.). Herbaceous, with creeping woody rhizome. Stems 10-25 cm, erect or ascending, simple, leafy, glabrous below, somewhat pubescent above. Leaves fleshy, not markedly glandular-punctate, glabrous or subglabrous; basal and lower cauline subpinnatifid, the lamina 35-45 × 25-30 mm, cuneate, with 3-5 apical lobes or teeth, the petiole 50-80 mm, narrowly winged; upper cauline reduced, subentire, sessile. Capitula 12-25 mm in diameter, solitary. Ligulate florets 8-20 mm, white. Achenes 1·5-2·2 mm, without epicarpic mucilage-cells.{\i  Stony tundra and seashores. Arctic Russia}. Rs (N).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The European plant is subsp.{\b  polare} (Hultén) Heywood,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 272 (1976) ({\i Chrysanthemum arcticum} subsp. {\i polare} Hultén,{\i  Dendranthema hultenii} (A. & D. Löve) Tzvelev), which differs from subsp. arcticum in its smaller stature, simple stems, cuneate basal leaves glabrous at the base and shorter ligules with 4-5 veins.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Related species which are widely cultivated for ornament are{\b  D. indicum} (L.) Desmoulins,{\i  Actes Soc. Linn. Bordeaux}{\b  20}: 562 (1855) and {\b D. morifolium} (Ramat.) Tzvelev in Schischkin & Bobrov, {\i Fl. URSS}{\b  26}: 373 (1961) and numerous cultivars derived from them. These are the autumn-flowering chrysanthemums of horticulture.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 69.            Tanacetum}                L.     
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood, partly based on data provided by S.A. Alavi.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or herbaceous perennials, often aromatic. Leaves pinnately divided, alternate. Capitula in terminal corymbs, rarely solitary, with or without ligulate florets. Involucral bracts in 3 rows. Receptacle convex to subglobose, usually punctate-tuberculate. Outer florets ligulate, usually female, white or yellow, or tubular, hermaphrodite or female, yellow. Inner florets hermaphrodite, tubular. Achenes all similar, usually 3- to 10-ribbed, without epicarpic mucilaginous cells or vallecular secretory canals, very rarely with secretory lacunae. Pappus usually a corona.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 All florets tubular
\par
2 Perennial; leaves more than 5 cm .................................................. {\b 1. vulgare}
\par
2 Annual; leaves less than 3 cm
\par
3 Greyish-sublanate, much-branched; lower cauline leaves
\par
  0·5-1 cm, the lobes obtuse .................................................... {\b 2. microphyllum}
\par
3 Greenish-pubescent; cauline leaves more than 1 cm the
\par
  lobes acute ...................................................................................... {\b 3. annuum}
\par
1 Outer florets ligulate, the ligules sometimes very short
\par
4 Ligules yellow
\par
5 Capitula usually solitary; involucre 10-18 mm in 
\par
  diameter .................................................................................... {\b 7. bipinnatum}
\par
5 Capitula few to numerous; involucre 4-7(-10) mm in diameter
\par
6 Ligulate florets few, the ligules 0·5-1(-1·5) mm
\par
7 Capitula hemispherical; leaves white-tomentose ........................ {\b 8. santolina}
\par
7 Capitula elongate-subglobose; leaves glabrous to sub
\par
  glabrous ....................................................................................... {\b 5. paczoskii}
\par

\par
169}
\par