{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 cauline shortly petiolate or sessile. Peduncles 10-20 mm. {\i Calcifuge. C. Alps; Appennini}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b ambigua} (Heimerl) I. B. K. Richardson,{\i  op. cit.} 272 (1976) ({\i A. erba-rotta }var.{\i  ambigua} Heimerl): Plant not caespitose. Leaves pinnatifid, divided to about ½-way to midrib, the cauline shortly petiolate. Peduncles 10-15 mm.{\i  Calcifuge. W. Alps; Appennini}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b erba-rotta}: Plant not caespitose. Leaves simple, dentate at apex, the cauline shortly petiolate. Peduncles 3-15 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Calcifuge. S.W. Alps.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b calcarea} (Porta) I. B. K. Richardson, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 272 (1976) ({\i A. moschata} var. {\i calcarea} Porta): Plant caespitose. Leaves pinnatifid or dentate.{\i  Calcicole. Appennini.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b rupestris} (Porta) I. B. K. Richardson,{\i  loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i A. rupestris} Porta): Plant caespitose. Leaves simple, entire.{\i  Calcicole. Appennini.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants similar to{\b  5}({\b b}) but with brown hairs on the peduncles have been called {\b Ptarmica laggeri} Schultz Bip. ex Ascherson,{\i  Festschr. Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin} 245 (1873). They are probably hybrids between {\b 6} and {\b 9}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. nana} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 899 (1753). Tomentose. Stems up to 15 cm, simple, erect. Leaves 1-3(-4·5) cm; basal long-petiolate, oblong-lanceolate to -spathulate, 1(-2)-pinnatifid, the lobes lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, acute or subobtuse, crowded, entire. Corymbs with 4-8 capitula; peduncles 1-3(-10) mm. Involucre 5-7 mm in diameter; bracts c. 4 mm, lanceolate, acute, tomentose, with a wide, brown margin. Ligules 2-3·5 mm, obovate, white. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain rocks and screes; calcifuge. • Alps, eastwards to} c. 11°{\i  E.; C. Appennini.} Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. umbellata} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.} {\b 2}: 192 (1813). Subcaespitose, whitish-tomentose. Stems up to 15 cm, simple, erect. Leaves 1-2 cm, mostly basal, ovate, pinnatisect, the lobes spathulate, obtuse, entire. Corymbs with (1-)3-6(-8) capitula, subumbellate; peduncles 2-20 mm. Involucre 4-6 mm in diameter; bracts c. 3 mm, ovate, obtuse, sparsely pubescent, with a wide, brown margin. Ligules 3-5 mm, oblong, white. 2n = 18+1-3B.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S.C. & S. Greece. }Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants with solitary capitula c. 10 mm in diameter probably belong here, but further study is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. barbeyana} Heldr. & Heimerl in Heimerl,{\i  Monogr. Ptarm.} 49 (1884). Caespitose, sericeous. Stems up to 10(-15) cm, erect or ascending. Leaves c. 1 cm, mostly basal, long-petiolate, elliptical to lanceolate in outline, pinnatisect, the lobes lanceolate, acute, entire. Corymbs with 5-20 capitula; peduncles 1-2 mm. Involucre c. 4 mm in diameter; bracts c. 4 mm, lanceolate, subacute, sericeous, with a wide, brown margin. Ligules c. 3 mm, broadly obovate, white.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S.C. Greece} ({\i Korax}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. atrata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 899 (1753). Plant odourless. Stems up to 30 cm, simple, erect, at least the upper part densely brown pubescent. Leaves 1-4 cm, usually 2-pinnatifid; primary segments with not more than 3 lanceolate, acute, distant lobes, subglabrous, not punctate. Corymbs with 2-10 capitula; peduncles 3-15 mm, usually brown-pubescent. Involucre 8-12 mm in diameter; bracts c. 5 mm, lanceolate, with a wide, darkish brown margin. Ligules c. 6 mm, obovate, white. 2n = 18.{\i  Rock-crevices, screes and stony pastures; usually calcicole. • Alps.} Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Hybrids with {\b 3}({\b a}) are frequent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. clusiana} Tausch, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}){\b  2}: 546 (1821) ({\i A. atrata} subsp.{\i  clusiana }(Tausch) Heimerl). Like {\b 9} but plant strongly aromatic; hairs on upper part of stem and peduncles white; primary segments of leaves mostly with 4-10 lobes; involucre 5-7 mm in diameter; bracts ovate to lanceolate. 2n = 18.{\i  Screes and stony pastures. • E. Alps; mountains of Bulgaria and S. Jugoslavia.} Al Au Bu Gr Ju ?Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. clavennae} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 898 (1753). More or less sericeous-tomentose. Stems up to 40 cm, simple, erect or ascending. Leaves pinnatifid, the lobes few, mostly entire, obtuse; basal leaves up to 8 cm, long-petiolate; cauline c. 2 × 1 cm, sessile. Corymbs with 6-25 capitula; peduncles 5-20 mm. Involucre 4-6(-8) mm in diameter; bracts 3-5 mm, ovate, obtuse or acute, with a wide, brown margin. Ligules 4-6 mm, ovate, white. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain rocks. • Alps, eastwards from } 9°{\i  E.; mountains of W. half of Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Ge Gr He It Ju ?Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    The considerable variation in density of indumentum and size of inflorescence does not seem to warrant formal recognition at present.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. ambrosiaca} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  3}: 276 (1875). Grey-tomentose. Stems up to 20 cm, ascending, simple. Leaves 1-2 × c. 0·7 cm, mostly 2-pinnatifid; lobes numerous, lanceolate, more or less acute. Corymbs with 4-10 capitula; peduncles 2-6 mm. Involucre 5-6 mm in diameter; bracts 2-3 mm, obtuse, ovate, with a wide, brown margin. Ligules c. 2 mm, c. ½ as long as involucre, suborbicular, white. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain rocks. • E.C. Greece} ({\i Olimbos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. A. abrotanoides} (Vis.) Vis., {\i Fl. Dalm.}{\b  2}: 81 (1847). Stems up to 40 cm, simple or branched above, erect or ascending, glabrescent. Leaves 1-3 cm, 1(-2)-pinnatifid, mostly cauline, appressed-pubescent; lobes linear to lanceolate, acute, entire. Corymbs with 12-30 capitula; peduncles 6-10 mm. Involucre 5-7 mm in diameter; bracts c. 3 mm, ovate, obtuse, with a narrow, pale brown margin. Ligules c. 4 mm, obovate, white. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain rocks and screes. W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. fraasii} Schultz Bip., {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}){\b  25}: 159 (1855) (?incl. {\i A. canescens} Form.). Sericeous-tomentose. Stems up to 50 cm, erect, simple. Leaves 2-pinnatifid, the lobes lanceolate; basal 2-10 cm, petiolate; cauline 1-3 × 0·3-0·8 cm, sessile, few. Corymbs with c. 15 capitula; peduncles 3-10 mm. Involucre 4 6(-9) mm in diameter; bracts 4-5 mm, lanceolate, obtuse, with a pale brown margin. Ligules 2-3 mm, wider than long, white. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S. & W. Greece, Albania, Crna Gora.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. A. macrophylla} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 898 (1753). Stems 40-75 cm, erect, simple. Leaves c. 7 cm, 1(-2)-pinnatifid to pinnatisect, the lobes deeply and irregularly serrate, acute, more or less glabrous; rhachis entire. Corymbs with 5-40 capitula; peduncles 10-20 mm. Involucre 5-8 mm in diameter; bracts 3-4 mm, ovate, obtuse, with a brown margin. Ligules 4-6 mm, obovate, white.{\i  Damp or shady places in the mountains. Alps, N. Appennini.} Au Ga Ge He It [Cz].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Hybrids with several small-leaved species occur; they are intermediate in leaf-characters and recognition is difficult.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. A. lingulata} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  1}: 2 (1799). Stems 10-40 cm, simple, erect, densely brownish-pubescent above. Leaves 2-5 cm, simple, spathulate, serrulate, glandular-punctate, glabrous to pubescent, sessile. Corymbs with 10-30 capitula; peduncles c. 5 mm. Involucre 5-8 mm in diameter; bracts c. 3 mm, ovate, subacute, with a dark brown margin. Ligules c. 3 mm,
\par

\par
161}
\par