{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min12}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min13}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1022}{\nofchars5828}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28  }{\b\fs28  C. anthemoides}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  891 (1753), native of Africa and S.W. Asia, has been recorded from Albania, but probably only as a casual.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 84.               Chlamydophora}{\fs28             Ehrenb.ex Less.
\par }{\fs24 By \'86T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Like }{\i\fs28 Cotula}{\fs28  but florets all hermaphrodite, with 4- to 5-lobed tubular corolla; receptacle convex; achenes all similar; pappus an obliquely truncate or unilateral membranous corona.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. C. tridentata}{\fs28  (Delile) Ehrenb. ex Less., }{\i\fs28 Syn. Gen. Comp.}{\fs28  266 (1832). Glabrous annual up to 15 cm. Leaves linear to oblong, entire or toothed, often 3-dentate near the apex. Capitula 5-8 mm in diameter; involucre hemispherical; bracts c. 2 mm, oblong, rounded at apex, broadly scarious. Achenes c. 1 mm, fusiform, costate, shortly pedicellate; corona about as long as the achene, obliquely truncate and lobed.}{\i\fs28  Gavdhos.}{\fs28  Cr. (}{\i\fs28 N. Africa}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 85.                Nananthea}{\fs28               DC.
\par }{\fs24 By \'86T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Like }{\i\fs28 Cotula}{\fs28  but outer florets usually ligulate; involucral bracts 3-9, in 1 row; achenes all similar.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. N. perpusilla}{\fs28  (Loisel.) DC., }{\i\fs28 Prodr.}{\b\fs28  6}{\fs28 : 45 (1838). Slender, glabrous annual 3-6 cm. Leaves rather succulent, with 3-5 ovate obtuse lobes, the lowest simple; petiole about twice as long as lamina. Capitula 2-5 mm in diameter; involucral bracts 0\'b775-1 mm, obovate, broadly scarious. Ligules c. 0\'b75 mm, white; tubular florets yellow. Achenes c. 0\'b75 mm, pyriform, somewhat compressed, finely striate. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Maritime rocks and sands. \bullet  N.W. coast of Sardegna, S.E. coast of Corse and islets adjacent to Sardegna and Corse.}{\fs28  Co Sa.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 86.               Soliva}{\fs28          Ruiz & Pavon
\par }{\fs24 By \'86T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Herbs. Leaves pinnatisect, alternate. Capitula sessile, surrounded by leaves. Involucral bracts in 2 subequal rows. Receptacle flat, without scales. Outer florets female; corolla absent. Inner florets usually functionally male; corolla tubular, 4-, rarely 2- or 3-dentate. Achenes glabrous, compressed, with a smooth, thin wing; style persistent; pappus absent.
\par 
\par   Literature: A. L. Cabrera, }{\i\fs28 Notas Mus. La Plata}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Bot.}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 14}{\fs28 : 123-139 (1949).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. S. pterosperma}{\fs28  (Juss.) Less., }{\i\fs28 Syn. Gen. Comp.}{\fs28  268 (1832) (}{\i\fs28 S. sessilis}{\fs28  auct., non Ruiz & Pavon). More or less villous annual, with procumbent stems up to 20 cm. Leaves 2-pinnatisect; segments 3-5; lobes linear-lanceolate, acute; petioles flattened, enlarged and scarious at base. Capitula 5-8 mm in diameter. Achenes 3-3\'b75 mm, with a wide wing, deeply lobed near the base; persistent styles erect, long-exserted from the capitulum in fruit. 2n = c. 110. }{\i\fs28 Roadsides,pinewoods and damp places. Naturalized in Portugal and N.W. Spain}{\fs28 . [Hs Lu.] (}{\i\fs28 South America}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28  S. sessilis}{\fs28  Ruiz & Pav\'f3n, }{\i\fs28 Fl. Peruv. Chil. Prodr.}{\fs28  113(1794), has been recorded from Portugal, probably in error. The two species have been confused by many authors, but can be readily distinguished by the entire (not deeply lobed) wings of the achenes in }{\i\fs28 S. sessilis}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 87.            Gymnostyles}{\fs28           Juss.
\par }{\fs24 By \'86T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Like }{\i\fs28 Soliva}{\fs28  but achenes villous, with a transversely sulcate, thick wing.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. G. stolonifera}{\fs28  (Brot.) Tutin,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  70}{\fs28 : 18 (1975) (}{\i\fs28 G. nasturtiifolia}{\fs28  Juss. pro parte). More or less villous annual, with procumbent stems 2-5 cm, rooting at the nodes. Leaves 1-pinnatisect, with 5-9 oblong or lanceolate, entire or toothed, obtuse lobes; petioles flattened, enlarged and scarious at base, longer than the lamina. Capitula 5-8 mm in diameter. Achenes c. 2 \'d7 2 mm, villous, with a wing the two upper angles of which extend beyond the achene; persistent styles about as long as the achene, recurved.}{\i\fs28  Roadsides and damp places. Naturalized in S.W. Europe.}{\fs28  [Az Bl Hs Lu.] (}{\i\fs28 South America}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 88.             Artemisia}{\fs28               L.
\par }{\fs24 By \'86T.G. Tutin. K. Persson (spp. }{\b\fs24 9-18}{\fs24 ) 
\par & W. Gutermann (spp. }{\b\fs24 34-40}{\fs24 ).
\par  
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Herbs or small shrubs, frequently aromatic. Leaves alternate. Capitula small, usually pendent, in racemose, paniculate or capitate inflorescences, rarely solitary. Involucral bracts in few rows. Receptacle flat to hemispherical, without scales, sometimes hirsute. Florets all tubular. Achenes obovoid, subterete or compressed, smooth, finely striate or 2-ribbed; pappus absent or sometimes a small scarious ring.
\par 
\par   Literature: T. G. Leonova,}{\i\fs28  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Leningrad}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  7}{\fs28 : 280-294 (1971). K. Persson, }{\i\fs28 Op. Bot.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Lund}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  35}{\fs28 : 1-188 (1974).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Most leaves on the flowering stems undivided
\par 2 Leaves glabrous, except for the lowest ................................ }{\b\fs28 49. dracunculus}{\fs28 
\par 2 Leaves \'b1 hairy
\par 3 Leaves thinly lanate, often glabrescent ................................ }{\b\fs28 10. caerulescens}{\fs28 
\par 3 Leaves densely stellate-tomentose ................................................ }{\b\fs28 50. glauca}{\fs28 
\par 1 Most leaves on the flowering stems divided
\par 4 Annual or biennial
\par 5 Cauline leaves with rather dense, appressed hairs ..................... }{\b\fs28 5. siversiana}{\fs28 
\par 5 Cauline leaves glabrous
\par 6 Cauline leaves with filiform lobes .............................................. }{\b\fs28 57. scoparia}{\fs28 
\par 6 Cauline leaves with linear-lanceolate lobes ................................... }{\b\fs28 48. annua}{\fs28 
\par 4 Perennial
\par 7 All florets hermaphrodite and fertile
\par 8 Leaves rarely more than 10 mm, mostly in axillary 
\par   fascicles on the flowering stems
\par 9 Leaves c. 5 mm, usually 1-pinnatisect, all but the 
\par   lowest sessile ........................................................................... }{\b\fs28 45. herba-alba}{\fs28 
\par 9 Leaves c. 10 mm, 2-pinnatisect, all but the upper 
\par   long-petiolate ............................................................................. }{\b\fs28 44. barrelieri}{\fs28 
\par 8 Most leaves more than 10 mm, not in axillary fascicles
\par   on the flowering stems
\par 10 Lower cauline leaves 1(-2)-pinnatisect
\par 11 Panicle-branches 1-2(-3) cm, erect to erecto-patent ............ }{\b\fs28 18. lessingiana}{\fs28 
\par 11 At least some panicle-branches more than 3 cm, erecto-
\par    patent, sometimes distally pendent .......................... (}{\b\fs28 9-15}{\fs28 ). }{\b\fs28 maritima }{\fs28 group
\par 10 Lower cauline leaves 2- to 4-pinnatisect
\par 12 Panicle wide, with erecto-patent to patent branches
\par    ................................................................................... (}{\b\fs28 9-15}{\fs28 ). }{\b\fs28 maritima}{\fs28  group
\par 12 Panicle narrow, with erect branches
\par 13 Not or slightly caespitose; flowering stems not very
\par    slender; involucre usually more than 2\'b75 mm ......... (}{\b\fs28 9-15}{\fs28 ). }{\b\fs28 maritima }{\fs28 group
\par 13 Caespitose, with numerous, very slender flowering 
\par    stems; involucre 2-2\'b75 mm
\par 14 Glabrescent; leaf-lobes linear to somewhat spathulate;
\par    involucre subglabrous to glabrous, shiny ................................ }{\b\fs28 16. pauciflora}{\fs28 
\par 14 Grey-tomentose; leaf-lobes linear to filiform; involucre 
\par    grey- to white-tomentose with distinct glandular dots ......... }{\b\fs28 17. gracilescens}{\fs28 
\par 7  Outer florets female, with filiform perianth
\par 15 Inner florets functionally male
\par 16 Outer involucral bracts hairy
\par 17 Stems and leaves persistently sericeous; outer involucral
\par    bracts sparsely hairy ............................................................... }{\b\fs28 56. campestris}{\fs28 
\par 17 Stems and leaves glabrescent; outer involucral bracts
\par    densely hairy ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 51. trautvetterana}{\fs28 
\par 16 Outer involucral bracts glabrous
\par 
\par 178}
\par }