{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 11 Base of stem reddish; lower cauline leaves with setaceous
\par
    teeth at base and reddish spots; peduncles 5-8 cm ............ {\b 2. graminifolium}
\par
11 Base of stem green; lower cauline leaves without setaceous
\par
    teeth at base or reddish spots; peduncles 11-14 cm .............. {\b 7. chloroticum}
\par
10 Cauline leaves oblong-lanceolate to elliptical, with
\par
   numerous teeth or lobes
\par
12 Involucral bracts with a prominent, broadly ovate to
\par
   spathulate, obtuse scarious apical appendage
\par
13 Pappus of ligulate florets an auricle, equalling or 
\par
   longer than corolla-tube .......................................................... {\b 3. gracilicaule}
\par
13 Pappus of ligulate florets a corona, shorter than corolla-tube
\par
14 Stems much-branched; cauline leaves obovate-spathulate,
\par
   shortly auriculate, crenate or crenate-dentate in upper part .......... {\b 1. vulgare}
\par
14 Stems sparingly branched; cauline leaves oblong to 
\par
   linear, the margins regularly dentate ............................................. {\b 6. atratum}
\par
12 Involucral bracts without a distinct apical appendage
\par
15 Pappus of ligulate florets an auricle, equalling or 
\par
   longer than corolla-tube .......................................................... {\b 3. gracilicaule}
\par
15 Pappus of ligulate florets, when present, a corona,
\par
   shorter than corolla-tube
\par
16 Leaf-segments obtuse to acute ..................................................... {\b 1. vulgare}
\par
16 Leaf-segments acuminate, mucronate or aristate ...................... {\b 8. corsicum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. vulgare} Lam.,{\i  Fl.-Fr.}{\b  2}: 137 (1779) ({\i Chrysanthemum leucanthemum} L.). Stems 6-100 cm, simple or branched, glabrous or hairy. Basal leaves 1·5-10(-12) cm, obovate-spathulate to oblong-obovate, long-petiolate; margins usually crenate; cauline leaves variable, oblong to oblong-lanceolate, entire, crenate, serrate or deeply lobed to pinnatifid, the lower and middle petiolate, the upper sessile; all leaves green or glaucous. Capitula (2-)2·5-4(-9) cm in diameter, solitary or 2-10. Involucral bracts ovate-oblong to lanceolate, with a usually dark scarious margin. Ligules white, rarely very short or absent. Achenes of ligulate florets with or without a pappus; those of tubular florets without a pappus; pappus, when present, a corona or auricle.{\i  In a wide range of natural habitats and also common as a roadside and field weed. Almost throughout Europe, but only as a casual in the extreme north}. All except Az Bl Cr Sb; only as an alien in Fa Is.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   An extremely variable species or species-complex which has been divided into a large number of taxa (given the rank of variety, subspecies or species) many of which are of restricted occurrence. The discovery of extensive cytological variation has led to intensive cytotaxonomic studies of the populations in various parts of Europe. Although some regional and local correlations between chromosome number and morphological variation can be detected, no overall treatment is at present possible and the recent tendency to recognize the various components of this complex as species is certainly premature and cannot be justified on practical grounds with our present knowledge. since, however, it is desirable to draw attention to the main variants which deserve some recognition they are listed below.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: C. Favarger & M. Villard,{\i  Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges.}{\b  75}: 57-79 (1965). D. Mirkovic,{\i  Acta Bot. Croat.}{\b  25}: 137-152 (1966);{\i  op. cit.}{\b  28}: 245-252 (1969). D. Papes, {\i Acta Bot. Croat.}{\b  31}: 81-86 (1972). A. Polatschek,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  113}: 101-147 (1966); L. Przywara & J. Schmager, {\i Acta Biol. Cracov.} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 11}: 105-116 (1968). L. Przywara,{\i  op. cit.}{\b  13}: 133-142 (1970). M. Villard,{\i  Bull. Soc. Neuchatel Sci. Nat.}{\b  91}: 119-126 (1968); {\i Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges.}{\b  80}: 96-188 (1970).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  L. praecox} (Horvatic) Horvatic, {\i Acta Bot. Croat.}{\b  22}: 212 (1963) ({\i L. ircutianum} (Turcz.) DC., {\i L. vulgare} subsp.{\i  triviale} (Gaudin) Briq. & Cavillier pro parte; incl. {\i L. gaudinii} Dalla Torre) is an early-flowering (April-June) race or series of races which are diploid (2n = 18) and occur throughout much of the range of the tetraploid (2n = 36) or hexaploid (2n = 54){\i  L. vulgare}, from which it is sometimes separable by its narrower leaves (at least 6 times as long as wide) and auricles with long teeth, although intermediates occur in several areas. Dwarf alpine variants also occur.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  L. leucolepis} (Briq. & Cavillier) Horvatic,{\i  op. cit.} 214 (1963), from the W. & C. Mediterranean region, is diploid (2n = 18) or tetraploid (2n = 36), sometimes hexaploid (2n = 54), with crenate to deeply lobed basal leaves with incised auricles, involucral bracts with pale or whitish margins, and pappus usually absent.{\b  L. rohlenae} (Horvatic) Horvatic,{\i  loc. cit.} (1963) probably belongs here, though the ligulate florets have a pappus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b L. adustum} (Koch) Gremli,{\i  Fl. Anal. Suisse} ed. 2, 272 (1898) ({\i Chrysanthemum leucanthemum} subsp.{\i  saxicola} (Koch) Hayek, {\i L. montanum} DC. pro parte, {\i L. maximum} auct., non (Ramond) DC.; incl.{\i  L. margaritae} (Gáyer ex Jav.) Soó), from S. Sweden to S.E. France, S. Italy and Romania, is hexaploid (2n = 54), with crenate or entire basal leaves with 4-6 small teeth at base and capitula 3·5-6(-9) cm in diameter. It is often confused with{\i  L. heterophyllum} (Willd.) DC. and {\i L. maximum} (Ramond) DC.; dwarf variants occur in the mountains of C. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b L. heterophyllum} (Willd.) DC., {\i Prodr.} {\b 6}: 47 (1838) ({\i L. montanum} DC. pro parte, {\i L. maximum} auct., non (Ramond) DC.), from the S. Alps and C. Appennini, is octoploid (2n = 72) or occasionally pentaploid (2n = 45) or hexaploid (2n = 54), and is characterized by having serrate basal leaves, numerous cauline leaves, capitula 4-5(-6) cm in diameter, and ligulate florets sometimes with a pappus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  L. cuneifolium} Le Grand ex Coste,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 341 (1903), from S.E. France (Hautes-Alpes), is an octoploid (2n = 72) with basal and cauline leaves obovate to spathulate, sometimes long-petiolate, cuneiform, deeply and regularly toothed, capitula up to 6 cm in diameter, and well developed pappus on ligulate florets.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b L. maximum} (Ramond) DC., {\i Prodr.} {\b 6}: 46 (1838), from the Pyrenees, is decaploid (2n = 90) or dodecaploid (2n = 108), with entire to dentate basal leaves and capitula (6-)7-9 cm in diameter. It is widely cultivated for ornament in gardens.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b L. pallens} (Gay) DC., {\b loc. cit}. (1838), found in the mountains of S. Europe from the S. Alps to C. Spain and Albania, is hexaploid (2n = 54) with crenate-dentate basal leaves, petioles winged at base, and capitula 1·5-5 cm in diameter.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b L. crassifolium} (Lange) Willk. in Willk. & Lange, {\i Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  2}: 96 (1865), from N.W. Portugal and N. Spain, just extending into S.W. France, has broadly crenate-dentate basal leaves and capitula 2-3 cm in diameter.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  L. subglaucum} De Laramb., {\i Bull. Soc. Litt. Sci. Castres}{\b  1861}: 446 (1861) ({\i L. vulgare} subsp.{\i  glaucophyllum} Briq. & Cavillier), which comprises two races, a hexaploid (2n = 54) from the limestone plateaux of S.C. France and a decaploid (2n = 90) from S.E. France (Alpes-Maritimes), is somewhat glaucous, with basal leaves crenate-dentate only distally, and capitula 4-7 cm in diameter. Plants with 2n = 72+1B have been reported from N. Spain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b L. meridionale} Le Grand,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  28}: 56 (1881), from S.C. France, has pinnatifid basal leaves, and capitula 2-3 cm in diameter, and the achenes of the ligulate florets without pappus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  L. laciniatum} Huter, Porta & Rigo,{\i  Itin. Ital. III} ({\i Exsicc.}) no. 617 (1878), from S. Italy (Calabria), has 2-pinnatifid basal leaves,
\par

\par
175}
\par