{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Outer involucral bracts lanceolate, acute, sericeous or tomentose to subglabrous, with a dark membranous margin. Ligules yellow, or white with a yellow or purplish base. Achenes with 5-7 ribs. Pappus a short, crenulate corona. 2n = 6.{\i  Rocks, screes and stony slopes. • Mountains of C. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves cuneate to orbicular-spathulate, incise-dentate;
\par
  involucral bracts long-pubescent; ligules yellow ... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b spathulifolia}
\par
1 Leaves linear-spathulate; ligules yellow or white
\par
2 Lamina with 3-7 forwardly directed lanceolate lobes;
\par
  involucral bracts sericeous .............................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b pallida}
\par
2 Lamina with numerous shallow forwardly directed teeth;
\par
  involucral bracts subglabrous ...................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b virescens}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pallida}: {\i Calcifuge. C. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b virescens} (Pau) Heywood, {\i op. cit.} 183 (1975) ({\i Pyrethrum pallidum} var. {\i virescens} Pau): {\i Calcicole. E. & E.C. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b spathulifolia} (Gay) Heywood, {\i op. cit.} 183 (1975) ({\i Pyrethrum spathulifolium} Gay):{\i  Calcicole. S.E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Variants of subsp. ({\b a}) with yellow ligules and white ligules are sympatric, but the latter usually occur at higher altitudes than the former. Variants of subsp. ({\b b}) with yellow ligules and white ligules also occur, the former in most of the range of the species, the latter only in the southern part.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. flaveola} (Hoffmanns. & Link) Heywood, {\i op. cit.} 184 (1975) ({\i Pyrethrum flaveolum} Hoffmanns. & Link,{\i  Tanacetum flaveolum} (Hoffmanns. & Link) Rothm.). Plant laxly caespitose, greyish to greenish-sericeous or pubescent. Stems 10-20 cm, ascending, leafy below. Basal and lower cauline leaves pinnatifid to pinnatilobed with (5-)7-14 distant, lanceolate, mucronate lobes. Capitula 2-3 cm in diameter. Outer involucral bracts ovate, acute, pubescent, with a narrow brown scarious margin. Ligules yellow. Achenes with 5 ribs. Pappus a corona. 2n = 36.  •{\i  N.W. Spain, Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. radicans} (Cav.) Heywood, {\i op. cit.} 185 (1975) ({\i Pyrethrum hispanicum} var. {\i pinnatifidum} Willk. pro parte,{\i  P. radicans} Cav., {\i Tanacetum radicans} (Cav.) Schultz Bip.). Densely caespitose, procumbent, with numerous runners, greyish- to greenish-sericeous or tomentose. Stems ascending, with few cauline leaves at the base. Basal and lower cauline leaves pinnatipartite with 5-9 approximate, oblong-linear, acute lobes. Capitula 1·5-2 cm in diameter. Outer involucral bracts ovate, acute, subglabrous, ciliate, with a wide reddish-brown scarious margin. Ligules yellow, becoming orange-red after anthesis. Achenes with 3-6 ribs. Pappus a corona. 2n = 18.{\i  Schistose screes above} 2500{\i  m. • S. Spain }({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A disjunct population comprising plants more or less identical with those from Sierra Nevada and plants somewhat transitional to {\b 2} or{\b  5} occurs on calcareous mountains of E.C. Spain (Serrania de Cuenca).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. pulverulenta} (Lag.) Heywood, {\i op. cit.} 184 (1975) ({\i Pyrethrum hispanicum} var.{\i  pinnatifidum} Willk. pro parte, {\i P. pulverulentum} Lag., {\i Tanacetum pulverulentum} (Lag.) Schultz Bip.). Greyish- to whitish-tomentose. Stems 10-20 cm, numerous, crowded, erect or ascending. Basal and lower cauline leaves oblong-linear, pinnatifid with 7-15 approximate, linear, mucronate lobes. Outer involucral bracts ovate, acute, tomentose, with a narrow, dark membranous margin. Capitula 1·5-2·5 cm in diameter. Ligules white, yellowish towards the base. Achenes with 7-10 ribs. Pappus a corona. •{\i  Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pulverulenta}: Plant short-lived, laxly caespitose. Leaf-lamina oblong in outline. Ligules yellow at the base or to half-way.{\i  N. & C. Spain, Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pseudopulverulenta} (Heywood) Heywood,{\i  op. cit.} 185 (1975) ({\i Tanacetum pulverulentum} subsp.{\i  pseudopulverulentum} Heywood): Plant long-lived, densely caespitose. Leaf-lamina orbicular in outline. Ligules yellow at the very base.{\i  E. & S.E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 75.           Prolongoa}            Boiss.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves alternate. Capitula solitary. Involucral bracts in 2-3 rows, the margin widely scarious. Receptacle convex, without scales. Ligulate florets sterile; inner florets hermaphrodite, actinomorphic, tubular-conical; tube slightly compressed at base, but not winged. Achenes all similar, trigonous, incurved, the outer with 2 lateral and 1 adaxial ribs, and 2 thick abaxial ribs; epicarp mucilaginous; vallecular secretory canals absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. pectinata} (L.) Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 320 (1840). Stems 10-25(-30) cm, usually hairy. Leaves pectinate-pinnatifid, the lobes acute to acuminate, appressed-hairy. Capitula 2-2·5 cm in diameter. Ligules 5-6·5 mm, yellow. Pappus an auricle 1·5-2 mm at anthesis. Achene 2-2·5 mm.{\i  Sandy places and cultivated fields. • C. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 76.            Lepidophorum}            Cass. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or biennials. Leaves simple, alternate. Capitula solitary. Involucral bracts in 2-3 rows. Receptacle plano-convex; scales present. Ligulate florets female; inner florets hermaphrodite, tubular, actinomorphic; corolla-tube compressed at base and slightly winged. Achenes of ligulate florets oblong, 3- to 4-angled, inviable; pappus of 4 free, triangular, acute to acuminate scales. Achenes of tubular florets oblong, 5-angled, without ribs; angles covered with longitudinal rows of mucilage-secreting cells; vallecular secretory canals absent; pappus absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. repandum} (L.) DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 19 (1838). Stems 20-50 cm, simple or branched above, glabrous. Basal leaves 2-6 × 1-2 cm, spathulate to oblong-spathulate, obtuse, serrate, long-petiolate; middle and upper cauline leaves sessile. Capitula 20-40 mm in diameter. Ligules 6-12 mm, yellow. 2n = 18. •{\i  Portugal, S.W. & N.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 77.             Daveaua}          Willk.ex Mariz
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par       

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves alternate. Capitula solitary. Involucral bracts in 2-3 rows, with a wide, brownish-scarious margin. Receptacle conical, without scales. Ligulate florets female, white; inner florets hermaphrodite, the tube greatly dilated at the base. Achenes of ligulate florets compressed, broadly 2-winged, smooth dorsally, 3-ribbed ventrally; epicarpic mucilaginous cells sometimes present on the ribs; pappus tubular-auriculiform, longer than the achene. Achenes of tubular florets subcylindrical, without wings or distinct ribs; 3 resin-canals and epicarpic mucilaginous cells present; pappus rudimentary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. anthemoides} Mariz, {\i Bol. Soc. Brot.}{\b  9}: 220 (1891) ({\i Matricaria anthemoides} (Mariz) Coutinho). Glabrous. Stems 10-40 cm, erect, simple or branched. Leaves pinnatisect, the segments linear, filiform. Capitula 2·5-3·5 cm in diameter.{\i  Waste places and cultivated ground. S. Portugal}. Lu. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par
173}
\par