{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b platylepis} (Borbás) Heywood,{\i  loc. cit.} (1975) ({\i L. platylepis} Borbás, {\i L. ceratophylloides} subsp. {\i platylepis} (Borbás) Hayek; incl.{\i  L. liburnicum} (Horvatic) Horvatic,{\i  L. croaticum} (Horvatic) Horvatic): Stems 10-50 cm. Basal leaves oblong to obovate-cuneate, truncate or rounded at apex, incise-crenate, serrate or pinnatilobed; cauline leaves oblong-lanceolate, incise-dentate to pinnatilobed. 2n = 27, 36, 45, 54, 108.{\i  W. & C. Jugoslavia.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b g}) Subsp. {\b lithopolitanicum} (E. Mayer) Horvatic,{\i  Acta Bot. Croat.}{\b  22}: 208 (1963) ({\i Chrysanthemum atratum} subsp. {\i litho-politanicum} E. Mayer): Basal leaves linear-cuneate with 3(-5) teeth at apex. Cauline leaves narrowly lanceolate to linear, remotely toothed. 2n = 18, 72.{\i  S.E. Alps} ({\i N. of Ljubljana}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. L. chloroticum} A. Kerner & Murb., {\i Lunds Univ. Årsskr.}{\b  27}: 109 (1891) ({\i L. graminifolium} auct. balcan., non (L.) Lam.). Stems 20-35 cm, simple or with 2-3 branches. Basal leaves narrowly cuneate, long-petiolate, with 3-7 teeth at apex; lower cauline leaves entire below; middle cauline leaves 1-3 mm wide, shortly petiolate or sessile, remotely toothed, the teeth acute, erect. Capitula 3-5 cm in diameter; involucral bracts usually pale green, with a pale, scarious margin.{\i  Grassland and pastures up to} 1800 {\i m. • W. & C. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. L. corsicum} (Less.) DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 47 (1838). Stems 20-60 cm, usually simple, somewhat pubescent. Basal and lower cauline leaves lobed to pinnatipartite; middle cauline leaves pinnatilobed to 2-pinnatisect, with ovate to linear, mucronate to aristate segments. Capitula 2-3 cm in diameter; involucral bracts with a brownish-black margin. Pappus of ligulate florets a corona at least ½ as long as the corolla-tube. 2n = 36.{\i  Rocks and rocky slopes. • Corse. }Co.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Extremely variable in leaf-shape. J. Gamisans ({\i Candollea}{\b  27}: 189-209 (1972)) recognizes two subspecies based on different degrees of leaf-dissection, but intermediates occur and varietal status seems preferable.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. L. waldsteinii} (Schultz Bip.) Pouzar,{\i  Preslia}{\b  47}: 158 (1975) ({\i L. rotundifolium} (Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd.) DC., non Opiz). Stems 20-70 cm, very leafy, simple or sparingly branched. Basal and lower cauline leaves suborbicular to broadly ovate, uniformly crenate-dentate, cordate, petiolate; middle cauline leaves cuneiform to ovate-oblong, shortly petiolate, uniformly crenate-dentate. Capitula 4-6 cm in diameter, solitary or 2-5 in a lax corymb; involucral bracts with a dark margin. 2n = 18.{\i  Carpathians; one locality in C. Jugoslavia.} Cz Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 10. L. discoideum} (All.) Coste,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 340 (1903). Rhizomatous; stems 40-60 cm, woody at base, simple or branched. Basal leaves obovate-oblong, cuneiform, incise-dentate at apex, the teeth rounded; middle leaves oblong-lanceolate to linear, serrate-dentate (including the petiole-base); teeth remote, acute. Capitula 2-2·5 cm in diameter, solitary or 2-4, usually without ligules; ligules up to 8 mm, yellow, when present. 2n = 18. •{\i  S.E. France, N.W. Italy.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. L. arundanum} (Boiss.) Cuatrec., {\i Cavanillesia}{\b  1}: 40 (1928) ({\i Pyrethrum arundanum} Boiss.). Densely caespitose, villous to subglabrous; stems up to 5 cm, ascending. Leaves all in a basal rosette, 2- to 3-pinnatifid, with linear-lanceolate, usually acute lobes. Capitula 2-2·5 cm in diameter, solitary. Ligules whitish-pink, becoming darker after anthesis. Achenes with 5 or 6 prolonged, winged ribs as wide as the body of the fruit. Pappus a membranous corona.{\i  Calcareous mountains of S. & S.E. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   An unusual species related to species from N. Africa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. L. paludosum} (Poiret) Bonnet & Barratte,{\i  Cat. Rais. Pl. Vasc. Tunisie} 221 (1896) ({\i Chrysanthemum paludosum} Poiret,{\i  Hymenostemma fontanesii} Willk.). Glabrous annual. Stems 5-15(-20) cm, branched. Basal leaves obovate-spathulate; lower cauline leaves oblong-cuneate, petiolate, the petiole-base auriculate; middle and upper cauline leaves oblong to lanceolate; all leaves incise-dentate to pinnatifid. Capitula 2-3 cm in diameter; ligules pale yellow or whitish with a yellowish base; tubular florets zygomorphic, 2- to 3-lobed. Achenes with 7-10 slender ribs, those of ligulate florets with a corona.{\i  S. & S.E. Spain; S. Portugal; Islas Baleares.} Bl Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Anomalous in the genus in Europe by its habit and flower colour, showing affinities with a group of species from N. Africa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 82.             Plagius}            L'Her.ex DC. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Somewhat woody perennials. Leaves simple, alternate. Capitula in terminal corymbs of 4-10. Involucral bracts in 2-3 rows, keeled on the back. Receptacle convex. All florets hermaphrodite, tubular, obconical, yellow; corolla-tube unwinged. Achenes all similar, obconical, ribbed, with a thick basal callus and a distinct epigynous disc; epicarpic mucilaginous cells and vallecular secretory canals present. Pappus an auricle, more developed on the adaxial side.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. flosculosus} (L.) Alavi & Heywood, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 273 (1976) ({\i Chrysanthemum flosculosum} L.). Stems 40-100 cm, much-branched, glabrous. Leaves ovate-oblong to obovate, regularly toothed, auriculate at the base. Capitula 1-2 cm in diameter, shortly pedunculate. Achenes c. 2 mm; ribs narrow, white, prominent. 2n = 18.{\i  Meadows and pastures. • Corse, Sardegna.} Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 83.            Cotula}           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Leaves entire or pinnatisect, alternate. Capitula terminal and axillary, pedunculate. Involucral bracts in 2 rows. Receptacle flat; scales absent. Florets pedicellate, the pedicels persistent after the achenes have fallen. Outer florets female; corolla small or absent. Inner florets hermaphrodite or functionally male; corolla tubular, compressed, 4-dentate. Achenes of female florets compressed, those of hermaphrodite florets plano-convex; pappus absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous; leaves entire or with few teeth or lobes .................. {\b 1. coronopifolia} 
\par
Villous; leaves usually 2-pinnatifid ................................................ {\b 2. australis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. coronopifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 892 (1753). Glabrous annual up to 30 cm. Leaves linear, entire, or with few, remote teeth or lobes, sessile and sheathing at base. Capitula 5-10 mm in diameter; involucral bracts c. 2 mm, ovate, rounded, purplish with a scarious margin. Outer florets without corolla, long-pedicellate; inner florets with yellow corolla, shortly pedicellate. Outer achenes 1·5 mm, strongly compressed and winged; inner achenes 1·75 mm, unwinged. 2n = 20.{\i  Damp, often saline places. Naturalized in W. Europe.} [Br Da Ga Ge Hb Hs Lu No Sa.] ({\i South Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. australis} (Sieber ex Sprengel) Hooker fil., {\i Bot. Antarct. Voy.} {\b 2}({\b 1}): 128 (1852). Like {\b 1} but villous; leaves usually 2-pinnatifid; capitula 4-5 mm in diameter.{\i  Naturalized in Portugal} ({\i near Porto}). [Lu.] ({\i Australia, New Zealand}.)
\par

\par
177}
\par