{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 78.               Glossopappus}             G.Kunze   
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves simple, alternate. Capitula solitary. Involucral bracts in 2-3 rows, with a dark brown margin, the inner with a wide scarious wing and appendage. Receptacle conical, without scales. Ligulate florets female, fertile or sterile. Inner florets hermaphrodite, tubular-campanulate, slightly zygomorphic; corolla-tube strongly compressed at base and slightly winged. Achenes all similar, cylindrical, with 8-10 more or less projecting white ribs and basal callus. Epicarpic mucilaginous cells on some ribs and vallecular secretory canals present. Pappus an auricle longer than the achene.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. macrotus} (Durieu) Briq. in Burnat,{\i  Fl. Alp. Marit.}{\b  6}: 77 (1916) ({\i G. chrysanthemoides} G. Kunze). Glabrous. Stems 10-40 cm. Basal leaves 2-4 cm, obovate, obtuse, remotely toothed, petiolate; middle cauline leaves sparse, spathulate-oblong, subentire to dentate, sessile. Capitula solitary, 2·5-3 cm in diameter. Ligules 7-8 mm, yellow or sometimes whitish outside. Achenes 2-2·5 mm; pappus 4·5-6 mm. {\i Dry, stony places. S.W. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Represented in Europe by subsp.{\b  chrysanthemoides} (G. Kunze) Maire in Jahandiez & Maire,{\i  Cat. Pl. Maroc}{\b  3}: 778 (1934), which differs from subsp.{\i  macrotus} from N. Africa by the zygomorphic corollas of the tubular florets, with 2 teeth markedly longer than the others.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 79.               Hymenostemma }          (G. Kunze) Willk.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves pinnately toothed or divided, alternate. Capitula solitary. Involucral bracts in 2-3 rows, unequal, the inner with a wide scarious margin. Receptacle conical, without scales. Ligulate florets female, usually sterile, white; inner florets hermaphrodite, tubular-campanulate; corolla-tube compressed, 2-winged; lobes unequal. Achenes all similar, oblong-ovoid, somewhat curved, with 5-6 whitish ribs and longitudinal rows of mucilage-cells parallel to the ribs. Pappus cupuliform, c. ½ as long as achene.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. pseudanthemis} (G. Kunze) Willk.,{\i  Bot. Zeit.}{\b  22}: 253 (1864). Slender, pubescent. Stems (5-)10-20 cm, simple or branched. Leaves 5-20 × 2-3 mm, pectinate-pinnatifid, the segments oblong, obtuse, mucronate; petiole long. Capitula 10-20 mm in diameter. Ligules white, yellowish at base; tubular florets yellow.{\i  Dry, shady places. • S.W. Spain} ({\i Prov.Cadiz}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 80.               Coleostephus}              Cass.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves simple, alternate. Capitula solitary or 2-5 on branches. Involucral bracts in 2-3 rows, brownish with a narrow, scarious apical border. Receptacle plano-convex, without scales. Ligulate florets female, fertile or sterile. Inner florets hermaphrodite, tubular-campanulate, actinomorphic; corolla-tube strongly compressed at base and slightly winged. Achenes all similar, cylindrical, with 8-10 more or less projecting white ribs and a basal callus. Epicarpic mucilaginous cells on some ribs and vallecular secretory canals present. Pappus prominent, oblique, sheathing or a corona, as long as or shorter than achene, sometimes absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves ± regularly toothed; corolla-teeth of tubular florets
\par
  subacute; pappus an auricle subequalling achene, sheathing .........{\b 1. myconis}
\par
Leaves irregularly toothed; corolla-teeth of tubular 
\par
 florets truncate; pappus a corona or absent  ...................................{\b 2. clausonis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. myconis} (L.) Reichenb. fil.,{\i  Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  16}: 49 (1853)({\i Chrysanthemum myconis} L.,{\i  Myconia myconis} (L.) Briq.). Stems 10-45 cm, sparingly branched, suberect, glabrous or slightly hairy. Basal leaves 2-5 cm, obovate to obovate-spathulate, broadly obtuse, more or less regularly toothed, petiolate; middle cauline leaves ovate-oblong, subamplexicaul. Capitula 2 cm in diameter. Ligules 6-15 mm, yellow, whitish or discolorous. Corolla-teeth of tubular florets subacute. Achenes of ligulate florets 3 mm, compressed, sterile, with an elongate, membranous, tubular pappus enveloping the corolla-tube. Achenes of tubular florets c. 2 mm, cylindrical, with an auricle 1·2-1·8 mm enveloping the lower half of the corolla-tube. 2n.=.18.{\i  Cultivated ground and waste places. S. Europe.} Az Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. clausonis} Pomel,{\i  Nouv. Mat. Fl. Atl.} 59 (1874) ({\i C. hybridus} Lange, non {\i Chrysanthemum hybridum} Guss.). Like {\b 1} but leaves irregularly toothed; stems procumbent; corolla-teeth of tubular florets truncate; achenes less than 2 mm; pappus a corona or absent.{\i  W. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Co Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 81.            Leucanthemum}                Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial, rarely annual herbs. Leaves entire to pinnately divided, alternate. Capitula solitary, rarely 2-6, terminal. Involucral bracts in 2-3 rows. Receptacle usually convex, without scales. Outer florets ligulate, female, white or pinkish, rarely tubular-campanulate and hermaphrodite or female, yellow. Inner florets hermaphrodite, tubular-campanulate. Achenes all similar, obconical-cylindrical, with usually 10 prominent ribs and epicarpic mucilaginous cells on most ribs; vallecular secretory canals present. Pappus a corona or auricle, sometimes rudimentary or absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: S. Horvatic, {\i Acta Bot. Inst. Bot. Univ. Zagreb.}{\b  3}: 1-80 (1928); {\i Acta Bot. Croat.}{\b  22}: 203-218 (1963).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ligules absent; all florets usually hermaphrodite
\par
2 Apex, margin and usually median vein of outer involucral
\par
  bracts reddish; lower half of corolla-tube weakly 2-winged .. {\b 10. discoideum}
\par
2 Apex, margin and median vein of outer involucral bracts
\par
  concolorous; lower half of corolla-tube strongly 2-winged ........... {\b 1. vulgare} 
\par
1 Ligules present; outer florets female
\par
3 Ligules 5·5-6(-8) mm, yellow at least at base
\par
4 Perennial; ligules yellow throughout ..................................... {\b 10. discoideum}
\par
4 Annual; ligules pale yellow or whitish with a yellowish base {\b 12. paludosum}
\par
3 Ligules usually more than 8 mm, white or pinkish
\par
5 Densely caespitose; leaves mostly basal; stems up to 5 cm .. {\b 11. arundanum}
\par
5 Not or laxly caespitose; cauline leaves present; stems
\par
  usually more than 10 cm
\par
6 Base of stems covered with persistent white, scarious
\par
  sheathing petioles ........................................................................... {\b 4. burnatii}
\par
6 Base of stems not covered with persistent petioles
\par
7 Basal leaves ± orbicular, cordate; all leaves regularly
\par
  crenate-dentate ...................................................................... {\b 9. rotundifolium}
\par
7 Basal leaves obovate, spathulate to oblanceolate, cuneate; 
\par
  all leaves ± irregularly lobed, crenate or dentate
\par
8 Lower cauline leaves 2-pinnatipartite; lobes linear, entire
\par
9 Pappus of ligulate florets a usually complete corona at
\par
  least ½ as long as corolla-tube ..................................................... {\b 8. corsicum}
\par
9 Pappus of ligulate florets usually an auricle, rarely 
\par
  up to ½ as long as corolla-tube ............................................. {\b 5. monspeliense}
\par
8 Lower cauline leaves not 2-pinnatipartite
\par
10 Cauline leaves linear to linear-lanceolate, entire or 
\par
   with a few teeth
\par

\par
174}
\par