{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 6 Ligulate florets numerous, the ligules 1-3 mm
\par 8 Involucre 4-7 mm in diameter, glabrous or sparsely hairy;
\par  outer bracts ovate-lanceolate ................................................ {\b 4. achilleifolium}
\par 8 Involucre 7-10 mm in diameter, lanate, rarely glabrous;
\par  outer bracts broadly ovate ........................................................ {\b 6. millefolium}
\par 4 Ligules white
\par 9 Involucre 4-7 mm in diameter; capitula very numerous in
\par  a dense, compound corymb ............................................... {\b 13. macrophyllum}
\par 9 Involucre more than 8 mm in diameter; capitula 1-30 in 
\par  a lax corymb
\par 10 Cauline leaves sessile
\par 11 Capitula long-pedunculate, forming a regular, lax 
\par   corymb; leaves pubescent to glabrous ................................... {\b 9. corymbosum}
\par 11 Capitula shortly pedunculate, forming an irregular 
\par   corymb; leaves densely villous-lanate .............................. {\b 10. mucronulatum}
\par 10 Cauline leaves petiolate
\par 12 Involucre 12-18 mm in diameter; capitula solitary;
\par   leaf-segments narrowly lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate,
\par   densely silvery-sericeous ................................................. {\b 14. cinerariifolium}
\par 12 Involucre 6-8 mm in diameter; capitula 3-30 in a lax 
\par   corymb; leaf-segments oblong or oblong-elliptical to 
\par   ovate, pubescent to subglabrous
\par 13 Stems ridged; leaf-segments oblong-elliptical to ovate;
\par   ligules 2·5-7 mm .................................................................... {\b 11. parthenium}
\par 13 Stems terete; leaf-segments oblong; ligules 7-10 mm ... {\b 12. parthenifolium}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. TANACETUM. Ligules yellow or absent. Achenes without secretory lacunae.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. vulgare} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 844 (1753) ({\i Chrysanthemum vulgare} (L.) Bernh., non (Lam.) Gaterau, {\i C. tanacetum} Karsch, non vis.; incl.{\i  T. audibertii} (Req.) DC.). Aromatic perennial. Stems 30-150 cm, branched above. Leaves pinnatipartite to pinnatisect, glabrous to sparsely hairy, glandular-punctate; lower cauline leaves more than 5 cm, petiolate, oblong to oblong-ovate, the segments pinnatisect to pinnatilobed, linear-lanceolate to oblong-elliptical; upper cauline leaves similar but sessile. Capitula (5-)10-70(-100) in a dense, compound corymb; involucre 5-8 mm in diameter. Outer row of florets tubular, female, zygomorphic, 3-toothed, rarely shortly ligulate, or actinomorphic, 5-toothed, hermaphrodite; inner florets tubular, 5-toothed. Achenes 1·2-1·8 mm, 5-ribbed, with scattered epicarpic, sessile, transparent, non-mucilaginous glands; pappus 0·2-0·4 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Roadsides, river-gravels and waste places; extensively cultivated for ornament and as a pot-herb, and in some regions naturalized. Almost throughout Europe.} All except Az Bl Cr Sb; not native in Hb.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Plants with finely dissected leaves occur in Corse, Sardegna and Sicilia and are sometimes recognized as separate species or varieties. Their status requires further study.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   T. funkii} Schultz Bip. ex Willk. in Willk. & Lange, {\i Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  2}: 102 (1865), described from a single collection from S. Spain (Sierra Nevada), needs further study. It is described as a much-branched, pubescent, caespitose annual with very small solitary capitula at the ends of branches.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. microphyllum} DC., {\i Prodr.} {\b 6}: 131 (1838). Greyish sublanate annual. Stems 20-60 cm, much-branched. Basal leaves 2-pinnatisect; cauline leaves less than 1 cm, 1-pinnatisect; segments all approximate, linear, obtuse, more or less hirsute. Capitula 5-20 in a dense corymb. All florets hermaphrodite, tubular, 4- to 5-toothed. Achenes 5-ribbed.{\i  Waste places. C. & S. Spain, N.E. & E.C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. T. annuum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 844 (1753). Greenish-pubescent annual. Stems 20-80 cm, branched. Leaves pinnatisect, the cauline 1-3 cm; segments linear, acute or acuminate, sparsely pubescent to glabrous. Capitula 6-40 in a dense corymb. All florets hermaphrodite, tubular, 5-toothed. Achenes 5-ribbed. 2n = 18.{\i  Cultivated ground and waste places. S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. T. achilleifolium} (Bieb.) Schultz Bip., {\i Tanacet.} 47 (1844). Perennial. Stems 10-40 cm, pubescent. Leaves 2-pinnatisect; basal 10-12(-15) cm, linear, petiolate; all greyish-green-pubescent. Capitula hemispherical, 2-15(-20) in a lax, irregular corymb; involucre 4-7 mm in diameter. Ligulate florets yellow, female; ligules 1-2 mm. Achenes 1·5-2 mm, 5- to 6(-8)-ribbed; pappus a corona 0·3-0·5 mm. {\i Steppes and semi-deserts. S.E. part of U.S.S.R. }?Bu ?Rm Rs (W, K, E).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Not always clearly separable from {\b 6}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. T. paczoskii} (Zefirov) Tzvelev in Schischkin & Bobrov, Fl. URSS 26: 349 (1961). Like {\b 4} but leaves subglabrous or glabrous; capitula elongate-subglobose, with the ligulate florets c. 0·5 mm, not exceeding the inner involucral bracts.{\i  Stony slopes and steppes. • Krym.} Rs (K).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. T. millefolium} (L.) Tzvelev,{\i  op. cit.} 348 (1961) ({\i T. kittaryanum }(C. A. Meyer) Tzvelev,{\i  Chrysanthemum millefoliatum} L.). Perennial, woody at the base. Stems 20-50 cm, branched above or simple. Leaves 2-pinnatisect; basal 10-15 cm, petiolate, all pubescent when young, often later subglabrous. Capitula 2-10(-15) in a lax, irregular corymb; involucre 7-10 mm in diameter. Ligulate florets yellow, female; ligules (1·5-)1·8-3 mm. Achenes 2-2·5 mm, 5- to 8(-10)-ribbed; pappus a corona 0·3-0·8 mm. {\i Dry, stony ground. From Bulgaria to S.C. Russia.} Bu Rm Rs (W, K, E).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Several closely related plants have been described from the U.S.S.R. but do not appear to warrant specific status, e.g. {\b T. uralense} (Krasch.) Tzvelev,{\i  op. cit.} 346 (1961), from S.E. Russia and S. Ural, said to differ in its oblique rhizome and its more dissected leaves with a broader lamina,{\b  T. sclerophyllum} (Krasch.) Tzvelev, {\i op. cit.} 347 (1961), from the middle Volga basin, with rigid leaves and 2-4(-6) capitula, and {\b T. odessanum} (Klokov) Tzvelev, {\i op. cit. }348 (1961), from S. Ukraine and Moldavia, with shorter peduncles and larger capitula.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. T. bipinnatum} (L.) Schultz Bip., {\i Tanacet.} 48 (1844). Perennial. Stems 6-40 cm, solitary, simple or branched above. Leaves 2- or 3-pinnatisect; basal 25-30 cm, oblong to linear-oblong, petiolate; all more or less villous. Capitula solitary or rarely 2-4 in a lax corymb; involucre 10-18 mm in diameter. Ligulate florets yellow, female; ligules 3-7 mm. Achenes 2·5-3·5 mm, 5- to 7-ribbed; pappus 0·3-0·8 mm, conspicuous. 2n = 54.{\i  River-gravels and stony slopes. Arctic and subarctic Russia.} Rs (N). ({\i Circumpolar}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. T. santolina} Winkler,{\i  Acta Horti Petrop.}{\b  11}: 375 (1891). Perennial, woody at base. Stems 10-35 cm, subtomentose. Leaves 2-pinnatifid, whitish-tomentose; lower cauline 3-6 cm, linear, with 14-20 segments, linear-lanceolate, with linear-lanceolate lobes, petiolate. Capitula 2-10(-15) in a lax corymb; involucre 4-7 mm in diameter. Ligulate florets yellow, female; ligules 0·5-1(-1·5) mm. Achenes 1·8-2·2 mm; pappus a corona 0·2-0·4 mm.{\i  Saline steppes. W. Kazakhstan,} ?{\i S.E. Russia.} Rs (E). ({\i C. Asia}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. PYRETHRUM (zinn) Reichenb. fil. Ligules white, always present. Achenes without secretory lacunae.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. T. corymbosum} (L.) Schultz Bip.,{\i  Tanacet.} 57 (1844) ({\i Chrysanthemum corymbosum} L., {\i Leucanthemum corymbosum}
\par
\par 170}
\par