{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Capitula 6-10 mm in diameter (without ligules), 10-16 mm (with ligules), 10-60; ligules 4-6 mm.{\i  Widely cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized.} [Cz Ga Hs It Rs (C, W).] ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 72.            Phalacrocarpum}         Willk.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials, woody at base. Leaves opposite. Capitula solitary. Involucral bracts in 3 rows. Receptacle convex, without scales. Ligulate florets female, white or purplish; other florets tubular-campanulate, the marginal hermaphrodite, fertile, the central mostly male or petaloid and sterile. Achenes obconical-cylindrical, slightly compressed, with small, obtuse basal callus; ribs 6-7, narrow, white; secretory canals and mucilaginous cells absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves pinnatipartite to pinnatisect or 2-pinnatisect,
\par
  the segments linear to lanceolate; whole plant greyish-
\par
  tomentose or -sericeous ....................................................... {\b 1. oppositifolium} 
\par
Leaves narrowly cuneate, entire at the base, spathulate,
\par
  and with 4-5 pairs of teeth towards the apex; whole 
\par
  plant shining silvery-sericeous .......................................... {\b 2. hoffmannseggii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. oppositifolium} (Brot.) Willk., {\i Bot. Zeit.}{\b  22}: 252 (1864). Greyish-tomentose or -sericeous. Stems ascending, simple or branched at base. Leaves obovate, pinnatipartite to pinnatisect with linear-lanceolate to lanceolate segments, or 2-pinnatisect with linear segments. Peduncles up to 20 cm. Capitula (including ligules) 2·5-5·5 cm in diameter. 2n = 18.{\i  Rocks and stony slopes in the mountains. • N. & N.W. Spain, N. & C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Extremely variable in the form and dissection of the leaves and in the diameter of capitula.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. hoffmannseggii} (Samp.) Laínz,{\i  Bol. Inst. Estud. Astur.} ({\i Supl. Ci}.) {\b 1}: 34 (1960) ({\i P. sericeum} Henriq.). Silvery-sericeous. Stems ascending, branched. Leaves narrowly cuneate, entire at base, spathulate, with 4-5 pairs of straight teeth towards the apex. Peduncles up to 15 cm. Capitula (including ligules) 2·5-3 cm in diameter. 2n = 18.{\i  Rocks and stony slopes in the mountains. • N.W. Spain, N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 73.            Otospermum}            Willk.
\par
 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves 2-3 times 3-partite, alternate. Capitula subcorymbose. Involucral bracts in 3 rows, with dark margins. Receptacle subconical in fruit, without scales. Ligulate florets female, white; tubular florets hermaphrodite, the tube compressed, slightly winged. Achenes of ligulate florets connate with the inner involucral bracts; ribs 5-6 (1 anterior, 2 lateral and 2-3 posterior), prominent, rugose, separated by deep furrows. Achenes of tubular florets with 5 shallow ribs. Epicarp mucilaginous, without secretory canals. Pappus a membranous auricle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. glabrum} (Lag.) Willk.,{\i  Bot. Zeit.}{\b 22}: 251 (1864). Glabrous, bright green. Stems 10-40 cm, erect or ascending. Leaf-lobes linear, subulate, mucronate. Capitula c. 2·5 cm in diameter. 2n = 18. {\i S.W. Spain, C. & S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 74.              Leucanthemopsis}          (Giroux) Heywood 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dwarf, caespitose, subscapose perennials. Leaves pinnatilobed to pinnatisect, eglandular. Capitula solitary. Receptacle convex. Ligulate florets female; ligules yellow, or white, sometimes yellowish at base or becoming pink. Inner florets hermaphrodite; corolla tubular-campanulate. Achenes all similar, 3- to 10-ribbed, the ribs not prominent, the surface with one or several rows of mucilaginous cells on and around each rib; vallecular secretory canals absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: V. H. Heywood,{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  12}({\b 2}): 313-374(1954); {\b 32}({\b 2}): 175-187 (1975).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ligules white
\par
2 Leaves oblong-linear, pinnatifid with 7-15 lobes;
\par
  ligules yellowish towards the base ......................................... {\b 5. pulverulenta}
\par
2 Leaves ovate, linear-spathulate or spathulate with 
\par
  5-7 apical or lateral lobes or crenations; ligules not
\par
  yellowish towards the base
\par
3 Leaves linear-spathulate, with 3-7 forwardly directed 
\par
  lanceolate lobes ................................................................................ {\b 2. pallida}
\par
3 Leaves ovate to spathulate, with 5 crenations at the 
\par
  apex or pinnatifid to palmatifid with 5-7 lobes ................................. {\b 1. alpina}
\par
1 Ligules yellow
\par
4 Leaves linear-spathulate, 2- to 7-fid at the apex or 
\par
  with numerous forwardly directed shallow incisions,
\par
  or cuneate to orbicular-spathulate, incise-dentate ............................ {\b 2. pallida}
\par
4 Leaves oblong to oblong-linear, pinnatifid to pinnati-
\par
  partite with 5-15 lobes
\par
5 Densely caespitose, ± procumbent; leaf-lobes 5-9, oblong-linear, 
\par
  approximate; outer involucral bracts subglabrous, ciliate ............. {\b 4. radicans}
\par
5 Laxly caespitose, ascending; leaf-lobes (5-)7-15,
\par
  lanceolate distant; outer involucral bracts pubescent .................... {\b 3. flaveola}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. alpina} (L.) Heywood,{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  32}({\b 2}): 182 (1975) ({\i Chrysanthemum alpinum} L.,{\i  Pyrethrum alpinum} (L.) Schrank, {\i Tanacetum alpinum} (L.) Schultz Bip.). Caespitose, more or less hairy to subglabrous. Stems 3-15 cm, ascending, usually more or less leafless. Basal leaves ovate to spathulate, crenate to pinnatifid or palmatifid, grey-tomentose to greenish-subglabrous. Capitula 2-4 cm in diameter, solitary. Ligules white, sometimes becoming pink at least after anthesis. Pappus a corona. •{\i  Mountains of Europe, from the Carpathians southwards to N.C. Spain, C. Appennini, and C. Jugoslavia.} Au Co Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Highly variable in leaf-shape, indumentum, flower-colour and chromosome number. The following can be recognized as subspecies; other small-scale variants occur, often with a distinctive chromosome number, particularly in subsp. ({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves spathulate, with 5 crenations at the apex .......... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b cuneata} 
\par
1 Leaves ovate, pinnatifid to palmatifid, with 5-7 lobes
\par
2 Extremely dwarf; leaves palmatifid with the lobes very
\par
  closely approximate ................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b tomentosa}
\par
2 Caespitose; leaves pinnatifid, the lobes ± separate ......... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b alpina}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   (a) Subsp. {\b alpina}: 2n = 18, 36, 54. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tomentosa} (Loisel.) Heywood,{\i  loc. cit.} (1975) ({\i Chrysanthemum tomentosum} Loisel.,{\i  Leucanthemum tomentosum} (Loisel.) Gren. & Godron): 2n = 18. {\i Corse}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b cuneata} (Pau) Heywood,{\i  loc. cit.} (1975) ({\i Pyrethrum cuneatum} Pau): 2n = 54. •{\i  N.C. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Urbion}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. pallida} (Miller) Heywood,{\i  loc. cit.} (1975) ({\i Chrysanthemum pallidum} Miller,{\i  Pyrethrum hispanicum} var.{\i  laciniatum} Willk. {\i Tanacetum pallidum} (Miller) Maire; incl.{\i  Pyrethrum leucanthemifolium} Porta & Rigo). Plant greenish to silvery-white-sericeous or whitish-tomentose. Stems 5-20 cm, several, simple, ascending, with few cauline leaves. Basal and lower cauline leaves long-petiolate, linear-spathulate to obovate-spathulate, variable in shape and dissection of lamina. Capitula 2·5-3·5 cm in diameter.
\par

\par
172}
\par