{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 18 Involucre not more than 3(-3·5) mm
\par
19 Panicle narrow; branches erect ............................................ {\b 54. commutata}
\par
19 Panicle wide; branches erecto-patent
\par
20 Outermost involucral bracts with wide scarious margins ..... {\b 56. campestris}
\par
20 Outermost involucral bracts almost entirely herbaceous .{\b 53. tschernieviana}
\par
18 Involucre at least 4 mm
\par
21 Leaves almost all basal .................................................... {\b 55. bargusinensis}
\par
21 Leaves almost all cauline
\par
22 Middle cauline leaves pinnatisect ......................................... {\b 56. campestris}
\par
22 Middle cauline leaves palmately 3-fid ................................. {\b 52. salsoloides}
\par
15 Inner florets hermaphrodite and fertile
\par
23 Receptacle hairy
\par
24 Inflorescence paniculate; stems usually at least 30 cm
\par
25 Leaf-lobes mostly 0·5 mm wide
\par
26 Inner involucral bracts with wide glabrous margins ......................... {\b 8. alba}
\par
26 Inner involucral bracts hairy all over .......................................... {\b 41. frigida}
\par
25 Leaf-lobes mostly at least 1 mm wide
\par
27 Corolla-lobes hairy ..................................................................... {\b 42. sericea}
\par
27 Corolla-lobes glabrous
\par
28 Involucre 2-3 mm; capitula c. 3 mm across ........................... {\b 4. absinthium}
\par
28 Involucre 3·5-4 mm; capitula 6-7 mm across ....................... {\b 6. arborescens}
\par
24 Inflorescence racemose or capitate, sometimes with a 
\par
   few short branches; stems usually less than 30 cm
\par
29 Involucral bracts not hairy all over
\par
30 Involucral bracts hairy, but with a glabrous scarious margin ........... {\b 8. alba}
\par
30 Involucral bracts nearly or quite glabrous
\par
31 Involucral bracts strongly ciliate .............................................. {\b 47. rupestris}
\par
31 Involucral bracts glabrous ........................................... {\b 32. chamaemelifolia}
\par
29 Involucral bracts hairy all over
\par
32 Corolla glabrous
\par
33 Cauline leaves sessile or subsessile ............................................ {\b 41. frigida}
\par
33 Cauline leaves long-petiolate ................................................... {\b 38. glacialis}
\par
32 Corolla hairy at least in the upper part
\par
34 Capitula erect, with c. 15 florets; corolla-lobes 
\par
   sparsely hairy ..................................................................... {\b 34. umbelliformis}
\par
34 Capitula nodding (at least when mature), with more 
\par
   than 20 florets; corolla-lobes densely hairy
\par
35 Plant silvery-sericeous; involucral bracts with 
\par
   closely appressed hairs and dark margin; receptacle 
\par
   shortly hairy .................................................................................... {\b 35. nitida}
\par
35 Plant whitish villous-lanate; involucral bracts villous-
\par
   lanate with pale margin; receptacle with long hairs ........... {\b 40. pedemontana} 
\par
23 Receptacle glabrous
\par
36 Leaves c. 5 mm, mostly in axillary fascicles on the
\par
   flowering stems ............................................................................ {\b 43. reptans}
\par
36 Leaves usually 10 mm or more, not in axillary fascicles
\par
   on the flowering stems
\par
37 Terminal lobe of cauline leaves at least 2 mm wide at the base
\par
38 Capitula 10 or fewer .............................................................. {\b 26. norvegica}
\par
38 Capitula numerous
\par
39 Leaves not white-lanate beneath
\par
40 Leaves appressed-pubescent beneath .................................... {\b 20. armeniaca}
\par
40 Leaves glabrous or nearly so ..................................................... {\b 21. latifolia}
\par
39 Leaves white-lanate beneath
\par
41 Leaves white-lanate above ....................................................... {\b 7. stellerana}
\par
41 Leaves green and glabrous to sparsely hairy above
\par
42 Panicle usually sparingly branched; involucre 4-5 mm .................. {\b 3. tilesii}
\par
42 Panicle usually much-branched; involucre 2·5-3 mm 
\par
43 Leaves with an obscure network of small veins;
\par
   flowering July-September ............................................................. {\b 1. vulgaris} 
\par
43 Leaves with a conspicuous network of small veins;
\par
   flowering October-November ................................................. {\b 2. verlotiorum}
\par
37 Terminal lobe of cauline leaves less than 2 mm wide at base 
\par
44 Capitula 10 or fewer
\par
45 Capitula c. 10 mm across, long-pedunculate; involucral
\par
   bracts more than 5 mm .............................................................. {\b 26. nonegica}
\par
45 Capitula up to 7 mm across, shortly pedunculate;
\par
   involucral bracts 3-4·5 mm
\par
46 Corolla glabrous; involucral bracts with a conspicuous
\par
   dark margin; capitula with 10-15 florets ....................................... {\b 37. genipi}
\par
46 Corolla hairy, at least in the upper part; involucral
\par
   bracts without a conspicuous brown margin; capitula 
\par
   with at least 25 florets
\par
47 Capitula usually more than 6, in a narrow raceme;
\par
   corolla yellow; hairs on corolla-lobes flexuous, the 
\par
   longest more than 0·5 mm; achenes hairy .................................. {\b 36. eriantha}
\par
47 Capitula 1-4, in a corymb; corolla purplish; hairs on
\par
   corolla-lobes thick, the longest less than 0·5 mm;
\par
   achenes glabrous .................................................................... {\b 39. granatensis} 
\par
44 Capitula more than 10
\par
48 Capitula in a simple or very slightly branched racemose
\par
   inflorescence
\par
49 Lower cauline leaves 2-pinnatisect
\par
50 Involucre c. 4 mm; capitula 6-8 mm across .................................. {\b 25. atrata}
\par
50 Involucre c. 3 mm; capitula 3-5 mm across ............................. {\b 19. laciniata}
\par
49 Lower cauline leaves simple, ± pinnatifid or digitate
\par
51 Capitula with at least 25 florets; corolla villous ....................... {\b 36. eriantha}
\par
51 Capitula with 10-15 florets; corolla usually glabrous ................. {\b 37. genipi}
\par
48 Capitula in a much-branched panicle; branches 
\par
   sometimes short but numerous
\par
52 Lower cauline leaves sessile, the lowest pair of 
\par
   segments usually ± amplexicaul
\par
53 Involucre glabrous ...................................................... {\b 32. chamaemelifolia}
\par
53 Involucre pubescent
\par
54 Leaves subglabrous above; lobes 0·5-1·5 mm wide
\par
55 Involucre c. 2·5 mm; corolla-lobes glabrous .................... {\b 29. santolinifolia}
\par
55 Involucre 3·5-4·5 mm; corolla-lobes arachnoid-pubescent
\par
   beneath .................................................................................... {\b 33. macrantha}
\par
54 Leaves densely pubescent on both surfaces; lobes up to
\par
   0·5 mm wide
\par
56 Leaves matt; lobes up to 5 mm; corolla glabrous ...................... {\b 30. pontica}
\par
56 Leaves sericeous; lobes 5-12 mm; corolla pubescent ............. {\b 31. austriaca}
\par
52 Lower cauline leaves distinctly petiolate
\par
57 Plant densely white-tomentose .............................................. {\b 46. hololeuca}
\par
57 Plant green or grey-green
\par
58 Leaf-lobes filiform
\par
59 Involucre 3-4 mm; inner bracts ovate .................................. {\b 27. abrotanum}
\par
59 Involucre 2·5 mm; inner bracts lanceolate-spathulate ............ {\b 28. molinieri}
\par
58 Leaf-lobes linear to linear-lanceolate
\par
60 Lower leaves with 1-2 small, ± amplexicaul lobes at 
\par
   base of petiole ..................................................................................... {\b 8. alba}
\par
60 Lower leaves without lobes at base of petiole
\par
61 Leaves usually with sparse, patent hairs beneath, often
\par
   glabrescent; lamina usually more than 3 times as long 
\par
   as the longest segment 
\par
62 Inflorescence usually freely branched, with numerous
\par
   capitula; involucral bracts usually with a pale margin ............... {\b 19. laciniata} 
\par
62 Inflorescence with few or no short branches and few 
\par
   capitula; involucral bracts with a dark brown margin .................... {\b 25. atrata}
\par
61 Leaves usually appressed-pubescent beneath; lamina 
\par
   usually less than 3 times as long as the longest segment
\par

\par
179}
\par