{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 (L.) Gren. & Godron,{\i  Pyrethrum corymbosum} (L.) Scop.). Perennial. Stems 30-120(-150) cm, more or less branched; leaves pinnatisect to pinnatipartite, pubescent or glabrous (rarely densely hairy above, white-sericeous beneath), the segments toothed; basal 30-40 mm, oblong to linear-oblong, with 16-40 segments, the segments oblong to oblanceolate, petiolate; cauline leaves similar but smaller and sessile. Capitula 3-15(-20) in a lax corymb, long-pedunculate; involucre 8-14 mm in diameter. Ligulate florets white, female; ligules 10-16 mm. Achenes 2-2·5(-3) mm; ribs 5-7, very prominent; pappus a shortly toothed corona 0·5-0·8 mm. {\i Open woodland, scrub and meadows. Europe northwards to N.C. France and C. Russia; some isolated stations in N. Russia} ({\i by Onezskoe Ozero}){\i  and locally naturalized.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (N, C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Da It Su].,
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b corymbosum}: Leaves shining green beneath, the segments dentate; involucral bracts with a narrow, light brown margin; ligules 10-15 mm. 2n = 36.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b clusii} (Fischer ex Reichenb.) Heywood,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 272 (1976) ({\i Pyrethrum clusii} Fischer ex Reichenb. {\i Chrysanthemum subcorymbosum} Schur, {\i Tanacetum corymbosum} var. {\i subcorymbosum} (Schur) Simonkai): Leaves shining green on both surfaces, the segments serrate; involucral bracts with a broad, blackish-brown margin; ligules 15-20 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Carpathians, E. Alps and probably Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. T. mucronulatum} (Hoffmanns. & Link) Heywood, {\i Agron. Lusit.}{\b  20}: 214 (1958) ({\i Pyrethrum mucronulatum} Hoffmanns. & Link). Like {\b 9} but stems not more than 60 cm; leaves densely villous-lanate beneath; capitula shortly pedunculate, forming an irregular corymb. {\i Scrub and rocky places. • N.E. & E.C. Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. T. parthenium} (L.) Schultz Bip., {\i Tanacet. }55 (1844) ({\i Chrysanthemum parthenium} (L.) Bernh.,{\i  Leucanthemum parthenium} (L.) Gren. & Godron,{\i  Pyrethrum parthenium} (L.) Sm.). Strongly aromatic perennial. Stems ridged. Leaves pinnatisect to pinnatipartite, yellowish-green; basal and lower cauline more or less ovate, with 3-7 oblong-elliptical to ovate segments which are subpinnately divided, crenate or entire. Capitula 5-20(-30) in a dense corymb; involucre 6-8 mm in diameter. Ligulate florets white, female; ligules 2·5-7 mm. Achenes 1·2-1·5 mm, 5- to 8-ribbed; pappus an irregularly lobed corona 0·2 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain scrub and rocky places. Balkan peninsula. Long cultivated for ornament and as a medicinal plant and naturalized in hedges and waste places throughout a large part of Europe.} Al Bu Gr Ju [Au Az Be Br Co Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Su Tu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   T. vahlii}  DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 129 (1838), believed to have been collected in Spain, and the apparently related {\b T. willkommii} Schultz Bip., {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 34}: 748 (1851), collected in E. Spain, are plants about which further information is needed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. T. parthenifolium} (Willd.) Schultz Bip.,{\i  Tanacet.} 56 (1844) ({\i Pyrethrum parthenifolium }Willd.). Like {\b 11} but stems terete; leaf-segments oblong-elliptical to ovate, incise-dentate; ligules 7-10 mm; pappus entire.{\i  Mountain woods and scrub. Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i S.W. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. T. macrophyllum} (Waldst. & Kit.) Schultz Bip.,{\i  Tanacet.} 53 (1844) ({\i Chrysanthemum macrophyllum} Waldst. & Kit., {\i Pyrethrum macrophyllum} (Waldst. & Kit.) Willd.). Perennial. Stems 40-100(-150) cm, usually solitary, simple or branched above. Leaves pinnatipartite to pinnatilobed, glabrous above, densely hairy beneath; cauline leaves subsessile, with 8-16 lanceolate, acute, doubly crenate segments. Capitula (20-)40-100(-150) in very dense, compound corymbs; involucre 4-7 mm in diameter. Ligulate florets white, female; ligules 2-4 mm. Achenes 1·6-2 mm, 5-ribbed; pappus a denticulate corona 0·2-0·3 mm.{\i  Mountain woods. From N.W. Jugoslavia and the E. Carpathians southwards to Macedonia; cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized in C. Europe.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm [Cz Da Ge Hu Rs (W)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable in leaf-width and degree of dissection.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CINERARIIFOLIA (Heywood) Alavi. Ligules white. Achenes with secretory lacunae.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. T. cinerariifolium} (Trev.) Schultz Bip.,{\i  Tanacet.} 58 (1844) ({\i Pyrethrum cinerariifolium }Trev.). Caespitose, silvery-grey, sericeous perennial. Stems 15-45 cm. Leaves pinnatipartite, glandular-punctate; basal 10-20 cm, petiolate, lanceolate to oblong, the segments pinnatisect to palmatisect, narrowly lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate; cauline similar but shortly petiolate. Capitula solitary; involucre 12-18 mm. Ligulate florets white, female; ligules 8-16 mm. Achenes 2·5-3·5 mm, 5- to 7-ribbed. Pappus an irregularly lobed corona 0·6-1 mm.{\i  Rocky ground. W. Jugoslavia and Albania; cultivated elsewhere in S.E. & E. C. Europe as an insecticide, and locally naturalized.} Al Ju [Au Hs Hu It Rs (W, K, E)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 70.             Leucanthemella}           Tzvelev 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbaceous perennials. Leaves simple, alternate, glandular-punctate. Capitula solitary or 2-8 in a lax corymb. Involucral bracts in 2-3 rows. Receptacle strongly convex, without scales. Ligulate florets in 1 row, sterile; tube strongly compressed but unwinged. Inner florets hermaphrodite, tubular or tubular-campanulate. Achenes all similar, without mucilaginous cells or vallecular secretory canals. Pappus minute or absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. serotina} (L.) Tzvelev in Schischkin & Bobrov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  26}: 139 (1961) ({\i Tanacetum serotinum} (L.) Schultz Bip.). Stems 30-150 cm, usually hairy. Leaves lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, 2- to 4-lobed at the base, sessile- middle cauline with forwardly directed teeth. Ligules 10-25 mm, white or reddish. Achenes 2-3 mm, with thick, white, obtuse ribs. 2n = 18.{\i  Wet places. From S.E. Czechoslovakia and E.C. Jugoslavia eastwards to N. Ukraine and N.E. Bulgaria.} Bu Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W) [He Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 71.          Balsamita}                Miller 
\par
 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Leaves simple, strongly glandular-punctate alternate. Capitula in a corymbose inflorescence. Involucral bracts in several rows. Receptacle plano-convex. Outer florets female, tubular or with white ligules, rarely absent. Inner florets hermaphrodite, tubular-obconical. Achenes all similar, 5- to 8-ribbed, with epicarpic non-mucilaginous glands; mucilage-cells and vallecular resin-canals absent; pappus short, irregularly toothed or lobed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. major} Desf.,{\i  Actes Soc. Hist. Nat. Paris}{\b  1}: 3 (1792) ({\i Chrysanthemum balsamita} (L.) Baillon, non L.,{\i  Pyrethrum majus} (Desf.) Tzvelev). Düll green, densely hairy. Stems 30-120 cm simple or branched, densely leafy. Basal and lower cauline leaves oblong, cuneate, crenate-dentate, petiolate; upper reduced.
\par

\par

\par
171}
\par