{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 capitula 2·5-4·5 cm in diameter and the achenes of the ligulate florets with a prominent corona.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  L. delarbrei} Timb.-Lagr. in Lamotte, {\i Prodr. Fl. Centr. Fr.} 404 (1881), from the Pyrenees, S.C. France and probably N. Italy, has pinnatifid to subpinnatifid basal leaves, capitula 1·5-2·5 cm in diameter, and the achenes of the ligulate florets without a pappus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  L. lacustre} (Brot.) Samp.,{\i  Lista Esp. Herb. Port.} 132 (1913), from W.C. Portugal (Estremadura), has toothed basal leaves, capitula 4·5-6 cm in diameter and the achenes of the ligulate florets with auricles.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b L. sylvaticum} (Hoffmanns. & Link) Nyman,{\i  Syll. }11(1854-1855), from N. & C. Portugal and N. Spain, is tetraploid (2n = 36) or hexaploid (2n = 54), with toothed basal leaves, capitula 3·5-5 cm in diameter, involucral bracts pale brown to colourless, and the achenes of the ligulate florets with mucronate, scarious pappus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b L. pluriflorum} Pau, {\i Bol. Soc. Aragon Ci. Nat.}{\b  1}: 31 (1902), from N.W. Spain, is said to have stems decumbent for 20-40 cm then ascending and much branched above. Several other variants of this complex occur in Spain but have not been adequately studied either taxonomically or cytologically.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. graminifolium} (L.) Lam.,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 131(1779) ({\i L. montanum} (L.) DC.). Stems (10-)15-30(-40) cm, simple, somewhat woody at base, finely pubescent and often reddish below. Basal leaves obovate-spathulate or oblong-lanceolate, toothed; apex 3-to 5-toothed; petiole long, finely pubescent and reddish at the base. Cauline leaves oblong to linear, the lower ones with setaceous teeth at base, the others entire or sparsely toothed. Capitula 3-3·5 cm in diameter, solitary. Involucral bracts lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, with a wide, membranous, dark brown margin. Achenes of ligulate florets with a well developed corona. 2n = 18. •{\i  S., C. & W. France.} Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. gracilicaule} (Dufour) Alavi & Heywood,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 274 (1976) ({\i Chrysanthemum gracilicaule} Dufour). Rhizomatous; stems 35-50 cm, woody at base, branched. Basal leaves cuneiform-spathulate, the apex broadly obtuse, with 3-4(-6) teeth; lower cauline leaves linear- to obovate-spathulate, incise-dentate, sessile. Capitula 3-4·5 cm in diameter, solitary. Involucral bracts ovate-oblong to oblong, with a wide, pale brown scarious margin, often with a distinct, scarious, apical appendage. Achenes of ligulate florets with an auricle at least as long as the corolla-tube. •{\i  E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. burnatii} Briq. & Cavillier in Burnat,{\i  Fl. Alpes Marit.}{\b  6}: 108 (1916). Stems erect or ascending. Basal leaves linear-oblong, cuneiform, entire, the apex sometimes 2- to 3-toothed; cauline leaves linear to filiform, entire or remotely toothed; petiole-base sheathing, whitish, scarious, persistent. Capitula 2-4 cm in diameter, solitary. Involucral bracts oblong-ovate, obtuse, with a scarious, fimbriate, dark brown or blackish margin. Achenes of ligulate florets with a fimbriate auricle. 2n = 18.{\i  Calcicole. Rocks and slopes,} 900-1650{\i  m. S.E. France} ({\i Alpes-Maritimes and adjacent mountains}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. monspeliense} (L.) Coste, {\i Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 342 (1903). Stems 30-60 cm, simple or branched. Basal and lower cauline leaves ovate, 2-pinnatipartite; middle and upper cauline leaves pinnatipartite, sessile. Capitula 2-4 cm in diameter, solitary. Involucral bracts lanceolate, acute, with a blackish, membranous margin. Achenes of ligulate florets usually with an auricle, rarely ½ as long as the corolla-tube. 2n = 36. •{\i  S. & S.C. France; N.E. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. atratum} (Jacq.) DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 48 (1838) ({\i Chrysanthemum atratum} Jacq.). Stems 10-50 cm, simple or branched, glabrous or hairy. Basal leaves spathulate, long-petiolate, crenate to lobed or with 3-5 apical teeth; cauline leaves oblong to linear, deeply toothed to pinnatifid. Capitula 2-5 cm in diameter, solitary. Involucral bracts lanceolate to oblong, the outer with a wide scarious apical appendage; ligules white. Achenes usually all with a pappus. •{\i  Alps, Appennini, mountains of N.W. & C. Jugoslavia.} Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A complex species showing, like{\i  L. vulgare}, a great deal of cytological variation but divisible into a number of fairly well characterized subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Outer involucral bracts pale green, with a blackish-
\par
  brown to nearly hyaline margin 0·1-0·2 mm wide ...... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b platylepis} 
\par
1 Outer involucral bracts dark green, with a dark brown 
\par
  or black margin more than 0·2 mm wide
\par
2 Involucral bracts with a dark marginal band and a ± 
\par
  hyaline scarious border; middle cauline leaves deeply 
\par
  3-lobed at apex, otherwise entire ............................ ({\b e}) subsp. {\b tridactylites}
\par
2 Involucral bracts with dark brown or black margin,
\par
  without a hyaline border; middle cauline leaves pinnatifid,
\par
  toothed or lobed
\par
3 Stem 5-20 cm; capitula 3 cm in diameter
\par
4 Stem leafy for 4/5 of its length; basal and lower 
\par
  cauline leaves shortly petiolate ........................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b halleri}
\par
4 Stem leafy for 2/3-3/5 of its length; basal and lower 
\par
  cauline leaves long-petiolate ............................ ({\b g}) subsp. {\b lithopolitanicum}
\par
3 Stem (15-)20-35(-50) cm; capitula 4 cm in diameter
\par
5 Middle cauline leaves pinnatifid or 2-pinnatifid with 
\par
  linear segments; achenes of tubular florets with rudimentary
\par
   pappus ............................................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b ceratophylloides}
\par
5 Middle cauline leaves incised, toothed or lobed; achenes
\par
  of tubular florets with well-developed pappus
\par
6 Stem leafy for 2/5-3/5 of its length; basal leaves 
\par
  shallowly lobed at apex; cauline leaves sessile, with
\par
  ± incurved teeth .............................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b atratum}
\par
6 Stem leafy for 1/3-1/2 of its length; basal leaves 
\par
  deeply lobed at apex; cauline leaves petiolate, with ± 
\par
  out-curved teeth ................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b coronopifolium}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b atratum}: Stems 10-20 cm. Basal leaves oblong-cuneate or -spathulate, with (3-)5-7 lobes or teeth at apex; middle cauline leaves oblong-lanceolate, incise-dentate, the teeth incurved. 2n = 54. {\i N.E. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b halleri} (Suter) Heywood,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 272 (1976) ({\i Chrysanthemum halleri} Suter): Stems 10-20 cm. Basal leaves like ({\b a}) but middle cauline dentate with 10-16 teeth. 2n = 18.{\i  C. & E. Alps.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b coronopifolium} (Vill.) Horvatic,{\i  Acta Bot. Inst. Univ. Zagreb.}{\b  10}: 65 (1935) ({\i L. coronopifolium} (Vill.) Gren. & Godron, {\i Chrysanthemum coronopifolium} Vill.): Stems 20-30(-50) cm. Basal leaves spathulate-cuneate, incise-dentate. 2n = 54.{\i  S.W. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b ceratophylloides} (All.) Horvatic,{\i  op. cit.} 66 (19353 ({\i L. ceratophylloides} (All.) Nyman,{\i  Chrysanthemum ceratophylloides }All.): Stems (15-)20-30(-50) cm. Basal leaves spathulate-cuneate; middle cauline leaves pinnatifid to 2-pinnatifid. 2n = 54.{\i  S.W. Alps, N. & C. Appennini, Alpi Apuane}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b tridactylites} (A. Kerner & Huter ex Rigo) Heywood,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 272 (1976) ({\i L. tridactylites} A. Kerner & Huter ex Rigo): Stems up to 30 cm. Basal leaves obovate-spathulate, obtuse or truncate, 3- to 5-lobed at apex; cauline leaves narrowly obovate-oblong, deeply 3-fid at apex.{\i  C. & S. Appennini}.
\par

\par
176}
\par