{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 73 Plant not pruinose  
\par 
74 Stems 4-angled below; corolla rotate
\par 
75 Corolla usually 3-4 mm in diameter ...................................... {\b 71. abaujense}
\par 
75 Corolla usually 4-5 mm in diameter ..................................... {\b 72. polonicum}
\par 
74 Stems ± terete below  
\par 
76 Corolla distinctly cup-shaped, the lobes acute; stem 
\par 
   usually hairy ........................................................................... {\b 73. laconicum}
\par 
76 Corolla rotate to slightly cup-shaped, the lobes ± 
\par 
   apiculate; stem glabrous ........................................................ {\b 75. laevigatum}
\par 
73 Plant pruinose at least on young shoots and ovaries
\par 
77 Corolla often more than 4 mm in diameter, rotate;
\par 
   leaves broadly oblanceolate to elliptical, usually 
\par 
   black when dry ......................................................................... {\b 76. schultesii}
\par 
77 Corolla usually less than 3·5 mm in diameter; leaves 
\par 
   linear-lanceolate, usually greenish when dry 
\par 
78 Corolla distinctly cup-shaped, usually less than 
\par 
   2·6 mm in diameter ................................................................. {\b 74. procurrens}
\par 
78 Corolla rotate to slightly cup-shaped, usually more 
\par 
   than 2·5 mm in diameter ........................................................ {\b 75. laevigatum}
\par 
66 Upper and lower surfaces of leaf concolorous, glaucous
\par 
   -pruinose throughout; leaves often less than 25 mm;
\par 
   pedicels never capillary (Sect.{\i  Leiogalium} Ser. {\i Octonaria})  
\par 
79 Leaves elliptical to oblanceolate, 2-6 mm wide; stolons absent  
\par 
80 Leaves ± elliptical, coriaceous ............................................. {\b 59. pruinosum}
\par 
80 Leaves ± oblanceolate, membranous ............................ {\b 60. glaucophyllum}
\par 
79 Leaves linear-lanceolate to filiform, 0·3-2 mm  wide;
\par 
   stolons often present  
\par 
81 Flowers in dense clusters; inflorescence interrupted ............ {\b 61. murcicum}
\par 
81 Flowers not distinctly clustered; inflorescence
\par 
   scarcely interrupted
\par 
82 Partial inflorescences pyramidal; plants strongly stoloniferous,
\par 
   with remote stems      
\par 
83 Stem hairy at base, glabrescent above; corolla 3-4 mm
\par 
   in diameter ........................................................................... {\b 66. volhynicum}
\par 
83 Stem glabrous at base, pubescent above; corolla c. 2 mm
\par 
   in diameter .......................................................................... {\b 67. moldavicum}
\par 
82 Partial inflorescences corymbiform; plants with or 
\par 
   without stolons      
\par 
84 Marginal teeth of leaves in 1-2 rows ....................................... {\b 63. glaucum}
\par 
84 Marginal teeth of leaves in many rows
\par 
85 Without rooting stolons; leaves usually more than 20 mm . {\b 62. octonarium}
\par 
85 With rooting stolons; leaves usually less than 20 mm
\par 
86 Stems glabrous ................................................................... {\b 64. biebersteinii}
\par 
86 Stems hairy, especially below ............................................... {\b 65. xeroticum}
\par 
58 Corolla ± rotate, the lobes sometimes apiculate  
\par 
87 Lower surface of leaf distinctly paler green than the
\par 
   upper and often bluish; leaves often more  than 25 mm;
\par 
   partial inflorescences corymbiform; pedicels ± 
\par 
   capillary (Sect.{\i  Leiogalium} Ser. {\i Nemoralia})
\par 
88 Stems not rooting at the base; plants without stolons
\par 
89 Corolla subrotate, the lobes shortly apiculate
\par 
90 Leaves linear, 0·5-3 mm wide ......................................... {\b 68. kitaibelianum}
\par 
90 Leaves linear-lanceolate, 3-5 mm wide .................................. {\b 70. aristatum}
\par 
89 Corolla ± cup-shaped, the lobes acute
\par 
91 Leaves pale green beneath; stems 4-angled below, often
\par 
   hairy ................................................................................. {\b 69. pseudaristatum}
\par 
91 Leaves bluish-green beneath, often pruinose; stems 
\par 
   terete (or obscurely 4-angled) below, glabrous
\par 
92 Leaves membranous, lanceolate-elliptical, the margins
\par 
   with slender teeth ................................................................... {\b 77. sylvaticum}
\par 
92 Leaves coriaceous, linear-lanceolate, the margins
\par 
   with more robust teeth
\par 
93 Young shoots and ovaries pruinose ................................... {\b 78. longifolium}
\par 
93 Young shoots and ovaries green ......................................... {\b 79. bulgaricum}
\par 
88 Stems rooting at the base; plants with (sometimes short)
\par 
   stolons; corolla-lobes often apiculate 
\par 
94 Plant not pruinose 
\par 
95 Stems 4-angled below; corolla rotate 
\par 
96 Corolla usually 3-4 mm in diameter ...................................... {\b 71. abaujense}
\par 
96 Corolla usually 4-5 mm in diameter ..................................... {\b 72. polonicum}
\par 
95 Stems ± terete below 
\par 
97 Corolla distinctly cup-shaped, the lobes acute; stem 
\par 
   usually hairy ........................................................................... {\b 73. laconicum} 
\par 
97 Corolla rotate to slightly cup-shaped, the lobes ± apiculate;
\par 
   stem glabrous ......................................................................... {\b 75. laevigatum} 
\par 
94 Plant pruinose at least on young shoots and ovaries 
\par 
98 Corolla often more than 4 mm in diameter, rotate;
\par 
   leaves broadly oblanceolate to elliptic, usually black
\par 
   when dry ................................................................................... {\b 76. schultesii} 
\par 
98 Corolla usually less than 3·5 mm in diameter; leaves 
\par 
   linear-lanceolate, usually greenish when dry 
\par 
99 Corolla distinctly cup-shaped, usually less than 2·6 mm
\par 
   in diameter .............................................................................. {\b 74. procurrens}
\par 
99 Corolla rotate to slightly cup-shaped, usually more 
\par 
   than 2·5 mm in diameter ........................................................ {\b 75. laevigatum} 
\par 
87 Lower and upper surface of leaf concolorous; leaves
\par 
   often less than 25 mm; pedicels not truly capillary 
\par 
100 Stock or rhizome stout, ± woody, sometimes with stout
\par 
    stolons; stems often more than 30 cm, usually ± robust
\par 
    and erect; partial inflorescences oblong to pyramidal 
\par 
101 Partial inflorescences not very dense, the ultimate branches
\par 
     usually ebracteate and glabrous, not or  slightly divaricate
\par 
    after anthesis; corolla usually whitish and with apiculate lobes
\par 
     (Sect.{\i  Leiogalium} Ser.{\i  Erecta}) 
\par 
102 Leaves lanceolate to linear or acicular, the longest
\par 
    more than 7 times as long as wide 
\par 
103 Corolla slightly cup-shaped, with incurved apiculate
\par 
    lobes; anthers black when dry ............................. ({\b 51-58}). {\b incurvum} group 
\par 
103 Corolla rotate, with patent lobes; anthers brownish 
\par 
    when dry 
\par 
104 Longest leaves more than 3 mm wide, often somewhat 
\par 
    falcate ................................................................................... {\b 50. crespianum} 
\par 
104 Longest leaves less than 3 mm wide, usually straight
\par 
    ................................................................................ ({\b 41-49}). {\b lucidum} group 
\par 
102 Leaves elliptical to oblanceolate, the longest not 
\par 
    more than 7 times as long as wide 
\par 
105 Plant glaucous ........................................................................... {\b 40. reiseri} 
\par 
105 Plant green  
\par 
106 Corolla 1-1·5 mm in diameter, yellow .................................... {\b 35. firmum}
\par 
106 Corolla 2-5 mm in diameter, white to yellowish 
\par 
107 Corolla somewhat hairy outside; fruit ± fleshy, blackish ........ {\b 33. litorale}
\par 
107 Corolla glabrous; fruit brownish 
\par 
108 Leaves fleshy, scarcely longer than the middle internodes
\par 
     of the stem; corolla yellow, the lobes acute .......................... {\b 34. arenarium} 
\par 
108 Leaves not fleshy, longer than the middle internodes;
\par 
    corolla white to yellowish, the lobes apiculate ......({\b 36-39}). {\b mollugo} group
\par 
101 Partial inflorescences dense, bracteate and often 
\par 
    hairy up to the ultimate branches, divaricate 
\par 
    especially after anthesis; corolla usually yellow 
\par 
    and often with acute lobes (Sect. {\i Galium} pro parte) 
\par 
109 Internodes of inflorescence about as long as the 
\par 
    leaves; partial inflorescences few-flowered 
\par 
110 Plant hairy ..................................................................... {\b 31. erythrorrhizon} 
\par 
110 Plant glabrous .................................................................... {\b 32. pulvinatum} 
\par 
109 Internodes of inflorescence much longer than the 
\par 
    leaves; partial inflorescences usually many-flowered
\par 

\par
17}
\par