{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i laevigata} (Reichenb.) DC.). Leaves triangular-hastate to reniform; basal lobes divergent; margin regularly toothed; lamina glabrous. Scapes with 4-5(-8) scale-leaves, the lowest completely sheathing the stem at the base, rarely with a rudimentary lamina, the middle 2·5-4(-7) cm. Capitula c. 5 in the male, c. 10 in the female. Involucre 5·5-6 mm; bracts purplish or green, glabrous, with a minutely ciliate or shortly fimbriate apex. Florets yellowish or pinkish. Ligules in the male 2·8-4 mm, in the female c. 1·5 mm. stigma of male florets c. 1·3 mm. {\i Wet river-gravels. N. & E. Russia, southwards to} 52°{\i  N. in S. Ural.} Rs (N, C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. spurius} (Retz.) Reichenb., {\i Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 279 (1831). Leaves triangular-hastate, 2- to 3(-5)-lobed on each side at the base, glabrous above, hairy beneath, with 2-5 lateral veins bordering the sinus; margin regularly toothed. Scapes with 2-12 scale-leaves, the lower sheathing at the base, few or none with a rudimentary lamina, the middle 5-10·5 cm. Capitula 10-45. Involucre of male 5·5-8 mm, of female 4-6 mm; bracts pale green, glabrous, with a minutely ciliate or shortly fimbriate apex. Florets yellowish. Ligules in the male 2·2-4·5 mm, in the female 0·5-3 mm, convolute except in fully opened florets. Stigma of male florets 0·3-1 mm. 2n = 60.{\i  Sandy sea-shores and river-banks. U.S.S.R. and E. Romania, extending very locally north-westwards to N.W. Germany and formerly to S.W. Finland} ({\i Ahvenanmaa}). Da †Fe Ge Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. frigidus} (L.) Fries,{\i  Summa Veg. Scand.} 182 (1846) ({\i Nardosmia frigida} (L.) Hooker, {\i N. angulosa} Cass.). Leaves triangular-cordate, glabrous above, hairy beneath; basal lobes divergent, with 1-2 lateral veins bordering the sinus; margin coarsely dentate or lobed; apices of teeth (8-)10-20 mm apart. Scapes with 4-11 scale-leaves, the lower usually sheathing at the base, the middle in the male 3·1-6·2 cm, in the female 2·5-4·8 cm, usually fewer than half with a rudimentary lamina. Capitula 5-9 in the male, 8-12 in the female. Involucre 6-9 mm; bracts purplish or green, pubescent. Florets whitish-yellow or reddish. Ligules in the male 3-5·5 mm, in the female 2-2·5 mm. Stigma of male florets 1-1·8 mm. 2n = 60. {\i Stream-sides, bogs and other wet places. N. Europe, southwards to S. Norway and C. Ural.} Fe No Rs (N, C) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. P. fragrans} (Vill.) C. Presl,{\i  Fl. Sic.}{\b  1}: xxviii (1826). Leaves reniform-cordate, glabrous above, hairy beneath; basal lobes slightly convergent to divergent, with 2-5 lateral veins bordering the sinus; margin regularly dentate. Scapes often appearing while the previous season's leaves are green, with 2-7 scale-leaves, the lower usually sheathing at the base, the middle 3-7 cm, more than half with a rudimentary lamina. Capitula 6-20. Involucre 7-10·5 mm; bracts pale green or purplish, glabrous except for a few long hairs. Florets whitish-pink, vanilla-scented. Ligules 4-5·5 mm. Stigma of male florets 1·5-2·5 mm. 2n = 58, 59, 60, 61.{\i  Damp, shady places. C. Mediterranean region; cultivated for ornament in W. Europe and widely naturalized.} It Sa Si [Az Be Bl Br Co Da Ga Hb He Hs Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Only the male plant is known.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. P. japonicus} (Siebold & Zucc.) Maxim.,{\i  Razb. Rukop. Socin. F. Schmidta Reis. Amurl.} 17 (1866) ({\i Nardosmia japonica} Siebold & Zucc.). Leaves reniform-cordate, glabrous above, hairy beneath; basal lobes convergent, with c. 5 lateral veins bordering the sinus; margin irregularly dentate. Scapes with 15-25 scale-leaves, the lower almost cordate at the base, the middle 5-7 cm, rarely with a rudimentary lamina. Capitula c. 35. Involucre 8-10 mm; bracts pale green, sparsely pubescent, with usually entire apex; bract subtending the lowest inflorescence-branch 1·7-4 cm wide. Florets all tubular. Stigma of male florets 1·6-1·8 mm. 2n = 84-87.{\i  Stream-banks. Locally naturalized from gardens in N.W. & C. Europe.} [Br Cz Da Ho.] ({\i Japan, Sakhalin}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Only the male plant is naturalized in Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. P. doerfleri} Hayek,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 94}: 196 (1917). Leaves orbicular-cordate, tomentose above; basal lobes divergent, without lateral vein-branches bordering the sinus; margin regularly toothed. Scapes with 4 or more scale-leaves, the lower almost sheathing at the base, the middle c. 1·5 cm, fewer than half with a rudimentary lamina. Capitula 3-10; involucre 8-10 mm; bracts purplish, pubescent, with an entire to somewhat fimbriate apex. Stigma of male florets 1·5-2 mm, not bifid to the base. Florets pale yellow or reddish. Ligules in the male 5-6 mm.{\i  Wet screes. • N. Albania} ({\i Bjëshket e Nemura}). Al ?Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. P. sibiricus} (J. F. Gmelin) Dingwall,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 273 (1975) ({\i P. gmelinii} Polunin,{\i  Tussilago sibirica} J. F. Gmelin). Leaves elliptical to ovate, cuneate to truncate at the base, without a sinus; margin weakly and remotely toothed. Scapes with 3-4 scale-leaves, the lower sheathing the stem at the base, the middle 1·3-2 cm, none with a rudimentary lamina. Capitula 1-3; involucre 6-7 mm; bracts purplish, sparsely tomentose, with an entire to somewhat ciliate apex. Florets whitish. Ligules in the female c. 3·5 mm.{\i  Stony tundra. N. Ural.} Rs (N). ({\i N. Asia and North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 91.              Homogyne}            Cass.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Leaves mostly basal. Stems with 1 to few medium capitula. Involucral bracts in 1 row. Receptacle flat, without scales. Outer row of florets with short ligules, female, purplish; tubular florets numerous, hermaphrodite. Achenes narrowly cylindrical, 5- to 10-ribbed, truncate at apex; pappus-hairs numerous, in 1 row, denticulate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves whitish-lanate beneath ..................................................... {\b 2. discolor} 
\par
1 Leaves green or grey-green and glabrous or thinly 
\par
  floccose beneath
\par
2 Leaves crenate-dentate; stems always with 1 capitulum ................. {\b 1. alpina}
\par
2 Leaves shallowly lobed, the lobes with mucronate teeth;
\par
  stems with more than 1 capitulum .............................................. {\b 3. sylvestris}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. alpina} (L.) Cass.,{\i  Dict. Sci. Nat.}{\b  21}: 412 (1821). Rhizomes slender, with numerous lanate scales. Basal leaves usually 2-4 cm, orbicular, crenate-dentate, cordate at base, thinly floccose on the veins beneath, glabrescent, coriaceous; petiole 2-10 cm, hairy. Stems 10-40 cm, each with 1 capitulum, with thin arachnoid indumentum below, lanate above; cauline leaves few, small, sessile, the upper lanceolate, entire. Involucre 8-10 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse, purplish; florets purplish-red. Achenes 4-5 mm; pappus pure white. 2n = 120, 160.{\i  Damp or shady places. • Mountains and hill-country of W., C. & S. Europe, from C. France and the Sudeten Mountains southwards to the Pyrenees, C. Appennini and S. Bulgaria.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W) [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. discolor} (Jacq.) Cass.,{\i  op. cit.} 413 (1821). Like {\b 1} but basal leaves 1-3 cm, whitish-lanate beneath; stems up to 25 cm, distinctly thickened upwards, with usually 2 amplexicaul scale-leaves; florets bright purple; pappus dirty white. 2n = 60.{\i  Stony slopes and screes; calcicole. E. Alps; mountains of C. Jugoslavia.} Au Ge It Ju.
\par

\par
188}
\par