{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min13}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min13}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords990}{\nofchars5643}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\i\fs28 of Europe, but absent from many islands and much of the north.}{\fs28  All except Az Bl Co Cr Fa Hb Is Sa Sb ?Tu.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Panicle-branches viscid ................................................. (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 glutinosa}{\fs28 
\par 1 Panicle-branches not viscid
\par 2 Leaf-lobes short, fleshy, convex but not keeled beneath (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 maritima}{\fs28 
\par 2 Leaf-lobes not fleshy, keeled beneath
\par 3 Involucre 1\'b75-2\'b75 mm; panicle usually wide ............... (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 campestris}{\fs28 
\par 3 Involucre 3-6 mm; panicle narrow 
\par 4 Involucre usually 5-6 mm; most panicle-branches with
\par   1-3 capitula ........................................................................ (}{\b\fs28 f}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 borealis}{\fs28  
\par 4 Involucre usually 3-4\'b75 mm; most panicle-branches with
\par   3 or more capitula
\par 5 Outer involucral bracts almost entirely herbaceous ........ (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 bottnica}{\fs28 
\par 5 Outer involucral bracts broadly scarious ........................... (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 alpina}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28   (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 campestris}{\fs28 : Stems and leaves glabrescent to persistently sericeous; stems usually more than 25 cm. Leaf-lobes not fleshy, keeled beneath, thinly lanate when young. Panicle usually wide. Capitula shortly pedunculate. Involucre 1\'b75-2\'b75 mm, rarely hairy. 2n = 36.}{\i\fs28  Almost throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 glutinosa}{\fs28  (Gay ex Besser) Batt. in Batt. & Trabut, }{\i\fs28 Fl. Alg\'e9r., Dicot.}{\fs28  469 (1889) (}{\i\fs28 A. glutinosa}{\fs28  Gay ex Besser): Like subsp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) but panicle-branches and involucral bracts viscid; capitula sessile or subsessile.}{\i\fs28  From Portugal to Italy and Sicilia}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 maritima}{\fs28  Arcangeli,}{\i\fs28  Comp. Fl. Ital.}{\fs28  366 (1882): stems and leaves glabrescent; stems usually more than 25 cm. Leaf-lobes fleshy, convex but not keeled beneath, velutinous when young. Panicle usually wide. Capitula shortly pedunculate, often recurved. Involucre 3-5 mm, glabrous. 2n = 54.}{\i\fs28  Maritime sands. \bullet  W. coast of Europe, northwards to the Netherlands}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 alpina}{\fs28  (DC.) Arcangeli,}{\i\fs28  loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1882): Stems and leaves glabrescent; stems usually 20-40 cm. Leaf-lobes not fleshy, keeled beneath, thinly lanate when young. Panicle narrow; most branches with c. 6 capitula. Capitula shortly pedunculate. Involucre 3-4 mm; outer bracts broadly scarious. 2n = 36. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Alps,}{\fs28  1000-2000}{\i\fs28  m; local.}{\fs28 
\par   (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 bottnica}{\fs28  A. N. Lundstr\'f6m ex Kindb., }{\i\fs28 Svensk Fl}{\fs28 . 301 (1877) Intermediate between subspp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) and (}{\b\fs28 f}{\fs28 ). Panicle usually narrow; most branches with 3-6 capitula. Involucre 3-4\'b75 mm; bracts and florets usually hairy; outer bracts almost entirely herbaceous. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Shores of the north part of the Gulf of Bothnia}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 f}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 borealis}{\fs28  (Pallas) H. M. Hall & Clements,}{\i\fs28  Carnegie Inst. Washington Publ.}{\b\fs28  326}{\fs28 : 122 (1923) (}{\i\fs28 A. nana }{\fs28 Gaudin): Like subsp. (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) but stems up to 25 cm; most panicle-branches with 1-3 capitula; involucre 5-6 mm; outer bracts almost entirely herbaceous. 2n = 18, 36. }{\i\fs28 Alps, Arctic Russia.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Circumpolar.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 57. A. scoparia}{\fs28  Waldst. & Kit.,}{\i\fs28  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 66 (1801). Like }{\b\fs28 56}{\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) but biennial with slender stock and 1 flowering stem 30-60 cm; stem and leaves with sparse, sericeous, patent hairs or sometimes glabrous; capitula subglobose, recurved; involucre 1\'b75-2 mm.}{\i\fs28  C. & E. Europe.}{\fs28  Al Au Bu Cz Ge Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu [Ga].
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28   Tribe        }{\b\fs28 Senecioneae}{\fs28     Cass.
\par }{\fs24 Edit. \'86T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Leaves alternate, very rarely opposite, simple or pinnatisect. Capitula with or without ligules; outer florets usually female, the inner hermaphrodite or functionally male; corolla usually yellow. Receptacle without scales. Anthers usually sagittate but not caudate at base. Style-branches truncate and papillose at apex, sometimes with a non-stigmatic apex. Pappus of hairs.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 89.         Tussilago}{\fs28                L.
\par }{\fs24 By \'86T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial herbs. Leaves all basal. Scapes numerous, each with one medium capitulum. Involucral bracts in 1 row. Receptacle slightly convex, without scales. Ligulate florets in many rows, female, yellow; tubular florets few, functionally male. Achenes narrowly cylindrical, with 5 ribs, truncate at apex; pappus-hairs numerous, in 1 row, denticulate.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. T. farfara}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  865 (1753). Rhizomes long, whitish, scaly, bearing rosettes of leaves. Leaves 10-20(-30) cm, suborbicular, shallowly sinuately lobed and irregularly denticulate, cordate at base, green but thinly floccose above when young, persistently whitish-lanate beneath; petiole sulcate on adaxial surface. Scapes 4-15 cm, elongating in fruit, axillary, with numerous purplish scales, floccose, appearing before the leaves, erect in bud, nodding after anthesis. Involucre c. 10 mm; bracts numerous, linear-lanceolate, obtuse, purplish and with a scarious margin. Achenes c. 3 mm. 2n = 60.}{\i\fs28  Damp places, particularly on clay soils. Almost throughout Europe.}{\fs28  All except Az Bl Cr Lu.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 90.             Petasites}{\fs28                Miller
\par (incl. }{\i\fs28 Nardosmia }{\fs28 Cass.)
\par }{\fs24 By I. Dingwall.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Dioecious perennial herbs. Leaves usually basal. Scapes with few to numerous scale-leaves and 1-many capitula, greatly elongating in fruit. Involucral bracts in 1-2 rows. Receptacle flat, without scales. Male capitula with numerous tubular, functionally male florets, usually with a peripheral ring of 1-5 (-10) sterile ligulate or tubular female florets; female capitula with numerous fertile ligulate or tubular female florets and 0-5(-8) sterile tubular florets in the centre. Achenes cylindrical, glabrous; pappus-hairs numerous in female, few in male florets, simple.
\par 
\par   The key is divided into two parts, one for vegetative and one for flowering material. Vegetative characters refer to mature leaves; cauline scale-leaves comprise those up to the lowest branch of the inflorescence.
\par 
\par   Literature: J. Toman, }{\i\fs28 Folia Geobot. Phytotax.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Praha}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  7}{\fs28 : 81-406 (1972).
\par 
\par KEY TO VEGETATIVE PLANTS
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 At least some leaves with lamina cuneate at base ..................... }{\b\fs28 11. sibiricus}{\fs28 
\par 1 Lamina cordate to somewhat truncate at base
\par 2 Mature leaves tomentose above ................................................ }{\b\fs28 10. doerfleri}{\fs28 
\par 2 Mature leaves \'b1 glabrous above
\par 3 Leaves glabrous beneath, ............................................................. }{\b\fs28 5. radiatus}{\fs28 
\par 3 Leaves tomentose or lanate beneath, or pubescent on the veins
\par 4 Leaves regularly lobed, with the lobes dentate
\par 5 Lamina without or with 1 lateral vein bordering the sinus .............. }{\b\fs28 1. albus}{\fs28 
\par 5 Lamina with 2-5 lateral veins bordering the sinus ...................... }{\b\fs28 2. hybridus}{\fs28 
\par 4 Leaves not with regular, dentate lobes
\par 6 Leaves reniform-cordate, not angular in outline
\par 7 Leaves regularly dentate .............................................................. }{\b\fs28 8. fragrans}{\fs28 
\par 7 Leaves irregularly dentate ......................................................... }{\b\fs28 9. japonicus}{\fs28 
\par 6 Leaves somewhat angular in outline
\par 8 Leaves coarsely dentate or lobed; apices of teeth or 
\par   lobes (8-)10-20 mm apart .............................................................. }{\b\fs28 7. frigidus}{\fs28 
\par 8 Leaves dentate; apices of teeth 2-6 (-10) mm apart
\par 
\par 186}
\par }