{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 narrowly elliptical, with a glabrous, scarious margin. {\i Dry, saline or alkaline soils. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E). ({\i C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. taurica} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 1837 (1803). Like {\b 13} but stock ascending to vertical, stout; lower cauline leaves 3-pinnatisect, the lobes up to 7 mm, linear to filiform; uppermost leaves entire or with a few basal lobes; capitula ovoid, in a wide, paniculate inflorescence; involucre 2·5-3·5 mm, the bracts narrowly elliptical to obovate. {\i Dry places. S. part of U.S.S.R.} Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. A. santonicum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 845 (1753) ({\i A. monogyna} Waldst.& Kit.). Stems woody below, glabrous, at least at base. Lower cauline leaves withering at or before anthesis, 2- to 3-pinnatisect, sometimes with small auricles, the lobes up to 8 mm, linear to subspathulate, subacute to acute; uppermost leaves entire or with 2 basal lobes. Capitula usually pedunculate, nodding or erect in a mostly wide paniculate inflorescence; involucral bracts closely imbricate, the outer sparsely pubescent to glabrous, the inner much longer, glabrous, oblong to elliptical.{\i  Seasonally wet saline or alkaline soils. • From E. Austria to W. Kazakhstan, and southwards to N.E. Greece.} Au Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (W, K,E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b santonicum}: Stems pubescent at anthesis (at least above). Branches erect to horizontal, often distally pendent. Lamina of lower cauline leaves (15-)20-35(-45) × (10-)15-20(-25) mm. Inner involucral bracts (0·9-)1·2-1·6(-1·8) mm wide. Florets (2-)3-6; corolla 2·2-2·8 mm, reddish or yellow.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except Austria and Czecho-slovakia.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b patens} (Neilr.) K. Persson, {\i Op. Bot.} ({\i Lund}) {\b 35}: 162 (1974) ({\i A. maritima} var. {\i patens} Neilr., {\i A. salina} subsp. {\i patens} (Neilr.) Sagorski): Stems subglabrous to glabrous at anthesis. Branches erect to erecto-patent, rarely distally pendent. Lamina of lower cauline leaves 10-20(-25) × 7-15 mm. Inner involucral bracts 0·9-1·4(-1·5) mm wide. Florets (1-)2-4(-5); corolla 1·9-2·4(-2·5) mm, usually reddish. 2n = 18.{\i  From E. Austria to W. Romania.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. nutans} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 1831 (1803) ({\i A. cretacea }Kotov), from S. E. Russia, seems to have smaller capitula and grows in different habitats (on chalky soils) but is otherwise very similar to {\b 15}. It may represent a distinct species but further living material needs to be studied.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. A. pauciflora} Weber in Stechm., {\i Artem.} 26 (1775). Caespitose dwarf shrub, with a thick, woody, branched stock; flowering stems 10-20(-25) cm, numerous, slender, glabrescent. Leaves very small, usually tomentose, withering at anthesis; lower 2-to 3-pinnatisect, petiolate, sometimes with very small auricles, the middle 1- to 2-pinnatisect, sessile, the uppermost simple; lobes 0·5-2 mm, linear to somewhat spathulate, subacute to obtuse. Capitula oblong, sessile or shortly pedunculate, erect, in a narrow paniculate inflorescence with erect, very slender branches; outer (female) florets absent. Involucre 2-2·5 mm; bracts oblong, the outer puberulent, the inner much longer than the outer, often recurved, glabrous, shiny, very narrow, with a distinct, narrow midrib and a scarious margin. Florets 2-3; corolla glabrous, glandular. {\i S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E)- ({\i S.C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. A. gracilescens} Krasch. & Iljin,{\i  Animadv. Syst. Herb. Univ. Tomsk.}{\b  1949 }({\b 1-2}): 2 (1949). Like {\b 16} but flowering stems 15-30 cm, grey-tomentose; leaf-lobes linear to filiform, acute to subacute; involucral bracts oblong to elliptical, the outer grey- to white-tomentose with distinct glands, the inner sparsely pubescent; florets 2-5.{\i  S.E. Russia.} Rs (?C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. A. lessingiana} Besser, {\i Linnaea}{\b  15}: 90 (1841). Greyish-tomentose, soon glabrescent, caespitose perennial with a thick woody stock; flowering stems 15-30(-40) cm, numerous. Leaves mostly sparsely pubescent to glabrous, sometimes greyish-arachnoid-tomentose. Lower leaves 1- (to 2-)pinnatisect, long-petiolate, not auriculate, the lobes 5-10 mm, linear to filiform, upper leaves sessile, uppermost with two lobes basally or simple. Capitula narrowly ovoid, sessile to subsessile, erect, in a narrow paniculate or almost racemose inflorescence with erect to erectopatent branches 1-2(-3) cm; outer (female) florets absent. Involucre 3-4 mm; bracts oblong to elliptical, the outer greyish-pubescent to tomentose, the inner distinctly longer than the outer, glabrous, broadly scarious. Corolla glabrous. {\i S.E. Russia} ({\i Obscij Syrt, S.E. of Kujbys Vev}). Rs (E). ({\i N.W. Kazakhstan}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. A. laciniata} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.} {\b 3}: 1843 (1803). Not aromatic, rhizomatous perennial 5-50(-90) cm, glabrous or sparsely pubescent above. Lower leaves 2-pinnatifid, not auriculate at base, the lobes c. 5 × 1 mm, often deeply toothed, glabrous or sparsely sericeous; petiole long. Upper leaves less divided, shortly petiolate. Capitula broadly campanulate, shortly pedunculate, recurved, in a shortly branched, more or less secund, racemose panicle. Bracts small, pinnatifid or simple, linear. Involucre 2-3 mm; bracts ovate-oblong, obtuse, glabrous; margins carious. Receptacle glabrous. Corolla yellow. 2n = 18.{\i  Isolated stations in E. Austria, S.E. Czechoslovakia and S.C. Russia.} Au Cz †Ge Rs (C). ({\i Temperate Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. A. armeniaca} Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 263 (1783). Perennial 40-100 cm. Rhizome creeping; stems solitary or few together. Lower leaves 2-pinnatisect, long-petiolate, the upper 1-pinnatisect, sessile; lobes 3-10 × 1-2(-4) mm, sparsely pubescent above, whitish-lanate beneath, serrate, acute. Capitula hemispherical, shortly pedunculate, usually nodding, in a narrow paniculate inflorescence. Bracts simple, usually shorter than the peduncle. Involucre 4-5 mm; bracts glabrous or the outer more or less pubescent, ovate, obtuse, herbaceous, with a wide scarious margin. Receptacle glabrous. Corolla yellowish; lobes sparsely ciliate; tube glandular.{\i  S.E. part of U.S.S.R., northwards to} c. 60° {\i N. and westwards to }c. 33°{\i  E.} Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. A. latifolia} Ledeb.{\i  Mém. Acad. Sci. Pétersb.}{\b  5}: 569 (1815). Glabrous, rarely slightly puberulent perennial 15-80 cm, with a branched, woody stock. Leaves 1- to 2-pinnatisect, the lower long-petiolate, the upper sessile; lobes 2-15 × 1-3 mm, glandular-punctate, acuminate, entire or with few large teeth; terminal segment usually 1·8-4·2 mm wide at base. Capitula hemispherical, nodding, shortly pedunculate, in a narrow paniculate inflorescence. Bracts simple, lanceolate. Involucre c. 3 mm; bracts glabrous, ovate, obtuse, herbaceous, with a wide scarious margin. Receptacle glabrous. Corolla glabrous, glandular.{\i  E. & C. Russia}. Rs (N, C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. A. pancicii} (Janka) Ronniger {\i Samen-Tauschliste Bot. Gart. Univ. Wien}{\b  1938}: 5 1938. Pubescent, not aromatic perennial 10-70 cm, with long rhizomes and numerous vegetative shoots. Leaves 1- to 2-pinnatisect, sericeous beneath, the lower long-petiolate, the upper auriculate; lobes of lower leaves linear-lanceolate, obtuse or subobtuse, of others linear, acuminate; terminal lobe usually more than 1·5 mm wide at base. Capitula nodding, shortly pedunculate, in a narrow paniculate, more or less secund inflorescence. Bracts sessile, auriculate, with short lobes. Involucre c. 3 mm; bracts broadly ovate, obtuse, with a wide scarious margin, densely pubescent to subglabrous. Receptacle glabrous. Corolla pubescent. 2n = 54. •{\i  S.C. Czechoslovakia and N.E. Austria; N.E. Jugoslavia}. Au Cz Ju.
\par

\par
182}
\par