{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 from the base. Branches usually erect. Leaves and stems grey-tomentose, becoming subglabrous. Lower leaves c. 10 mm, 2-pinnatisect, fleshy, with oblong-spathulate lobes 1-2 mm, long-petiolate, auriculate, usually in fascicles on the flowering stems; uppermost leaves simple, sessile. Capitula ovoid, sessile, erect, in a freely branched panicle. Outer (female) florets absent. Involucre 2·5-3 mm; bracts ovate, brown, arachnoid-tomentose, usually eglandular, the inner with a scarious margin. Receptacle hairy. Corolla glabrous.{\i  Dry places. • S. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. A. herba-alba} Asso, {\i Syn. Stirp. Arag.} 117 (1779). Like {\b 44} but branches usually patent; leaves 2-5 mm, 1- (to 2-) pinnatisect, the lower shortly petiolate, the others sessile; involucral bracts usually glandular.{\i  Dry places. C., E. & S. Spain, just extending into S. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. A. hololeuca} Bieb. ex Besser,{\i  Nouv. Mém. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  3}: 46 (1834). White-tomentose, caespitose perennial, with a stout, woody stock and numerous densely leafy non-flowering shoots. Stems (5-)20-35 cm, ascending. Leaves long-petiolate, 2-pinnatisect; lobes entire, obtuse or subacute. Capitula campanulate, in panicles. Most of the bracts entire. Involucre 3·5-4 mm, arachnoid-pubescent; bracts ovate, with a scarious margin. Receptacle glabrous. Corolla yellowish; tube glabrous and glandular. •{\i  S.C. Russia and E. Ukraine.} Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. A. rupestris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 847 (1753). Small shrub, with numerous procumbent, non-flowering shoots and ascending flowering stems 7-45 cm. Leaves 1- to 2-pinnatisect, sessile, glabrous or villous; lobes 2-6 × 0·5-1 mm, acute. Capitula hemispherical, nodding, in a racemose or paniculate inflorescence. Involucre 3-4 mm; outer bracts oblong, herbaceous, the inner lanceolate to ovate, with brown, scarious, long-ciliate margin. Receptacle hairy. Corolla glandular. 2n = 18.{\i  Baltic region and N.W. Russia; S. Ural and adjacent lowlands; formerly in C. Germany}. †Ge Rs (N, B, C, E) Su. ({\i Siberia and C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. A. annua} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 847 (1753). Glabrous annual 5-150 cm. Lower and middle leaves 3-pinnatisect, sessile, the basal segments remote from the next pair and smaller than them; lobes 1-5 × 0·5-1 mm, linear-lanceolate, acute, entire or with few teeth; upper leaves 1- to 2-pinnatisect. Capitula hemispherical, nodding, in a lax, paniculate or (in small plants) racemose inflorescence. Involucre 1·5-2 mm, shining; outer bracts lanceolate, with a narrow scarious margin; inner ovate, with a wide scarious margin. Receptacle glabrous. Corolla glabrous. 2n = 18. S.E.{\i  Europe; widely naturalized in C. & S. Europe.} Al Bu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu [Au Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. DRACUNCULUS Besser. Capitula with glabrous receptacle; outer florets female, with filiform perianth, the rest functionally male.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. A. dracunculus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 849 (1753). Aromatic, much-branched glabrous perennial 60-120 cm. Basal leaves 3-fid at apex, the rest 2-10 × 0·2-1 cm, linear to lanceolate, entire or weakly toothed. Capitula globose, pedunculate, recurved. Involucre 2-3 mm; outer bracts oblong-elliptical, almost entirely herbaceous; inner ovate, with a wide, scarious margin. Corolla yellowish. 2n = 18, 36, 90.{\i  S. & E. parts of U.S.S.R.; widely cultivated for flavouring }(tarragon) {\i and locally naturalized}. Rs (C, W, E) [Au Cz Ga Ge He Ju Rm Rs (?B, K)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. A. glauca} Pallas ex Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.} {\b 3}: 1831 (1803). More or less densely stellate-tomentose perennial (15-)25-70 cm, with creeping or ascending stock. Leaves 1-7 × 0·1-0·7 cm, entire linear to linear-lanceolate, rarely a few (particularly on non-flowering shoots) 1- to 2-ternatisect. Capitula globose, pedunculate, patent or recurved. Involucre 1·5-2 mm, glabrous; outer bracts lanceolate; inner ovate-oblong, with a wide scarious margin. Corolla yellowish.{\i  E. Russia} ({\i Baskirskaja A.S.S.R.}). Rs (C, E). ({\i Siberia, North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. A. trautvetterana} Besser, {\i Mém. Sav. Étr. Pétersb.}{\b  4}: 464 (1845). Small shrub. Stems up to 65 cm, appressed-pubescent, glabrescent. Leaves pinnatisect, densely appressed-pubescent, glabrescent, the basal 5-8 cm, petiolate; cauline sessile, with 3-7 segments 1·5-5 cm, narrowly linear, mucronate, flat, uppermost leaves simple. Capitula ovoid, sessile or subsessile on the panicle branches. Involucre c. 3 mm; outer bracts ovate, densely hairy; inner somewhat larger, ovate, broadly scarious, hairy in the middle. Corolla yellowish.{\i  S.E. Russia, S. Ukraine.} Rs (W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. A. salsoloides} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.} {\b 3}: 1832 (1803). Like {\b 51} but stems usually 20-30 cm, nearly or quite glabrous; leaves glabrous or sometimes with short hairs, glaucous; middle cauline palmately 3-fid; segments 1-2 cm, subacute; capitula long-pedunculate, in a narrow, sparingly branched inflorescence; involucre 4-5 mm, glabrous; outer bracts much shorter than inner.{\i  S.C. & S.E. Russia, S. Ukraine.} Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. A. tschernieviana} Besser,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  8}: 33 (1835) ({\i A. arenaria} DC.). Suffruticose. Stems (35-)50-75(-100) cm, more or less hairy, soon glabrescent, with long, patent branches above. Leaves 1- to 2-pinnatisect, pubescent at first glabrescent; lower cauline 2-5(-6) cm, petiolate, deciduous, the middle usually sessile, and the uppermost usually simple; lobes 5-15 mm, narrowly linear, mucronate. Capitula ovoid, shortly pedunculate, patent or recurved, in a diffuse panicle. Involucre 2·5-3·5 mm, glabrous; bracts elliptical, the inner longer than the outer, broadly scarious. Corolla purple or yellowish.{\i  S. part of U.S.S.R., E. Romania.} Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. A. commutata} Besser,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  8}: 70 (1835). Stems 35-60(-70) cm, herbaceous, glabrous or hairy. Lower leaves 4-8(-12) cm, 2-pinnatisect, glabrous or hairy beneath when young, long-petiolate; lobes 10-30 × 0·5-1·5 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, acute; middle cauline leaves 1-pinnatisect sessile, the uppermost simple. Capitula oblong or broadly ovoid, pedunculate, patent or recurved, usually in a narrow panicle. Involucre 2·5-3 mm, glabrous; outer bracts broadly ovate, acute, the inner elliptical, broadly scarious. Corolla purplish or brownish.{\i  E. Russia}. Rs (C, ?E). ({\i Siberia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. A. bargusinensis} Sprengel, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  3}: 493 (1826). Like {\b 54} but leaves usually glabrous, the basal 10-15 cm, with lobes 10-15 × 1-2 mm; capitula narrowly ovoid; involucre 4-5 mm bracts shiny, white-scarious at margin, the outer short, ovate the inner elliptical to lanceolate, obtuse.{\i  E. Russia} (S. Ural). Rs (C). ({\i Siberia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. A. campestris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 846 (1753). Scarcely aromatic. Stock stout, woody, branched, with numerous non-flowering shoots. Stems (10-)20-80(-150) cm, ascending or erect, usually brownish-red and glabrous. Leaves sericeous when young, often glabrescent; basal 2- to 3-pinnatisect, petiolate; middle cauline 1- to 2-pinnatisect, sessile, uppermost simple. Capitula ovoid to globose, usually shortly pedunculate, erect or erecto-patent rarely recurved. Involucre 1·5-3·5(-6) mm, glabrous or rarely hairy; bracts with a wide scarious margin, the outer ovate, the inner oblong. Corolla yellowish or reddish.{\i  Dry places. Most}
\par

\par
185}
\par