{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. sylvestris} Cass.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1821). Like {\b 1} but basal leaves 3-7 cm, with 5-9 shallow lobes, each lobe with usually 3 mucronate teeth, sparsely and shortly hairy on the veins beneath, thin; lower cauline leaves usually petiolate; stems often branched, with glandular arachnoid indumentum above; involucre 10-12 mm. 2n = 58.{\i  Woods and scrub. • S.E. Alps; mountains of W. & C. Jugoslavia.} Au It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 92.              Adenostyles}          Cass.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Leaves alternate. Inflorescence corymbose, with numerous small capitula. Florets all tubular and hermaphrodite. Involucral bracts 3-8, with few small supplementary bracts. Receptacle flat, without scales. Achenes subterete, 10-ribbed; pappus-hairs numerous, in 2-3 rows, denticulate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves white-floccose-lanate, at least beneath ...................... {\b 3. leucophylla} 
\par
1 Leaves green on both surfaces, glabrous to rather 
\par
  sparsely arachnoid-pubescent beneath
\par
2 Upper cauline leaves sessile and semi-amplexicaul, or
\par
  petiolate, with semi-amplexicaul auricles; teeth very 
\par
  unequal; ultimate veins forming an indistinct, lax 
\par
  reticulum beneath .......................................................................... {\b 1. alliariae}
\par
2 Upper cauline leaves usually petiolate, without semi-
\par
  amplexicaul auricles; teeth ± equal; ultimate veins 
\par
  forming a prominent, close reticulum beneath ................................ {\b 2. alpina}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. alliariae} (Gouan) A. Kerner, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  21}: 12 (1811) ({\i A. albifrons} Reichenb.). Stem 60-200 cm, erect, stout, branched, often floccose. Lower leaves 20-50 cm wide, triangular-cordate to reniform, usually somewhat arachnoid-pubescent beneath, with coarse, very unequal teeth; ultimate veins forming an indistinct, lax reticulum beneath; upper cauline leaves small, sessile and semi-amplexicaul or petiolate, with semi-amplexicaul auricles. Capitula cylindrical; involucral bracts oblong, acute, glabrous, usually purplish. Florets reddish-purple, rarely white. Achenes c. 3 mm. 2n = 38.{\i  Wood- and stream-margins, scrub and damp rocky slopes. • Mountains of Europe, from the Vosges and the Carpathians southwards to C. Spain, Corse and N. Greece}. Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alliariae}: Capitula with 3-4(-6) florets; involucre 4-6 mm.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b hybrida} (Vill.) Tutin,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  67}: 282 (1973) ({\i A. hybrida }(Vill.) DC., {\i A. pyrenaica} Lange,{\i  A. orientalis} Boiss.): Capitula with (10-)12-15(-18) florets; involucre 7-10 mm.{\i  From the Pyrenees and Romania southwards}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. alpina} (L.) Bluff & Fingerh.,{\i  Comp. Fl. Germ.}{\b  2}: 329 (1825) ({\i A. glabra }(Miller) DC.). Like {\b 1} but stem 30-50(-80) cm, branched only in the inflorescence; lower leaves usually 10-15 cm wide, reniform, usually glabrous or nearly so beneath, with almost equal teeth; ultimate veins forming a prominent, close reticulum beneath; upper cauline leaves usually petiolate, neither amplexicaul nor auriculate; involucral bracts 4-5 mm, widened towards the apex, obtuse. 2n = 38. {\i Wood- and stream-margins, scrub and damp rocky slopes. • Alps, Appennini, Jura, Corse.} Au Co Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alpina}: Stems and branches of the inflorescence floccose; capitula with 3-5 bracts and 3-6 florets; corolla-lobes 2·5-3·2 mm. {\i Throughout the range of the species, except Corse.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b briquetii} (Gamisans) Tutin,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  70}: 18 (1915) ({\i A. briquetii} Gamisans): Stems and branches of the inflorescence glabrous; capitula with 4-8(-10) bracts and (5-)6-12(-19) florets; corolla-lobes 0·7-1·7 mm.{\i  Corse.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. leucophylla} (Willd.) Reichenb.,{\i  Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 278 (1831) ({\i A. tomentosa} Schinz & Thell.). Like {\b 1} but stem usually c. 30 cm, whitish-floccose; lower leaves usually less than 10 cm wide, white-floccose-lanate, at least beneath, with nearly equal teeth; ultimate veins inconspicuous beneath; upper cauline leaves petiolate, without auricles; capitula with 12-15(-32) florets; involucral bracts 4-5 mm, oblanceolate to obovate, obtuse or subacute, floccose. 2n = 38. {\i Screes and rocky slopes. Alps, eastwards to} c. 11°{\i  E.} Au Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A}. × {\b intermedia} Hegetschw.,{\i  Fl. Schweiz} 812 (1840) ({\i A. alliariae} × {\i leucophylla}), occurs with the parents and sometimes in the absence of {\i A. leucophylla}. It is more or less intermediate between them and rather variable.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 93.          Arnica}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By I.K. Ferguson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbaceous, rhizomatous perennials. Leaves simple, usually mainly basal; cauline few, opposite. Florets yellow. Involucral bracts herbaceous, usually in 2 rows. Receptacle convex, hairy. Ligulate florets female; tubular florets hermaphrodite. Achenes ribbed; pappus of 1 row of simple hairs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: B. Maguire,{\i  Brittonia}{\b  4}: 386-510 (1943).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves 0·5-2 cm wide, narrowly oblanceolate to elliptic-
\par
  lanceolate; cauline usually scattered on stem ......................... {\b 1. angustifolia}
\par
Leaves 2-4 cm wide, obovate or elliptical to oblanceolate;
\par
  cauline usually crowded near base of stem .................................. {\b 2. montana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. angustifolia} Vahl in Hornem.,{\i  Fl. Dan.}{\b  9}({\b 26}): 5 (1816) ({\i A. alpina} (L.) Olin, non Salisb.). Stems 10-45 cm. Basal leaves 5-15 × 0·5-2 cm, narrowly or rarely broadly oblanceolate to elliptic-lanceolate, entire, pubescent or glandular-pubescent; cauline leaves (0-)1-3(-5) pairs, smaller. Capitula solitary (seldom 3), 3·5-4·5 cm in diameter; peduncles usually without bracts, densely villous and with glandular hairs. Involucral bracts 10-16 × 1·5-2·5 mm, lanceolate. Ligules 15-25(-30) × (4-)5-7 mm, with 2-3 teeth 2-4 mm. Achenes 5-7 mm; pappus about as long as the corolla.{\i  Meadows; calcicole. Arctic Europe.} Fe No Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alpina} (L.) I. K. Ferguson, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  67}: 282 (1973) ({\i A. montana} var.{\i  alpina} L.): Stems 10-25(-30) cm. Cauline leaves usually 1-2 pairs. Peduncle with short glandular hairs obscured by long eglandular hairs. 2n = 76.{\i  N. Fennoscandia and Svalbard}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b iljinii} (Maguire) I. K. Ferguson,{\i  loc. cit.} (1973) ({\i A. alpina} subsp.{\i  iljinii} Maguire,{\i  A. iljinii} (Maguire) Iljin): Stems 15-45 cm. Cauline leaves usually 3 pairs. Peduncle with long glandular hairs intermixed with eglandular hairs. 2n = 56.{\i  N.E. Russia.} ({\i N. Siberia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp.{\i  angustifolia} occurs in Greenland and arctic America.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. montana} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 884 (1753). Stems (15-)25-60 cm. Basal and lower cauline leaves 6-17 × (1·2-)2-4(-5) cm, obovate or elliptical to oblanceolate, densely glandular-pubescent or -puberulent on the upper surface. Capitula 1-3(-7); peduncles with usually 2 alternate, linear-lanceolate bracts, and with glandular and long eglandular hairs. Involucral bracts (12-)14-17 × 2-3 mm, lanceolate. Ligules 18-25(-30) × (4-)5-8 mm, with 2-3 teeth 2-3 mm. Achenes 6·5-9 mm; pappus about as long as the corolla. 2n = 38.{\i  Meadows, pastures and heaths, mainly in the mountains; somewhat calcifuge. • From S. Norway and Latvia southwards to S. Portugal, N. Appennini and S. Carpathians.} Au Be Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B. C. W) su.
\par

\par

\par
189}
\par