{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 111 Leaves more than 10 mm; inflorescence ovoid ..... ({\b 25-27}). {\b verum} group
\par 
111 Leaves less than 10 mm; inflorescence narrowly cylindrical
\par 
112 Leaves glabrous beneath; margin slightly recurved ........ {\b 28. thymifolium}
\par 
112 Leaves densely hairy beneath; margin recurved to the
\par 
     midrib ......................................................................................... {\b 29. kerneri}
\par 
100 Stock or rhizome slender, scarcely woody, often with
\par 
    filiform stolons; stems often less than 30 cm, weak,
\par 
    ascending; partial inflorescences corymbiform, with
\par 
    ultimate branches usually ebracteate and not (or only
\par 
    slightly) divaricate after anthesis, or reduced and 
\par 
    few-flowered (Sect.{\i  Leptogalium})
\par 
113 Leaves glabrous, smooth, shining, blackish-brown when
\par 
    dry; midrib not distinct, often without hyaline apex;
\par 
    low, caespitose alpine plants
\par 
114 Leaves linear, with a long hyaline apex .......................... {\b 126. cespitosum}
\par 
114 Leaves ± oblanceolate, with a short, cartilaginous apex
\par 
115 Inflorescences small but many-flowered, bracteate;
\par 
    corolla yellowish-white ..................................... ({\b 119-123}). {\b baldense} group
\par 
115 Inflorescences few-flowered, leafy; corolla greenish 
\par 
    or yellowish-brown .............................................................. {\b 124. demissum}
\par 
113 Leaves usually ± hairy, or at least the margin scabrid
\par 
    with papilliform teeth or cilia, greenish or brownish
\par 
    when dry, with distinct mid-vein and hyaline apex
\par 
116 Corolla-lobes apiculate; flowers usually red or yellow
\par 
117 Leaves mostly 6 in a whorl, usually 5-7 times as long
\par 
    as wide; stems retrorsely aculeolate ......................................... {\b 86. corsicum}
\par 
117 Leaves mostly 7-8 in a whorl, often 7-10 times as 
\par 
    long as wide; stems glabrous or occasionally hairy
\par 
118 Corolla usually less than 2 mm in diameter, usually yellow or
\par 
     dark purple; awn of corolla-lobe (1/3)-1/2-2/3 as long as lobe
\par 
119 Inflorescence broadly ovoid to pyramidal, with long 
\par 
    branches; flowers often yellow; pedicels commonly 
\par 
    less than 1·5 mm ..................................................................... {\b 87. obliquum}
\par 
119 Inflorescence ovoid-oblong, with short branches;
\par 
    flowers dark purple; pedicels commonly more than 1·5 mm ..... {\b 88. rubrum}
\par 
118 Corolla c. 2 mm or more in diameter, bright purple,
\par 
    pink or whitish; awn of corolla-lobe 1/10-1/2 as long as lobe
\par 
120 Plants more than 20 cm; inflorescence ovoid; leaves
\par 
    narrowly oblanceolate .................................................... {\b 89}. × {\b centroniae}
\par 
120 Plants less than 20 cm; inflorescence corymbose;
\par 
    leaves broadly oblanceolate .......................................... {\b 90}. × {\b carmineum}
\par 
116 Corolla-lobes acute, not apiculate; flowers often white
\par 
121 Leaf-margin antrorsely ciliolate; leaves thin,
\par 
    blackish when dry; stem glabrous, smooth; fruit 
\par 
    acutely papillose ....................................................................... {\b 118. saxatile}
\par 
121 Plants not with the above combination of characters
\par 
122 Corolla purple, or pinkish; leaves mostly in whorls 
\par 
    of up to 6, scarcely more than 6 times as long as wide
\par 
123 Pedicels less than 0·5 mm; partial inflorescences 
\par 
    dense; corolla pinkish ............................................................... {\b 93. rosellum}
\par 
123 Pedicels more than 0·5 mm; partial inflorescences 
\par 
    lax; corolla bright purple ...................................................... {\b 91. balearicum}
\par 
122 Corolla white, rarely lightly suffused with yellow or
\par 
    red; leaves often in whorls of more than 6, usually 
\par 
    more than 6 times as long as wide
\par 
124 Hyaline apex of leaf usually more than 0·5 mm, about
\par 
    equalling width of leaf; leaves coriaceous, often shining,
\par 
    linear-lanceolate, often more than 10 times as long as wide
\par 
125 Leaves linear-lanceolate, hairy, usually 7-8 times as
\par 
    long as wide, the margin ± revolute ................................. {\b 116. brockmannii}
\par 
125 Leaves linear to acicular, more than 10 times as long
\par 
    as wide, the margin flat
\par 
126 Mid-vein occupying 1/3-1/2 width of leaf, strongly 
\par 
    thickened ................................................................................ {\b 115. pusillum}
\par 
126 Mid-vein occupying c. 1/4 width of leaf, not strongly
\par 
    thickened ................................................................................ {\b 117. idubedae}
\par 
124 Hyaline apex of leaf usually less than 0·5 mm,
\par 
    shorter than width of leaf; leaves often less than
\par 
    10 times as long as wide
\par 
127 Pedicels deflexed in fruit ........................................ {\b 114. megalospermum}
\par 
127 Pedicels straight in fruit, patent
\par 
128 Fruit ± acutely papillose
\par 
129 Pedicels mostly more than 1 mm; plant darkening on drying
\par 
130 Inflorescence ± corymbose; partial inflorescences lax;
\par 
    basal leaves soon deciduous
\par 
131 Leaf-margin smooth .......................................................... {\b 108. sudeticum}
\par 
131 Leaf-margin usually ± scabrid, ciliate or hairy ............. {\b 112. anisophyllon}
\par 
130 Inflorescence ± pyramidal; partial inflorescences 
\par 
    somewhat crowded; basal leaves persistent
\par 
132 Middle internodes 2-3½ times as long as leaves;
\par 
    leaves mostly 6½-8½ times as long as wide ............................. {\b 109. sterneri}
\par 
132 Middle internodes 1½-2½ times as long as leaves;
\par 
    leaves mostly 5-7 times as long as wide ................................ {\b 110. normanii}
\par 
129 Pedicels mostly less than 1 mm; plant remaining green
\par 
    on drying
\par 
133 Stem often more than 15 cm, somewhat stout, more than
\par 
    0·7 mm in diameter ......................................................... {\b 104. valdepilosum}
\par 
133 Stem scarcely more than 20 cm, very slender, less 
\par 
    than 0·6 mm in diameter
\par 
134 Middle internodes 4-6 cm .................................................. {\b 105. suecicum}
\par 
134 Middle internodes less than 4 cm 
\par 
135 Leaves c. 9 in a whorl ..................................................... {\b 106. oelandicum} 
\par 
135 Leaves 6-7 in a whorl ..................................................... {\b 107. cracoviense}
\par 
128 Fruit ± smooth or obtusely papillose
\par 
136 Distal part of the leaf-margin with only patent or
\par 
    retrorsely directed papilliform teeth or cilia
\par 
137 Inflorescence elongate-ovoid-pyramidal, mostly more
\par 
    than twice as long as wide
\par 
138 Laxly caespitose, with few stems; pedicels more than 1 mm
\par 
    ................................................................................................. {\b 103. pumilum}
\par 
138 Rather densely caespitose, with many stems; pedicels 
\par 
    often not more than 1 mm 
\par 
139 Leaves usually 11-18 mm ............................................ {\b 104. valdepilosum} 
\par 
139 Leaves usually 6-10 mm ....................................................... {\b 102. fleurotii}
\par 
137 Inflorescence broadly ovoid to corymbose, mostly less
\par 
    than twice as long as wide
\par 
140 Stems reddish at base; leaves often linear-lanceolate
\par 
    and more than 12 times as long as wide 
\par 
141 Pedicels not more than 1·1 mm; partial inflorescences
\par 
    rather dense ..................................................................... {\b 104. valdepilosum}
\par 

\par 
18}
\par