{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1999\mo1\dy19\hr14\min48}{\revtim\yr1999\mo1\dy19\hr14\min49}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1059}{\nofchars6041}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 23. A. insipida}{\fs28  Vill.,}{\i\fs28  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.}{\fs28  32 (1779). Like }{\b\fs28 22}{\fs28  but with the terminal lobe of the leaves usually less than 1 mm wide at base and the inflorescence laxer, with fewer capitula. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Formerly in S.W. Alps}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 N.W. of Gap}{\fs28 )- \'86Ga
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 24. A. oelandica}{\fs28  (Besser) Komarov., }{\i\fs28 Mat. Hist. Fl. Veg. USSR}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 126 (1946). Like }{\b\fs28 22}{\fs28  but leaves more sericeous and often glabrescent beneath; terminal lobe usually 1-1\'b75 mm wide at base; corolla glabrous. 2n = 54. }{\i\fs28 Limestone pavement. S.E. Sweden}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 \'d6land}{\fs28 ). Su.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 25. A. atrata}{\fs28  Lam.,}{\i\fs28  Encycl. M\'e9th. Bot.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 263 (1783). More or less pubescent, not aromatic perennial 10-40 cm. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnatifid, glandular-punctate, petiolate, not auriculate; segments making a right angle with the rhachis. Capitula hemispherical, shortly pedunculate, recurved, in a raceme or narrow panicle. Bracts usually linear and shorter than the capitula. Involucre 3\'b75-4 mm; bracts obtuse, somewhat pubescent on the back, very broadly scarious, the outer oblong, the inner ovate. Receptacle glabrous. Corolla yellow; lobes patent-pubescent; tube glabrous and glandular. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Rocks and dry pastures.  \bullet  W. & S. Alps, very local}{\fs28 . Ga It Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 26. A. norvegica}{\fs28  Fries,}{\i\fs28  Nov. Fl. Suec.}{\fs28  56 (1817). Pubescent, caespitose perennial (3-)5-20(-30) cm. Leaves mostly basal, 2-pinnate or the lowest almost digitate, petiolate; lobes 2-15 \'d7 1-2 mm, acute or subobtuse, entire, or with few large teeth; upper leaves 1- to 2-pinnate, sessile. Capitula 1-10, c. 10 mm across, hemispherical, long-pedunculate, nodding. Involucre 8-9 mm; bracts ovate, obtuse, with a wide, brown scarious margin. Receptacle glabrous. Corolla yellow, villous, eglandular. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Sandy, gravelly or dry, peaty places in the mountains. N.W. Scotland; C. Norway; N. Ural.}{\fs28  Br No Rs (N).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 27. A. abrotanum}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  845 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 A. paniculata}{\fs28  Lam.). Strongly aromatic shrub c. 100 cm. Leaves 1- to 3-pinnatifid, with filiform, glandular-punctuate lobes, glabrous above and greyish-pubescent beneath; petioles short, not auriculate. Capitula 3-4 \'d7 3-4 mm, globose, shortly pedunculate, in the axils of simple, leaflike bracts, 1-3 times as long as the capitula. Inner involucral bracts ovate. Receptacle glabrous. Capitula with 25-30 florets; corolla yellowish. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Widely cultivated for ornament and flavouring, and naturalized in E., S. & S.C. Europe.}{\fs28  [Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (N, C, W, E).] (}{\i\fs28 Native country uncertain}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 28. A. molinieri}{\fs28  Qu\'e9zel, Barbero & R. Loisel,}{\i\fs28  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b\fs28 113}{\fs28 : 524 (1966). Like }{\b\fs28 27}{\fs28  but not more than 60 cm; capitula 2\'b75 \'d7 2-2\'b75 mm, ovoid, very densely crowded in spicate inflorescences; inner involucral bracts lanceolate-spathulate; capitula with 10-15 florets. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S. France}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 near Flassans, Var}{\fs28 ). *Ga.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 29. A. santolinifolia}{\fs28  Turcz. ex Krasch. in Krylov,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Zap. Sibir.}{\b\fs28  11}{\fs28 : 2791 (1949). Caespitose, suffruticose perennial 1245(-80) cm. Lower leaves 3-pinnatisect, the lowest segments forming pinnatisect auricles; those in the inflorescence sessile, simple and entire or 1- to 2-pinnatisect; lobes 1-4 \'d7 c. 0\'b75 mm, glabrous or sparsely pubescent above, thinly arachnoid-pubescent beneath, glandular-punctate, acute, entire or with few large teeth. Capitula hemispherical, nodding, with short, slender peduncles, in a leafy, paniculate inflorescence. Bracts simple, linear, usually longer than the peduncle. Involucre c. 2\'b75 mm; bracts thinly arachnoid-pubescent, ovate, obtuse, herbaceous, with a wide scarious margin. Receptacle glabrous. Corolla glabrous, glandular.}{\i\fs28  S. Ural.}{\fs28  Rs (C, ?E). (}{\i\fs28 Siberia and C. Asia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 30. A. pontica}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  847 (1753). Somewhat aromatic, rhizomatous perennial 40-80 cm, greyish-tomentose, glabrescent below. Leaves 3-4 cm, 1- to 2-pinnatifid, sessile, auriculate at base, densely pubescent on both surfaces; lobes up to 0\'b75 mm wide, linear-lanceolate, mucronate. Capitula ovoid, pedunculate, recurved, in a narrow racemose panicle. Bracts simple or 1-pinnatifid, about as long as the capitula. Involucre c. 2\'b75 mm; bracts ovate-oblong, broadly scarious, tomentose in the middle, obtuse. Receptacle glabrous. Corolla yellow, with glabrous lobes. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  C. & E. Europe; casual and locally naturalized elsewhere}{\fs28 . Au Bu Cz Ge Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) [Ga He It].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 31. A. austriaca}{\fs28  Jacq., }{\i\fs28 Fl. Austr.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 61 (1773). Rhizomatous perennial, somewhat woody at base. Stems greyish-hairy, often tinged with red, freely branched above, with erecto-patent branches. Leaves 2-pinnatifid, greyish above, white beneath, somewhat sericeous; lobes 5-12 \'d7 c. 0\'b75 mm, linear, obtuse; lower leaves long-petiolate, the petioles auriculate at base; upper leaves sessile. Capitula broadly ovoid, shortly pedunculate, recurved, crowded on the branches of a spreading panicle. Bracts simple or the lower pinnatisect. Involucre c. 2 mm; bracts obtuse, shortly patent-pubescent on the outside, the outer linear, herbaceous, the inner oblong or ovate-oblong, nearly entirely scarious, reddish-grey. Receptacle glabrous. Corolla reddish yellow, with densely patent-pubescent lobes. 2n = 16.}{\i\fs28  E. & E.C. Europe.}{\fs28  Au Bu Cz Hu Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) [Ga Ge].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 32. A. chamaemelifolia}{\fs28  Vill.,}{\i\fs28  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.}{\fs28  32 (1779). Almost or quite glabrous, aromatic perennial (15-)30-50 cm, somewhat woody at base. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnatifid, not glandular-punctate, the cauline sessile, with the lowest segments amplexicaul. Capitula hemispherical, shortly pedunculate, recurved, crowded in a narrow panicle. Lower bracts large, leaflike, upper small and simple. Involucre 2\'b75-3 mm; bracts obtuse, glabrous or slightly hairy, the outer linear, herbaceous, the inner oblong, nearly entirely scarious. Receptacle glabrous or hairy. Corolla yellow, glabrous, glandular.}{\i\fs28  Mountain rocks. S.W. Alps, Pyrenees, Cordillera Cant\'e1brica; N.W. Bulgaria.}{\fs28  Bu Ga Hs It.
\par 
\par   (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 chamaemelifolia}{\fs28 : Stems usually 30-50 cm; inflorescence with numerous, sometimes short branches; receptacle glabrous. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Throughout most of the range of the species.}{\fs28 
\par   (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 cantabrica}{\fs28  La\'ednz, }{\i\fs28 Bol. Inst. Estud. Astur.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Supl. Ci.}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 10}{\fs28 : 207 (1964): Stems usually less than 30 cm; inflorescence sparingly branched; receptacle hairy.}{\i\fs28  N.W. Spain}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Pe\'f1a Ubi\'f1a, S. of Oviedo}{\fs28 ).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 33. A. macrantha}{\fs28  Ledeb., }{\i\fs28 M\'e9m. Acad. Sci. P\'e9tersb}{\fs28 . }{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28 : 573 (1815). Perennial 20-100 cm. Rhizome creeping; stems solitary or few together. Leaves 2-pinnatisect, all but the lowest sessile, with the basal segments more or less clasping the stem; lobes 2-10 \'d7 0\'b75-1\'b75 mm, sparsely pubescent above, grey-tomentose beneath. Capitula hemispherical, shortly pedunculate, nodding, in a narrow, paniculate inflorescence. Lower bracts leaf-like, the upper simple. Involucre 3\'b75-4\'b75 mm, arachnoid-tomentose; outer bracts oblong-lanceolate, herbaceous; inner broadly ovate, obtuse, with a wide, brownish, scarious margin. Receptacle glabrous. Corolla yellowish; lobes arachnoid-tomentose beneath; tube glandular but glabrous.}{\i\fs28  E. Russia.}{\fs28  Rs (C, E). (}{\i\fs28 Siberia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 34. A. umbelliformis}{\fs28  Lam.,}{\i\fs28  Encycl. M\'e9th. Bot.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 262 (1783) (}{\i\fs28 A. mutellina}{\fs28  Vill., non S. G. Gmelin,}{\i\fs28  A. laxa}{\fs28  Fritsch). Caespitose, whitish-sericeous, aromatic perennial up to 25 cm. Leaves petiolate, palmately divided, the segments twice 3-fid (simple in the uppermost leaves); lobes linear, subacute. Capitula 3-5 mm across, ovoid, more or less erect, the lower pedunculate, distant,
\par 
\par 183}
\par }