{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 4 Persistently grey- to white-tomentose; leaves persistent
\par
  at anthesis; branches and capitula always erect ........................ {\b 11. vallesiaca}
\par
4 Stems towards fruiting stage more or less glabrescent,
\par
  often in patches; leaves withering at anthesis; branches
\par
  sometimes erecto-patent with patent to nodding capitula .......... {\b 12. lerchiana}
\par
2 Stem and leaves at anthesis almost glabrous to sparsely
\par
  pubescent
\par
5 Stock stout and woody, vertical to ascending
\par
6 Capitula oblong to narrowly ellipsoid; involucral bracts
\par
  oblong with a basally prominent, linear midrib; leaves
\par
  2-pinnatisect, with remote linear lobes ................................. {\b 10. caerulescens}
\par
6 Capitula ovoid; involucral bracts narrowly elliptical to
\par
  obovate with a linear to slightly spathulate midrib;
\par
  leaves 3-pinnatisect with crowded linear to filiform lobes ............ {\b 14. taurica}
\par
5 Stock ± slender, horizontal to slightly ascending
\par
7 Capitula ellipsoid to broadly ovoid; outer bracts over-lapping 
\par
  1/3-1/2 of the inner; inner bracts sparsely to moderately 
\par
  pubescent ...................................................................................... {\b 9. maritima}
\par
7 Capitula oblong to narrowly ellipsoid; outer bracts 
\par
  much shorter than the inner; inner bracts glabrescent
\par
8 Leaf-lobes narrowly linear; panicle always narrow, with
\par
  erect branches and sessile to subsessile capitula ........................... {\b 13. nitrosa}
\par
8 Leaf-lobes linear to slightly spathulate; panicle 
\par
  usually wide, with ascending to almost horizontal 
\par
  branches and more or less pedunculate capitula .................... {\b 15. santonicum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. maritima} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 846 (1753) (incl.{\i  A. salina} Willd.). Grey- to white-tomentose, rarely glabrescent, strongly aromatic perennial with a horizontal to slightly ascending, usually rather slender stock; flowering stems 5-60 cm, often woody below. Lower cauline leaves withering at or soon after anthesis, 2- to 3-pinnatisect, petiolate, often with small entire to moderately segmented auricles, the lobes 3-15 × 0·4-0·9(-1·2) mm, spathulate to linear, subacute to obtuse; upper leaves sessile, the uppermost undivided or with a few lobes basally. Capitula ellipsoid to broadly ovoid, subsessile to shortly pedunculate, nodding or erect. Involucre 3-6 mm; bracts somewhat patent, the outer tomentose, the inner somewhat longer than the outer, pubescent, elliptical, with a usually spathulate midrib region and a glabrous, scarious margin.{\i  Coasts of W. & N. Europe, from S.W. France to S.E. Norway and Estonia; inland on saline soils in C. Germany.} Be Br Da Ga Ge Hb Ho No Rs (B) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b maritima}: Usually with a moderate number of rather long non-flowering shoots. Stems usually 20-60 cm, ascending, moderately to densely tomentose, sometimes glabrescent, woody at base. Inflorescence mostly wide, paniculate, the branches usually 5-10 cm. Lamina of lower cauline leaves 10-45 × 7-30 mm. Corolla 2·5-3·2 mm; style-branches 0·6-0·9 mm. 2n = 36, 54 (50-56).{\i  Throughout the range of the species except the extreme east}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b humifusa} (Fries ex Hartman) K. Persson, {\i Op. Bot.} ({\i Lund}){\b  35}: 150 (1974): Many short non-flowering shoots. Stems usually 5-25 cm, decumbent to ascending, densely tomentose, scarcely woody at base. Inflorescence mostly narrow, racemose, often simple; branches usually not exceeding 3 cm. Lamina of lower cauline leaves 5-18 × 4-13 mm. Corolla 2·4-2·8(-3) mm; style-branches 0·4-0·7 mm.{\i  Baltic islands }({\i Öland, Gotland, Saarema}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. caerulescens} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 848 (1753). Like {\b 9} but stock stout and woody; flowering stems woody for most of their length, sparsely pubescent, greyish-green, or glabrescent at anthesis; leaves of the flowering stems entire, lanceolate to linear, or sparsely pinnatifid to pinnatisect; branches and capitula mostly erect; involucre 2·5-5 mm, narrow, the inner bracts much longer than the outer, scarious except for the basally prominent, linear midrib. {\i W. & C. Mediterranean region, S.W. Portugal.} Al Bl Co Ga Hs It Ju Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b caerulescens}: Flowering stems 20-60 cm. Lower cauline leaves entire to sparsely pinnatifid or 1- to 2-pinnatisect with primary segments usually 5-15 mm; ultimate segments of pinnatisect leaves elongate, generally more than 0·7 mm wide. Branches and capitula erect to erecto-patent or pendent. Involucre 3-5 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Salt-marshes and maritime cliffs; inland on calcareous soils in C. Italy. S. Portugal and S.W. Spain; Mediterranean region from Corse to Albania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b gallica} (Willd.) K. Persson, {\i Op. Bot.} ({\i Lund}) {\b 35}: 173 (1974) ({\i A. gallica} Willd.): Flowering stems 15-40 cm. Lower cauline leaves 2-pinnatisect with primary segments usually 3-6 mm; ultimate segments very short, 0·4-0·7 mm wide. Branches and capitula erect to erecto-patent, very rarely pendent. Involucre 2·5-4 mm. 2n = 18. {\i Salt-marshes. From E. Spain to Corse and Sardegna}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. vallesiaca} All., {\i Auct. Syn. Stirp. Horti Taur.}{\b  16} (1773). Densely grey- to white-tomentose, strongly aromatic perennial with an ascending to vertical, much branched, very stout and woody stock and numerous short non-flowering shoots; flowering stems (10-)20-40(-50) cm, woody below. Lower cauline leaves persistent at anthesis, 3- to 4-pinnatisect, petiolate or subsessile with often large, pinnatisect auricles, the lobes 1-5 × 0·3-0·5 mm, linear, subacute to acute; upper leaves sessile, uppermost with pinnatisect lobes basally, seldom entire. Capitula oblong to ellipsoid, subsessile to sessile, erect, in a narrow paniculate inflorescence with erect branches 0·5-6 cm. Involucre 3-4(-5) mm; bracts slightly patent, the outer tomentose, the inner often much longer than the outer, pubescent at least in the upper half, elliptical, with a linear to slightly spathulate midrib region and a glabrous, scarious margin abruptly narrowing towards the base. 2n = 36. {\i Dry, calcareous hillsides} (500-1000 {\i m}). {\i S.W. Switzerland, S.E. France and N.W. Italy}. Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. lerchiana} Weber in Stechm., {\i Artem.} 24 (1775). Like {\b 11} but glabrescent and the leaves withering at anthesis; leaf-lobes often longer and narrower, 2-6 × 0·2-0·4(-0·5) mm, branches often longer, sometimes erecto-patent, with patent to nodding capitula; involucral bracts oblong to narrowly elliptical with narrowly linear midrib.{\i  Seashores and dry saline or alkaline soils. S.E. Europe, from E. Bulgaria to W. Kazakhstan.} Bu Rm Rs (K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. dzevanovskyi} Leonova in Wulf, {\i Fl. Kryma}{\b  3}({\b 3}): 222 (1969), described as nearly related to {\b 12} but distinguished by its denser and more persistent foliage and pubescence, taller stature, wider leaf-lobes and larger capitula, is endemic to Krym, on calcareous cliffs near the sea. It is perhaps only a subspecies of {\b 12}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 13. A. nitrosa} Weber in Stechm., {\i Artem.} 24 (1775). Greyish tomentose to glabrescent woody perennial with a horizontal to ascending, rather slender stock and few, rather long non-flowering shoots; flowering stems 30-50(-60) cm, rigid, glabrous or nearly so at anthesis. Lower cauline leaves withering at anthesis, 2-pinnatisect, petiolate, the lobes 3-5 mm, narrowly linear, subacute to acute; upper leaves sessile, uppermost undivided, spathulate to linear. Capitula oblong to ellipsoid, subsessile to sessile, often glomerate, erect, in a narrow paniculate inflorescence with erect branches. Involucre 3-4 mm; bracts slightly patent, the outer greyish-tomentose to sparsely pubescent, the inner distinctly longer than the outer, glabrescent,
\par

\par
181}
\par