{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 the upper nearly sessile in a usually simple, rather lax raceme; lower bracts like the cauline leaves, the upper mostly simple. Involucral bracts villous-sericeous, oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, the outer with a scarious, the inner with a brown margin. Receptacle shortly and sometimes sparsely hairy. Florets 10-20, the female more numerous than the hermaphrodite; corolla yellowish, the lobes slightly hairy. Achenes with sessile glands and some hairs. 2n = 34. {\i Mountain rocks, moraines and river-gravels. • Alps, N. Appennini.} Au Ga Ge He ?Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. gabriellae} Br.-Bl., {\i Trav. Soc. Pharm. Montpellier}{\b  4}: 233 (1945), from the E. Pyrenees, is like {\b 34} but has a more dense, silvery indumentum, leaves with wider and more obtuse segments, capitula fewer and more crowded in a terminal corymb, and glabrous achenes. It has 2n = 34 and is perhaps best regarded as a subspecies of {\b 34}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The identity of plants from the C. Pyrenees and Sierra Nevada which have been referred to {\b 34}, is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. A. nitida} Bertol.,{\i  Mant. Pl. Fl. Alp. Apuan.} 53 (1832). Like {\b 34} but up to 40 cm, with a densely appressed silvery indumentum; leaf-lobes linear, acute; largest capitula at least 6 mm across, hemispherical, nodding when mature; involucral bracts ovate, sericeous; receptacle densely hairy; florets more than 20, the female fewer than the hermaphrodite; corolla-lobes densely hairy; achenes glabrous. 2n = 54.{\i  Rock-crevices,} 1200-2400{\i  m; calcicole. • S.E. Alps; Alpi Apuane.} Au It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. A. eriantha} Ten., {\i Sem. 1830 Coll. Horti Bot. Neap.} 14 (1831) ({\i A. petrosa} Fritsch). Caespitose, sericeous-tomentose perennial up to 25 cm. Basal leaves petiolate, usually 2-ternate, with linear-lanceolate, acute lobes; upper cauline more or less sessile, digitate to pinnatifid, rarely simple. Capitula up to 7 mm across, hemispherical, usually in a simple, rather dense raceme, the lower shortly pedunculate, nodding when mature, the upper nearly sessile; lower bracts like the cauline leaves, the upper often simple. Involucral bracts 3-4·5 mm, ovate to oblanceolate, obtuse, largely scarious, the inner with a brown margin. Receptacle glabrous. Florets 25-50; corolla densely hairy, especially above. Achenes hairy. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain rocks; calcifuge in the west. • Pyrenees, S.W. Alps, C. Appennini, mountains of the Balkan peninsula, Carpathians.} Al Bu Cz Ga Gr Hs It Ju Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. A. genipi} Weber in Stechm.,{\i  Artem. }17 (1775) ({\i A. spicata }Wulfen). Like {\b 36} but less densely greyish-hairy; cauline leaves pinnately lobed or deeply toothed; inflorescence dense, nodding before anthesis; capitula not more than 4·5 mm across, erect; florets 10-15; corolla nearly glabrous. 2n = 18.{\i  Rocks and screes above} 2000{\i  m. Alps}. Au Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A completely glabrous variant,{\b  A. nivalis} Br.-Bl.,{\i  Verh. Schweiz. Naturf. Ges.} {\b 1919}: 117 (1920), occurs on a few mountaintops in S.W. Switzerland.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. A. glacialis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1187 (1763). Densely caespitose, silvery-sericeous perennial up to 18 cm. Leaves petiolate, 5-partite, with 3-fid segments, the lobes narrowly linear, subobtuse; upper cauline less divided. Capitula 4-7 mm across, broadly hemispherical, mostly crowded in a terminal corymb. Involucral bracts villous-sericeous, ovate, obtuse, with a green centre and brown scarious margin. Receptacle densely hairy. Florets 25-50, the female 10 or fewer; corolla bright yellow, glabrous. Achenes glabrous. 2n = 16.{\i  Schistose rocks and screes,} 2000-3100{\i  m. • S.W.Alps.} Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. A. granatensis} Boiss.,{\i  Biblioth. Univ. Genève} ser. 2, {\b 13}: 409 (1838). Like {\b 38} but capitula often solitary, sometimes larger, with up to 80 florets; involucral bracts ovate-lanceolate, acute, the centre often reddish; receptacle glabrous; corolla dark purplish, the lobes with dense short hairs.{\i  Stony places above} 2500{\i  m. • S. Spain }({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. A. pedemontana} Balbis,{\i  Horti Acad. Taur. Stirp.}{\b  1}: 19 (1810) ( {\i A. lanata} Willd., non Lam.,{\i  A. caucasica} auct., ?an Willd., {\i A. assoana }Willk.). Caespitose, whitish-lanate perennial up to 30 cm; non-flowering shoots often rooting at the nodes. Leaves petiolate, twice 3-fid to pinnatifid, with linear, acute lobes; upper cauline pinnately lobed, subsessile. Capitula 4-6 mm across, hemispherical, strongly recurved when mature, the lower shortly pedunculate, the upper sessile, often in dense groups of 2-5(-9) forming a simple or branched raceme; bracts usually pinnately lobed. Involucral bracts densely villous-lanate obovate, rarely lanceolate, the inner obtuse, broadly scarious with a pale brown margin. Receptacle with dense, long hairs. Florets 20-35, the female few; corolla yellowish, densely villous, at least in the upper part. Achenes glabrous. 2n = 16.{\i  Rocks, up to} 1500 {\i m; calcicole. S. Europe, from C. Spain to S.E. Ukraine; very local.} Bu Hs It Rm Rs (W, K, ?E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Perhaps conspecific with {\i A. alpina} Pallas ex Willd. ({\i A. caucasica} Willd.), from the Caucasus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. A. frigida} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 1838 (1803). More or less caespitose, sericeous perennial 5-50 cm. Stems woody below. Leaves 1- to 2-pinnatisect, sessile or shortly petiolate, the lowest segments distant from the others; lobes 2-5 × 0·5-1 mm, linear, acute; uppermost leaves small, sessile, palmately divided. Capitula hemispherical, patent or nodding, in a usually narrow, paniculate inflorescence. Involucre 3-4 mm, lanate; outer bracts lanceolate, the inner ovate, obtuse or subacute, almost entirely scarious but lanate. Receptacle hairy. Corolla glandular.{\i  S.E. & E. Russia, northwards to} 59° 30' {\i N. in C. Ural.} Rs (C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. A. sericea} Weber in Stechm.,{\i  Artem.} 16 (1775). Perennial 40-70 cm; rhizome creeping; stems solitary or few together. Leaves sericeous on both surfaces; the lower dead at flowering; the middle 2-pinnatisect, with 1-2 pairs of segments and usually 1-2 simple or less divided segments at the base; the upper 1-pinnatisect or simple; lobes 10-17 × 1-2 mm, acute, entire. Capitula hemispherical, nodding, in a narrow, or rarely lax, paniculate inflorescence. Involucre 3-4 mm, sericeous; bracts ovate, obtuse, with a scarious margin. Receptacle hairy. Corolla glandular; lobes densely hairy.{\i  S.C. & E. Russia, northwards to} c. 62° 30'{\i  N. in N. Ural.} Rs (N, C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. A. reptans} C. Sm. ex Link in Buch, {\i Phys. Beschr. Canar.} 148 (1825) ({\i A. hispanica} Lam., non Weber). Strongly aromatic small shrub 12-30 cm. Leaves c. 5 mm, simple or palmately 3- to 5-sect, grey-tomentose, fasciculate, sessile, not auriculate at base. Capitula shortly pedunculate, recurved, in a racemose or paniculate inflorescence. Bracts simple, lanceolate, acute, about as long as the capitula. Involucre 1·5-2 mm; bracts greenish, with a scarious margin, puberulent, obtuse, the outer oblong-lanceolate, the inner obovate. Receptacle glabrous. Corolla yellow, glabrous.{\i  S. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43} appears to differ from {\b 45} only in the larger number of florets, the outer of which are female. This may well be a nutritional effect and the taxonomic separation of the two consequently unjustified, but further investigation is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. A. barrelieri} Besser,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  9}: 87 (1836). Aromatic woody perennial up to 60 cm, divaricately branched
\par

\par
184}
\par