{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 9 Outer scales of leaf-buds strap-shaped, without a rudimentary 
\par
  lamina; leaves almost always 2(-5)-lobed on each side 
\par
  at the base ....................................................................................... {\b 6. spurius}
\par
9 Outer scales of leaf-buds ± ovate, or with a rudimentary
\par
  lamina; leaves not or very rarely 2-lobed on each side 
\par
  at the base 10 Leaves ± triangular-cordate to hastate,
\par
  densely white-tomentose beneath .............................................. {\b 3. paradoxus} 
\par
10 Leaves usually orbicular-cordate, greyish or greenish
\par
   beneath, not or sparsely tomentose
\par
11 Leaves sparsely tomentose beneath; petiole-furrow
\par
   winged ......................................................................................... {\b 2. hybridus}
\par
11 Leaves glabrous beneath except on the veins; petiole-
\par
   furrow not winged ................................................................... {\b 4. kablikianus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 KEY TO PLANTS WITH INFLORESCENCES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bract subtending the lowest inflorescence-branch 1·7-4 cm 
\par
  wide, and almost as long as the scale-leaves near the base
\par
  of the scape
\par
2 Scape with more than 7 scale-leaves ......................................... {\b 9. japonicus}
\par
2 Scape with 2-7 scale-leaves ......................................................... {\b 8. fragrans}
\par
1 Bract subtending the lowest inflorescence-branch
\par
  0·5-1·6 cm wide, usually much shorter than the scale-
\par
  leaves near the base of the scape
\par
3 Marginal florets ligulate
\par
4 Involucral bracts glabrous except for the minutely ciliate apex
\par
5 Middle scale-leaves of scape 2·5-4(-7) cm .................................. {\b 5. radiatus}
\par
5 Middle scale-leaves of scape 5-10·5 cm ........................................ {\b 6. spurius}
\par
4 Involucral bracts pubescent or with a few long hairs
\par
6 Middle scale-leaves of scape 1-2 cm
\par
7 Scapes with 1-3 capitula; involucre 6-7 mm ............................. {\b 11. sibiricus}
\par
7 Scapes with 3-10 capitula; involucre 8-10 mm ......................... {\b 10. doerfleri}
\par
6 Middle scale-leaves of scape 2·5-7 cm
\par
8 Involucral bracts pubescent; apex ciliate or somewhat
\par
  fimbriate ......................................................................................... {\b 7. frigidus}
\par
8 Involucral bracts with a few long hairs, apex not 
\par
  ciliate or fimbriate ......................................................................... {\b 8. fragrans}
\par
3 Marginal florets tubular
\par
9 Involucral bracts glabrous except for a few hairs round
\par
  the base and sometimes at apex
\par
10 Middle scale-leaves of scape of male 2-5·5 cm, of female
\par
   1·5-4·5 cm; apex of involucral bracts entire, not ciliate .............. {\b 2. hybridus}
\par
10 Middle scale-leaves of scape of male 5·5-10·5 cm, of 
\par
   female 5-10 cm; apex of involucral bracts minutely 
\par
   ciliate or fimbriate ......................................................................... {\b 6. spurius}
\par
9 Involucral bracts minutely pubescent (sometimes glabrescent 
\par
  in fruit)
\par
11 Involucral bracts purplish ....................................................... {\b 3. paradoxus}
\par
11 Involucral bracts pale green
\par
12 Heads of glandular hairs on involucral bracts not more
\par
   than twice as wide as their stalks ...................................................... {\b 1. albus}
\par
12 Heads of glandular hairs on involucral bracts 3 times 
\par
   as wide as their stalks ............................................................. {\b 4. kablikianus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. albus} (L.) Gaertner,{\i  Fruct. Sem. Pl.}{\b  2}: 406 (1791). Leaves orbicular-cordate, lanate beneath, more or less glabrous above when mature, without or with 1 lateral vein bordering the sinus; basal lobes usually divergent; margin regularly lobed, the lobes toothed, the teeth acute. Scapes with 5-26 scale-leaves, rarely sheathing at the base, the middle 1·8-5·5 cm, fewer than half with a rudimentary lamina. Capitula 5-40 in the male, 13-45 in the female. Involucre 6-12 mm; bracts pale green, with entire apex, minutely hairy, with glandular hairs with heads not more than twice as wide as their stalks. Florets yellowish-white, all tubular; corolla-lobes 2-4 mm. Stigma of male florets 1·5-2·8 mm, divided almost to the base. 2n = 60.{\i  Damp shady places, mainly in the mountains. From S. Norway southwards to S.C. France, S. Italy and Bulgaria.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (W) Su [Br Fa Rs (B)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. hybridus} (L.) P. Gaertner, B. Meyer & Scherb., {\i Fl. Wett.}{\b  3}: 184 (1801) ({\i P. officinalis} Moench). Leaves orbicular-cordate, somewhat angular, sparsely tomentose beneath, with 2-5 lateral veins bordering the sinus; basal lobes convergent; margin irregularly toothed, the teeth obtuse; apices of teeth 2-6(-10) mm apart. Scapes with 6-21 scale-leaves in the male, 17-38 in the female, not sheathing at the base, the middle 2-5·5 cm, fewer than half with a rudimentary lamina. Capitula 16-55 in the male, (25-)32-130 in the female. Involucre of male 5·5-8·5 mm, of female 2·5-6 mm; bracts purplish, with entire apex, glabrous except for a few hairs at base. Florets pale lilac-pink or yellowish, all tubular. Stigma of male florets 0·5-1·3 mm, divided only at the apex. 2n = 60. {\i River-banks and other damp places. Europe, northwards to Scotland, N.C. Germany and C. Russia; naturalized in the Baltic region and Fennoscandia.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu [Da Fe No Rs (B) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    In parts of N. Europe the female plant is rare or absent; these are mainly regions in which the species has been introduced.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b hybridus}: Involucral bracts purplish; florets pinkish. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ochroleucus} (Boiss. & Huet) Sourek,{\i  Rozpr. Cesk. Akad. Ved.}{\b  72}({\b 5}): 26 (1962): Involucral bracts greenish; florets yellowish.{\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. paradoxus} (Retz.) Baumg., {\i Enum. Stirp. Transs.}{\b  3}: 94 (1816) ({\i P. niveus }(Vill.) Baumg.). Leaves triangular-cordate to hastate, rarely somewhat 2-lobed at the base, densely white-tomentose beneath, with 1-3 lateral veins bordering the sinus; basal lobes usually divergent; margin usually regularly toothed, the teeth obtuse; apices of teeth 2-6(-10) mm apart. Scapes with 5-22 scale-leaves, not sheathing at the base, the middle 2-5(-6) cm, fewer than half with a rudimentary lamina. Capitula 5-26 in the male, 11-32 in the female. Involucre of male 5·5-10 mm, of female 3·5-8 mm; bracts reddish, with entire apex, minutely glandular-pubescent. Florets reddish-pink to white, all tubular. Stigma of male florets 1·5-3 mm. 2n = 60.{\i  Stream-banks and wet stony ground; calcicole. • Mountain regions of Europe, from the Pyrenees to the E. Carpathians and C. Jugoslavia.} Au Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Hybrids between {\b 1} and {\b 3} and between {\b 2} and {\b 3} are recorded from a number of countries, chiefly in C. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. kablikianus} Tausch ex Berchtold, {\i Lotos} {\b 1}: 120 (1851) ({\i P. glabratus} (J. Maly) Borbás). Leaves orbicular to triangular-cordate, somewhat angular in outline, glabrous beneath, except on the veins; basal lobes usually convergent, with 3-5 lateral veins bordering the sinus; margin regularly to irregularly toothed; apices of teeth 2-6(-10) mm apart. Scapes with 4-16 scale-leaves, the lower almost sheathing at the base, the middle 2·2-5·5 cm, fewer than half with a rudimentary lamina. Capitula 5-22 in the male, 18-33 in the female. Involucre of male 6-10 mm, of female 6-7·5 mm; bracts pale green, with a usually entire apex, minutely hairy, with glandular hairs with heads 3 times as wide as their stalks. Florets white or pale yellow, all tubular; corolla-lobes 1-2 mm. Stigma of male florets 1·7-3 mm, divided for more than half its length. 2n = 60. {\i Wet gravel, stream-banks and wooded gorges. • Sudeten Mts; Carpathians; N. & C. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Cz Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    The hybrid {\b 1} × {\b 3} is often confused with this species, but has the leaves tomentose beneath, with 1-2 lateral veins bordering the sinus, purplish florets and corolla-lobes 2-4 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. radiatus} (J. F. Gmelin) J. Toman,{\i  Folia Geobot. Phytotax. }({\i Praha}){\b  7}: 388 (1972) ({\i P. laevigatus} Reichenb.,{\i  Nardosmia}
\par

\par
187}
\par