{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 63 Leaf-lobes making an angle of less than 45° with the segment
   .................................................................................................. {\b 20. armeniaca}
\par
63 Leaf-lobes making an angle of more than 45° with the segment
\par
64 Leaves not sericeous beneath ................................................. {\b 24. oelandica}
\par
64 Leaves sericeous beneath
\par
65 Terminal lobes of leaves usually more than 1·5 mm wide
\par
   at base ......................................................................................... {\b 22. pancicii}
\par
65 Terminal lobe of leaves usually c. 1 mm wide at base ............. {\b 23. insipida}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ARTEMISIA (incl. Sect. {\i Absinthium} (Miller) DC. and Sect. {\i Seriphidium} Besser). Receptacle glabrous or hirsute; outer florets female (rarely absent), with filiform perianth, the rest hermaphrodite, all fertile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. vulgaris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 848 (1753). Perennial, caespitose, aromatic herb without overwintering rosettes. Stems (30-)60-120(-210) cm, sparsely pubescent, often glabrescent, usually red or purplish. Leaves 1-pinnatifid, auriculate at base, the segments sometimes deeply lobed, with an obscure network of small veins, usually glabrous above, whitish-tomentose beneath. Lower leaves shortly petiolate, upper sessile. Capitula numerous, subsessile, erect or slightly recurved, crowded on the branches of a large panicle. Bracts leaf-like, the upper small and simple. Involucre 2·5-3 mm, campanulate or ovoid; bracts greyish-arachnoid-pubescent, the outer lanceolate, acute, broadly scarious, the inner longer, oblong, obtuse. Receptacle glabrous. Corolla usually reddish-brown. 2n = 16.{\i  Most of Europe, but rare in the extreme north and extreme south.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. verlotiorum} Lamotte, {\i Compt.-Rend. Assoc. Fr. Avancem. Sci.}{\b  5} ({\i Clerm.-Ferr.}) 513 (1877). Like {\b 1} but not caespitose, with long rhizomes and over-wintering rosettes; stem more densely pubescent; leaves with a conspicuous network of small veins; bracts conspicuous, leaf-like even at the ends of branches, usually 3-fid; outer involucral bracts linear; flowering later. 2n = 54. {\i Naturalized on roadsides and waste places. W. & C. Europe.} [Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju.] ({\i S.W. China.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. tilesii} Ledeb., Mém. Acad. Sci. Pétersb. 5: 568 (1815). Like {\b 1} but inflorescence usually sparingly branched; involucre 4-5 mm, hemispherical.{\i  Arctic Russia.} Rs (N). ({\i N. Asia, Arctic America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. absinthium} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 848 (1753). Aromatic, more or less sericeous perennial 30-90 cm. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnatisect, petiolate; lobes 5-20 × 1-6 mm, usually obtuse. Capitula c. 3 mm across, hemispherical, nodding, in a paniculate inflorescence. Involucre 2-3 mm; outer bracts oblong, herbaceous; inner ovate, herbaceous, with a wide scarious margin. Receptacle hairy. Corolla glabrous. 2n = 18.{\i  Most of Europe; widely cultivated for flavouring and perhaps not native in some districts.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Sa Sb Si Tu; introduced in Hb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. siversiana} Ehrh. ex Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.} 3: 1845 (1803). Like {\b 4} but annual or biennial; involucre 4-5 mm; outer bracts ovate, with a wide scarious margin; inner coriaceous, with a wide scarious margin.{\i  C. & S. ural and adjacent lowlands.} Rs (C, *E) [Rs (B)]. ({\i N. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. arborescens} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1188 (1763). White-tomentose, aromatic perennial; stems 50-100 cm, woody below. Leaves 1- to 2-pinnatisect or the upper sometimes simple, petiolate; lobes 5-25 × 1-2 mm, obtuse. Capitula 6-7 mm across inflorescence. Involucre 3·5-4 mm; bracts ovate, tomentose, with a wide, glabrous, scarious margin. Receptacle hairy. Corolla glabrous. 2n = 18.{\i  Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Bl Co Cr Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. stellerana} Besser, {\i Nouv. Mém. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  3}: 79 (1834). Densely white-lanate, not aromatic, rhizomatous perennial 30-60 cm. Lower leaves pinnately lobed or deeply toothed, cuneate, petiolate; lobes obtuse; upper leaves sessile, sometimes entire. Capitula broadly campanulate, shortly pedunculate, erect or recurved, crowded in a racemose panicle. Bracts leaf-like, the upper small. Involucre 8-9 mm; bracts oblong to ovate, obtuse; margin scarious. Receptacle glabrous. Corolla yellow. {\i Cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized in N. Europe.} [Br Da Su.] ({\i N.E. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. alba} Turra, {\i Gior. Ital. Sci. Nat. Agric. Arti Commerc.}{\b  1}: 144 (1764) ({\i A. camphorata} Vill., {\i A. lobelii} All.; incl.{\i  A. incanescens} Jordan, {\i A. suavis} Jordan). Glabrous to white-tomentose, aromatic perennial with a stout, branched stock; stems 30-100 cm, woody below. Lower leaves 2(-3)-pinnatisect, the middle 1-pinnatisect and the upper usually simple; lower and middle leaves petiolate, with 1 or more pairs of small, more or less amplexicaul lobes at the base of the petiole; lobes 3-10 × 0·25-0·75 mm, obtuse. Capitula hemispherical, nodding, in a usually simple or slightly branched inflorescence. Involucre 3-4 mm; outer bracts lanceolate, with a narrow scarious margin, the inner ovate, with a wide, glabrous, scarious margin. Receptacle glabrous or hairy. Corolla glabrous but glandular. 2n = 36. {\i S. & S.C. Europe.} Al †Au Be Bu †Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in indumentum, leaf-size and in smell. Several taxa distinguished by one or more of these characters have been described at specific, subspecific and varietal rank. These appear to be largely sympatric and plants with every degree of pubescence are of common occurrence. In view of this it seems scarcely possible, on the available information, to recognize subspecies, but further investigation is desirable.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b 9-15}). {\b A. maritima} group. More or less densely tomentose to glabrescent, aromatic perennials, not or slightly caespitose; flowering stems 5-60 cm, more or less woody below. Lower leaves usually 2- to 4-pinnatisect, often auriculate, sometimes 3-fid to 1-pinnatisect, or entire. Capitula oblong to ovoid, nodding or erect, in a paniculate to almost racemose inflorescence. Outer (female) florets absent. Involucre (2-)2·5-6 mm; bracts tomentose to subglabrous or glabrous, the inner somewhat to much longer than the outer, with a glabrous, scarious margin. Corolla glabrous, glandular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A highly polymorphic and widespread group in Europe and temperate Asia. Numerous taxa have been described at varietal, subspecific and specific rank. Variation is particularly great in {\b 9}, {\b 10} and {\b 15} which have a fairly wide range of distribution. The other species occupy disjunct areas, often of a relict nature, and are characterized both morphologically and cytologically by a moderate degree of variability.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lower leaves entire or 3-fid to 1-pinnatisect ....................... {\b 10. caerulescens} 
\par
1 Lower leaves 2- to 4-pinnatisect
\par
2 Stem and leaves at anthesis more or less densely tomentose
\par
3 Stock slender, horizontal to slightly ascending, with 
\par
  few to many leaf-rosettes ............................................................. {\b 9. maritima}
\par
3 Stock stout and woody, vertical to ascending, with 
\par
  numerous short leaf-rosettes
\par

\par
180}
\par