{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. angulatus} L. fil., Suppl. 369 (1781), from South Africa, is also cultivated for ornament and is perhaps naturalized in N. Italy and S. Spain; it is a scrambling, glabrous perennial with ovate to lanceolate leaves 3-5 × 2·5-3 cm which are cuneate at the base, angled or weakly lobed and petiolate; the capitula are 12-25 mm in diameter, in compound corymbs or panicles, the involucre is 4-8 mm, with 3-7 supplementary bracts, and there are 4-6 yellow ligules 5-10 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. INCANAE (DC.) O. Hoffm. Dwarf shrubs or perennial herbs, tomentose or sericeous at least in part. Leaves usually more or less divided, pinnately veined. Involucre usually with small supplementary bracts. Achenes subcylindrical, glabrous or hairy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. gnaphalodes} Sieber,{\i  Reise Kreta }{\b 1}: 352 (1823). Dwarf shrub 20-50 cm. Stems branched at base, densely white-tomentose. Leaves 5-15 × 0·3-0·8 cm (excluding lobes), linear, entire or with up to 4 distant, entire lobes on each side, densely white-tomentose beneath, arachnoid-lanate, greenish and more or less glabrescent above. Capitula many, 12-15 mm in diameter, in compound corymbs. Involucre c. 7 mm, glabrous or arachnoid-lanate and glabrescent, reddish-tinged, with up to 5 supplementary bracts 1-2 mm. Ligules 10-13, 3-5 mm, yellow.{\i  Rock crevices and stony slopes. ?• Kriti, Karpathos.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. ambiguus} (Biv.) DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 356 (1838). Dwarf shrub 25-50 cm. Stems with a few branches at the base, slender, equally leafy throughout, the non-flowering shoots without distinct rosettes. Leaves 5-15 × 1·5-4(-7) cm, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, variously dissected. Capitula many, 10-12 mm in diameter, in lax or dense compound corymbs. Involucre 5-7 mm, with up to 5 supplementary bracts c. 1·5 mm. Ligules c. 10, 3-5 mm, yellow.{\i  Rocky and sandy places. S. Italy, Sicilia; S. Greece.} Gr It Si. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ambiguus} (incl. {\i S. taygeteus} Boiss. & Heldr.): Stems and involucre densely white-tomentose, sometimes somewhat glabrescent above. Leaves more or less lyrate-pinnatifid with the lobes irregularly dentate to pinnatifid, densely white-tomentose beneath, persistently arachnoid-tomentose or somewhat glabrescent above. {\i Sicilia and Lipari; S. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b gibbosus} (Guss.) Chater, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  68}: 274 (1974) ({\i Cineraria gibbosa} Guss.): Stems and involucre glabrous or glabrescent throughout. Leaves pinnatifid or pinnatisect with dentate to pinnatifid lobes, not or scarcely lyrate, densely white-tomentose beneath, glabrous above at maturity. •{\i  Sicilia, Calabria}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. bicolor} (Willd.) Tod.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Panorm.}{\b  1859}: 30 (1860). Dwarf shrub 25-50(-100) cm. Stems much-branched at the base and sometimes also above, stout, densely white-tomentose, with the leaves mostly crowded towards the base of the flowering stems and forming rosettes on the non-flowering shoots. Leaves 4-15 × 2·5-7 cm, ovate to lanceolate, dentate to pinnate, densely whitish-tomentose beneath, more or less arachnoid-tomentose, greenish and glabrescent above. Capitula many, 12-15 mm in diameter, in dense, compound corymbs. Involucre 5-8 mm, with up to 5 supplementary bracts 1-2 mm. Ligules 10-13, 3-6 mm, yellow.{\i  Rocky and sandy places. Mediterranean region; locally naturalized elsewhere.} Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si [Bl Br Hb Lu Rs (K)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves ovate-lanceolate, lyrate-pinnatifid to irregularly 
\par
  sinuate-dentate; involucre subglabrous, or whitish-
\par
  tomentose and more or less glabrescent ..................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b nebrodensis}
\par
1 Leaves pinnate, pinnatisect, or lyrate-pinnate or 
\par
  -pinnatisect involucre densely and usually persistently
\par
  whitish-tomentose
\par
2 Leaves ovate, often lyrate, with the ultimate lobes 
\par
  usually as wide as long and obtuse; peduncles long ........... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b bicolor}
\par
2 Leaves ovate or ovate-lanceolate, not lyrate, with the
\par
  ultimate lobes usually longer than wide and subacute;
\par
  peduncles short ................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b cineraria}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b bicolor}:{\i  Limestone cliffs. C. & E. parts of Mediterranean region; naturalized in Krym}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b nebrodensis} (Guss.) Chater, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  68}: 213 (1974) ({\i Cineraria nebrodensis} Guss.):{\i  Mountain rocks. • N. Sicilia} ({\i Madonie}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b cineraria} (DC.) Chater, {\i loc. cit.} (1974) ({\i Senecio cineraria} DC.): 2n = 40.{\i  Rocky and sandy places. W. & C. parts of Mediterranean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The plants widely cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized in W. Europe correspond to subspecies ({\b c}) in some respects, but vary greatly in the distribution of leaves on the stems.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from the Kiklades (Amorgos) with very broadly ovate, strongly lyrate leaves and glabrescent involucre, but otherwise like subsp. ({\b a}), may represent another subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. thapsoides} DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  7}: 301 (1838). Perennial 20-70 cm. Stems stout, woody at the base, erect, simple or somewhat branched, densely white-tomentose. Basal and lower cauline leaves 7-25 × 2-4·5 cm, oblong to oblong-ovate, gradually narrowed at base and more or less petiolate, subentire to crenate or weakly crenate-dentate, densely and persistently white-tomentose beneath, more or less sparsely arachnoid-tomentose, greenish and often glabrescent above; middle and upper cauline oblong to linear-lanceolate, widened and amplexicaul at base. Capitula usually many, c. 8 mm in diameter, in oblong panicles. Involucre 10-15 mm, with 1-8 supplementary bracts c. 2 mm. Ligules absent. Achenes 3-4 mm, glabrous.{\i  Mountain rocks. S. & W. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b thapsoides}: Middle and upper cauline leaves oblong to oblong-lanceolate, almost as large as the basal. Involucre 10-12 mm, more or less persistently white-tomentose, with 1-5 supplementary bracts.{\i  Greece and Albania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b visianianus} (Papaf. ex Vis.) Vandas, {\i Reliq. Formánek.} 279 (1909): Middle and upper cauline leaves oblong- to linear-lanceolate, more or less abruptly decreasing in size up the stem and mostly distinctly smaller than the basal. Involucre 12-15 mm, glabrous or subglabrous, with up to 8 supplementary bracts. •{\i  W. Jugoslavia and Albania.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. incanus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 869 (1753). Perennial 5-15 cm, more or less densely greyish- or whitish-sericeous-lanate, with short, woody, branched stock. Stems erect, branched only in inflorescence. Leaves sericeous-lanate at least on lower surface (rarely subglabrous), the basal 3-10 cm, usually lobed or pinnatifid, long-petiolate, the cauline pinnatisect or (uppermost) simple. Capitula several, in a dense corymb. Involucral bracts 6-10, 5-6 mm; supplementary bracts 0-2, often on the peduncle below the involucre. Ligules 3-6, 5-6 mm, ovate, yellow. Achenes c. 2 mm, glabrous or hairy.{\i  Pastures and rocky ground on mountains; calcifuge. • Alps and N. Appennini; Carpathians.} Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b incanus}: Lamina of basal leaves more or less broadly ovate in outline. Achenes hairy, at least above. 2n = 40.{\i  S.W. & S.C. Alps; N. Appennini}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b carniolicus} (Willd.) Br.-Bl., {\i Neue Denkschr. Schweiz. Naturf. Ges.}{\b  48}: 300 (1913): Lamina of basal leaves oblanceolate or narrowly obovate in outline. Achenes glabrous. 2n = c. 120, c. 160. C. & E. Alps; Carpathians.
\par

\par
194}
\par