{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. S. nemorensis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 870 (1753). Perennial 50-200 cm. Stock short, with stolons absent or up to 10(-20) cm. Stems erect, branched above or only in inflorescence, densely leafy. Leaves 5-20 × 1-7 cm, not much decreasing in size up the stem, glabrous above, often hairy beneath, acute, more or less dentate or rarely almost doubly dentate, with the outer margin of the teeth straight or concave. Capitula many, 20-35 mm in diameter, in more or less compound corymbs; peduncles eglandular. Involucre 5-9 mm, glabrous or very sparsely hairy, eglandular, with 3-6 supplementary bracts; bracts often black-tipped. Ligules 5-6(-8), 12-15 mm, yellow. Achenes c. 4 mm, glabrous.{\i  Damp meadows and woods. Much of Europe, but absent from most of Fennoscandia and from much of the Mediterranean region and the south-east.} Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Tu [Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nemorensis} (incl.{\i  S. bulgaricus} Velen.,{\i  S. jacquinianus} Reichenb.): Not purplish-tinged. Stems usually pubescent above. Leaves ovate to elliptic-lanceolate, c. 3 times as long as wide, usually hairy beneath, the lower narrowed at the base and petiolate, the upper sessile, amplexicaul. Supplementary bracts 3-5, about as long as the involucre. 2n = 40. {\i C. & E. Europe, extending to N. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b fuchsii} (C.C. Gmelin) Celak., {\i Prodr. Fl. Böhm.} 241 (1871) ({\i S. fuchsii} C.C. Gmelin; incl.{\i  S. fuchsii} var.{\i  expansus} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Hayek): Often purplish-tinged, usually glabrous. Leaves lanceolate or elliptic-lanceolate, 5-7 times as long as wide, all narrowed at the base, at least the middle and upper shortly petiolate, not amplexicaul. Supplementary bracts usually 5-6, often only c. ½ as long as the involucre. 2n = 40.{\i  C. & S. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. S. cacaliaster} Lam.,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 132 (1779). Like {\b 17}({\b a}) but stock often shortly creeping, without stolons; leaves lanceolate to elliptic-lanceolate, 4-6 times as long as wide, all narrowed to the base, the middle ones shortly petiolate, the upper sessile, not amplexicaul; peduncles and usually involucre glandular-hairy; supplementary bracts 1-3; ligules absent (rarely 1-3 and then whitish-yellow).{\i  Mountain meadows and woods. • S.C. France; S.E. Alps; from Albania to S.W. Romania.} Al Au Ga ?Hs It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   In areas where {\b 17} and {\b 18} overlap hybrid populations often occur.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. S. doria} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1215 (1759). Perennial 40-100(-150) cm. Stock short, without stolons. Stems erect, branched only in inflorescence. Leaves rapidly decreasing in size and usually becoming sparser up the stem; basal and lower cauline 10-40 × 3-18 cm, ovate to linear-elliptical, obtuse or acute, long-petiolate, glaucous, rather thick, subentire or patent-dentate with the outer margin of the teeth straight or concave; upper cauline usually ovate-lanceolate, amplexicaul, entire. Capitula many, 12-25 mm in diameter, in compound corymbs. Involucre 5-6(-9) mm, glabrous or sparsely hairy, with 2-4 supplementary bracts; bracts pale greenish throughout. Ligules 5-13, 7-10 mm, yellow. Achenes 3-4 mm.{\i  From E. France, C. Czechoslovakia and S.C. Russia southwards to S. Spain, Sicilia and Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Ga Hs Hu It Ju ?Po Rm Rs (C, W, E) Sa Si [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems or leaves hairy; ligules 8-13
\par
2 Achenes glabrous; leaves up to 18 cm wide ...............  ({\b b}) subsp. {\b umbrosus}
\par
2 Achenes hairy; leaves not more than 8 cm wide ........ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b kirghisicus} 
\par
1 Stems and leaves glabrous; ligules 5-6
\par
3 Basal leaves oblong-spathulate, entire; achenes ± hairy
\par
  ..................................................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b legionensis}
\par
3 Basal leaves linear-elliptical to oblong-obovate,
\par
  usually dentate; achenes glabrous ........................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b doria}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b doria} (incl. {\i S. schvetzovii} Korsh., {\i S. macrophyllus} Bieb.): Stems and leaves glabrous. Basal and lower cauline leaves 3-7(-11) cm wide, linear-elliptical to oblong-obovate, usually dentate. Supplementary bracts c. ½ as long as the involucre. Ligules 5-6. Achenes glabrous. {\i Damp meadows and woods. Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b umbrosus} (Waldst. & Kit.) Soó,{\i   Erd. Kisérl.}{\b  46}: 282 (1946) ({\i S. umbrosus }Waldst. & Kit.): Stems more or less sparsely lanate. Basal and lower cauline leaves up to 18 cm wide, ovate to oblong-ovate, dentate, usually crispate-hairy at least on the veins beneath. Supplementary bracts c. ¼ as long as the involucre. Ligules usually 8. Achenes glabrous. 2n = 40. {\i Open woodland and scrub. From Czechoslovakia to Bulgaria and W. Ukraine.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b kirghisicus} (DC.) Chater, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  68}: 216 (1914) ({\i S. kirghisicus} DC.,{\i  S. paucifolius} sensu Schischkin, non S.G. Gmelin): Stems often sparsely pubescent above. Basal and lower cauline leaves 1-8 cm wide, ovate to linear-lanceolate, dentate, crispate-hairy beneath. Supplementary bracts c. ½ as long as the involucre. Ligules 8-13. Achenes hairy.{\i  Saline steppes. S. part of U.S.S.R.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b legionensis} (Lange) Chater,{\i  loc. cit.} (1914) ({\i S. legionensis} Lange): Stems and leaves glabrous. Basal and lower cauline leaves 3-5 cm wide, oblong-spathulate, entire. Supplementary bracts c. ¼ as long as the involucre. Ligules 5-6. Achenes more or less hairy.{\i  Meadows and marshes. • N.W. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   More or less tomentose-lanate plants of subsp. ({\b a}) from Spain have been called var.{\i  incanescens} Lange; their status is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CROCISERIS Reichenb. Perennial herbs, usually subglabrous or sparsely hairy, without stolons. Leaves usually undivided, usually decreasing in size up the stem. Involucre with supplementary bracts. Ligules (10-)12-22, rather long. Achenes subcylindrical, glabrous or hairy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. S. lopezii} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 60 (1838) ({\i S. grandiflorus} Hoffmanns. & Link, non Bergius). Perennial 30-100 cm. Stock short. Stems erect, simple or branched only in inflorescence, sparsely pubescent. Leaves rapidly decreasing in size and becoming very sparse up the stem; basal and lower cauline 20-30 × 2·5-7 cm, lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, sparsely crispate-pubescent at least beneath, subentire or dentate with more or less patent teeth, more or less petiolate; upper cauline linear-lanceolate, sessile, more or less amplexicaul. Capitula 1-8, 40-55 mm in diameter, in a lax corymb. Involucre 10-14 mm, sparsely crispate-pubescent, with 10-15 supplementary bracts 1/3-1/2 as long as the involucre. Ligules 12-20, 15-20 mm, yellow. Achenes 5-6 mm, scabrid-puberulent. {\i Woods and other shady places. • S.W. Spain, S.W. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. S. paludosus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 870 (1753) ({\i S. racemosus }auct. eur., non (Bieb.) DC.; incl.{\i  S. auratus} DC., {\i S. tataricus} Less.). Perennial 50-200 cm. Stock short. Stems erect, branched above or only in inflorescence, sparsely to densely arachnoid-lanate, sometimes glabrescent. Leaves gradually decreasing in size up the stem; basal and lower cauline 10-20 × 1-2·5 cm, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, acute, serrate, shortly petiolate, sparsely to densely arachnoid-lanate or -tomentose or rarely glabrous beneath, usually glabrous above; upper cauline sessile, subamplexicaul. Capitula many, 30-40 mm in diameter, in a panicle or corymb. Involucre 6-8 mm, more or less arachnoid-lanate at base, with 5-10 supplementary bracts c. ½ as long as the involucre. Ligules 12-20, 10-14 mm, yellow. Achenes c. 3 mm, glabrous or sparsely hairy. 2n = 40.{\i  Damp places. Much of Europe, but absent from parts of the north-west and the Mediterranean region}.
\par

\par
196}
\par