{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Au Be Br Bu Cz †Da Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subspecies have been described, but are too poorly differentiated both morphologically and geographically to be worth maintaining.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. S. eubaeus} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 3}): 36 (1856). Perennial 20-60 cm. Stock short. Stems erect, branched only in inflorescence, white-arachnoid-lanate at least above. Basal and lower cauline leaves 7-15 × 2-3 cm, oblong-lanceolate, sparsely to densely arachnoid-lanate, more or less petiolate, entire or obscurely repand-dentate; upper sessile, subamplexicaul. Capitula 3-6, c. 40 mm in diameter, in a lax corymb. Involucre 12-18 mm, densely white-lanate, with 8-15 supplementary bracts 1/3-1/2 as long as the involucre. Ligules 12-18, 12-18 mm, yellow. Achenes c. 6 mm, the inner glabrous, the outer hairy.{\i  Mountain rocks. • E. Greece} ({\i Evvoia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. castagneanus} DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 354 (1838), from S.W. Asia, has once been recorded from Turkey-in-Europe; it is like {\b 22} but has less densely lanate or glabrescent stems, glabrous leaves, sparsely lanate, greenish involucre with 15-20 supplementary bracts, ligules 10-14 mm and sometimes all the achenes hairy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. S. macedonicus} Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 221 (1846). Glabrous or subglabrous perennial 50-80 cm. Stock short. Stems erect, branched only in inflorescence. Leaves rapidly diminishing in size up the stem; basal and lower cauline 15-30 × 2·5-5 cm, broadly elliptical to oblong-lanceolate, gradually narrowed at base, petiolate, subentire or remotely dentate (rarely almost pinnatifid); upper cauline numerous, lanceolate, sessile, subamplexicaul. Capitula 4-12(-20), 25-40 mm in diameter, in a simple corymb. Involucre 8-11 mm, with 10-12 supplementary bracts c. 2/3 as long as the involucre. Ligules 13-14, 13-17 mm, yellow. Achenes shortly hairy. {\i Mountain woods and rocky slopes. E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr ?Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. longipedunculatus} Halácsy, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  54}: 484 (1904), described from S.E. Greece (Parnassos), has the supplementary bracts c. ½ as long as the inner and almost subulate (not linear); it is probably conspecific with {\b 23}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. barckhausiifolius} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 6}): 101 (1859), from S.W. Asia, has once been recorded from S. Greece (Pateras Oros); it differs from 23 chiefly in having the basal and lower cauline leaves 5-7 × 1·5-2 cm, runcinate-pinnatifid and with 2-3 pairs of triangular, dentate lobes, and supplementary bracts c. 1/3 as long as the involucre.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. S. auricula} Bourgeau ex Cosson,{\i  Not.Pl. Crit.} 169(1852). Perennial 10-40 cm. Stock short, stout, densely lanate. Stems erect, simple or branched only in inflorescence, sparsely arachnoid-lanate or glabrous. Leaves 3-10 × 0·8-3 cm, mostly in a basal rosette, ovate-spathulate to linear-cuneate, subentire or 3-dentate at apex, glaucous, fleshy-coriaceous, glabrous or glabrescent; cauline up to 6, 1-3 cm, oblong to linear-lanceolate. Capitula (1-)2-8, 25-35 mm in diameter, in a corymb. Involucre 7-12 mm, subglabrous, with 4-6 supplementary bracts 1/3-1/2 as long as the involucre. Ligules 10-13, 10-12 mm, yellow. Achenes 4-5 mm, shortly hairy.{\i  Rocky and marshy places; calcicole. C., S. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. S. pyrenaicus} L. in Loefl.,{\i  Iter. Hisp.} 304 (1758) ({\i S. tournefortii} Lapeyr.). Perennial 15-60 cm. Stock shortly creeping. Stems ascending to erect, branched above or only in inflorescence, glabrous or shortly appressed-hairy above. Leaves crowded at the middle of the stem, glabrous or sparsely crispate hairy beneath, entire or dentate, more or less petiolate; upper cauline rapidly decreasing in size, linear to linear-lanceolate, sessile. Capitula 3-8(-15), 20-40 mm in diameter, in a corymb. Involucre 6-8 mm, sparsely crispate-hairy, with 5-8 supplementary bracts c. ½ as long as the involucre. Ligules 10-16, 10-15 mm, yellow. Achenes 3·5-5 mm, glabrous. 2n = 40. {\i Grassy and rocky places. • Mountains of S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable; plants from the Sierra Nevada and Sierra Tejeda ({\i S. tournefortii} var. {\i granatensis} Boiss.) have rather coriaceous, often entire, obtuse leaves, plants from the Sierra de Guadarrama and Sierra de Gredos ({\i S. tournefortii} var. {\i carpetanus} Willk.) are usually entirely glabrous and have more strongly dentate leaves, while plants from the Serra da Estrela ({\b S. cespitosus} Brot.,{\i  Fl. Lusit.}{\b  1}: 390 (1804)) have acute, often entire leaves and capitula 20-25 mm in diameter. This variation does not seem to be sufficiently distinct for subspecies to be recognized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b 26-28}).{\b  S. doronicum} group. Perennial 20-60 cm. Stock short. Stems erect, simple, or branched only in inflorescence, arachnoid-lanate or glabrescent. Basal leaves 10-25 × 2·5-6 cm, elliptical to ovate, finely repand-dentate to subentire, subacute; lower cauline similar, narrowed at base; upper cauline few, oblong- to linear-lanceolate, sessile, subamplexicaul. Capitula 25-60 mm in diameter, solitary or in a lax corymb. Ligules 12-20 mm, yellow or orange. Achenes 5-7 mm, glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A very critical group in need of further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ligules pale yellow
\par
2 Leaves thin, soft ........................................................................... {\b 27. scopolii}
\par
2 Leaves thick, somewhat coriaceous ......................................... {\b 26. doronicum} 
\par
1 Ligules golden-yellow or orange
\par
3 Plant stout; involucre 10-15 mm, with 12-20 supplementary 
\par
  bracts ......................................................................................... {\b 26. doronicum}
\par
3 Plant slender; involucre 8-10 mm, with 10-12 supplementary
\par
  bracts ......................................................................................... {\b 28. lagascanus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. S. doronicum} (L.) L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2}: 1215 (1759). Stems stout. Basal leaves usually rounded or cuneate at base and more or less abruptly contracted into the petiole, glabrescent above, usually arachnoid-lanate beneath, thick and somewhat coriaceous. Capitula 30-60 mm in diameter, solitary or up to 4(-7) in a lax corymb. Involucre 10-15 mm, more or less arachnoid-lanate, with 12-20 supplementary bracts. Ligules 12-20 mm.{\i  Grassy and rocky places. • Mountains of C. & S. Europe.} Al Au Bu Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Supplementary bracts about as long as involucre;capitula 1-3; 
\par
  ligules 12-22, deep yellow or orange-yellow; 
\par
  basal leaves rounded or cuneate at base ......................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b doronicum} 
\par
1 Supplementary bracts c. ½ as long as involucre
\par
2 Capitula 3-7; ligules 10-15, deep or orange-yellow;
\par
  basal leaves lanceolate, gradually narrowed into the
\par
  petiole ........................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b ruthenensis}
\par
2 Capitula solitary (rarely 2); ligules 12-17, pale yellow;
\par
  basal leaves ± ovate, abruptly contracted into the 
\par
  petiole ................................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b gerardii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b doronicum}: 2n = 40, 80.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ruthenensis} (Mazuc & Timb.-Lagr.) Nyman,{\i  Consp., Suppl.}{\b  2}: 163 (1889) ({\i S. ruthenensis} Mazuc & Timb.Lagr.): •{\i  S.W. France}.
\par
 ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b gerardii} (Godron & Gren.) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 354 (1879) ({\i S. gerardii} Godron & Gren.): 2n = 40. •{\i  S. Spain, S. France, N. Italy}.
\par

\par
197}
\par