{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 9 Basal leaves cordate at base, strongly dentate ............................. {\b 37. rivularis} 
\par
9 Basal leaves not or scarcely cordate at base, subentire
\par
  or weakly dentate
\par
10 Basal leaves not more than 10 cm, ± fleshy; bracts green ....... {\b 39. papposus}
\par
10 Basal leaves at least 10 cm, not fleshy; bracts reddish
\par
   at least at apex ............................................................................. {\b 36. helenitis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. S. integrifolius} (L.) Clairv.,{\i  Man. Herb. Suisse} 241 (1811). Perennial (2-)15-70(-100) cm. Stock short, erect. Basal leaves (1-)2-10(-15) × (1-)2-5 cm, more or less appressed to the ground, suborbicular to oblong-elliptical, more or less petiolate; lower cauline ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, sessile or narrowed into a short, winged petiole; middle and upper cauline lanceolate to linear, entire, sessile, subamplexicaul. Capitula 15-25 mm in diameter, solitary or up to 15 in a corymb; peduncles usually not more than twice as long as involucre. Involucre 5-8 mm. Achenes 2·5-4 mm. {\i Much of Europe, but with discontinuous range, and absent from large areas.} Al Au Br Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Basal and lower cauline leaves gradually narrowed into petiole
\par
2 Plant with ± persistent, dark purplish or brownish 
\par
  tomentum at least above ........................................... ({\b h}) subsp. {\b atropurpureus}
\par
2 Plant without persistent, dark tomentum
\par
3 Ligules c. 20 mm; involucre c. 7 mm ............................ ({\b g}) subsp. {\b tundricola}
\par
3 Ligules 7-11 mm; involucre c. 5 mm ............................ ({\b f}) subsp. {\b czernjaevii}
\par
1 Basal and lower cauline leaves abruptly contracted into
\par
  petiole
\par
4 Plant densely and persistently whitish-tomentose or 
\par
  -lanate, especially above ................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b capitatus}
\par
4 Plant more or less glabrescent
\par
5 Ligules orange or brownish-red (or sometimes absent) ({\b e}) subsp. {\b aurantiacus}
\par
5 Ligules yellow or golden-yellow, always present
\par
6 Involucral bracts purplish throughout; basal leaves 
\par
  sinuate-dentate ................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b serpentini}
\par
6 Involucral bracts usually green throughout
\par
7 Basal leaves entire or remotely denticulate; involucre
\par
  6-8 mm  ........................................................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b integrifolius}
\par
7 Basal leaves coarsely dentate; involucre 8-12 mm ......... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b maritimus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b integrifolius} (incl.{\i  S. aucheri} DC., {\i S. campestris} (Retz.) DC.,{\i  S. heldreichii} Boiss., {\i S. jailicola} Juz.): Stems 8-100 cm, arachnoid-lanate but glabrescent. Basal leaves ovate-lanceolate to suborbicular, usually abruptly contracted into a petiole which is not longer than the lamina, entire or remotely denticulate, greyish- or whitish-arachnoid-lanate, equally hairy on both surfaces but glabrescent, cauline leaves few. Capitula 3-15. Involucre 6-8 mm, glabrous or somewhat hairy at base; bracts green, sometimes reddish at apex. Ligules 12-15, 10-20 mm, yellow or golden yellow. Achenes shortly and usually densely hairy, rarely glabrous. 2n = 48, c. 90.{\i  Dry grassy places. Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b maritimus} (Syme) Chater,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  68}: 275 (1974) ({\i S. campestris} var.{\i  maritimus} Syme): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but basal leaves coarsely dentate; cauline leaves more numerous; involucre 8-12 mm.{\i  Coastal cliffs. • N. Wales} ({\i Holyhead Island}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b serpentini} (Gayer) Jáv. in Jáv. & Csapody,{\i  Icon. Fl. Hung.} 529 (1933): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but basal leaves oblong-elliptical, sinuate-dentate, floccose-lanate but glabrescent; capitula 2-10; involucral bracts purplish, usually throughout.{\i  Grassy places on serpentine. • E. Austria} ({\i Burgenland}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b capitatus} (Wahlenb.) Cuf., {\i Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih.}) {\b 70}: 14 (1933) ({\i S. capitatus }(Wahlenb.) Steudel, {\i S. aurantiacus} auct., non (Willd.) Less.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but up to 30( 40) cm, usually densely and persistently greyish-white-lanate or -tomentose especially above; basal leaves ovate-oblong or elliptical; cauline leaves numerous; involucral bracts usually purplish; ligules 5-12 mm, yellow to red, but often absent. 2n = 64, 96+0-4B.{\i  Mountain pastures. • Alps, Carpathians; Albania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b aurantiacus} (Hoppe ex Willd.) Briq. & Cavillier in Burnat,{\i  Fl. Alp. Marit.}{\b  6}: 42 (1916) ({\i S. aurantiacus} (Willd.) Less.; incl.{\i  S. besseranus} Minder.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but usually glabrous or sparsely hairy even when young, or sometimes floccose; capitula 2-6(-10); involucral bracts purplish usually throughout; ligules orange or brownish-red, sometimes absent.{\i  Grassy places and open woods. • Mountains of E.C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b czernjaevii} (Minder.) Chater, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  68}: 276 (1974) ({\i S. czernjaevii} Minder.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but basal leaves gradually narrowed into a petiole 1-2 times as long as the lamina; involucre c. 5 mm, arachnoid-lanate, sometimes glabrescent; ligules 10-15, 7-11 mm.{\i  Grassy places and scrub. N. & C. parts of U.S.S.R}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b g}) Subsp. {\b tundricola} (Tolm.) Chater,{\i  loc. cit.} (1974) ({\i S. tundricola} Tolm.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but 15-40 cm; basal leaves 1-4 × 1-2 cm, gradually narrowed at base; capitula 1-5(-10); involucral bracts brownish-purple above; ligules c. 20 mm; achenes often glabrous.{\i  Tundra and stony slopes. Arctic Russia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b h}) Subsp. {\b atropurpureus} (Ledeb.) Cuf., {\i Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih}.){\b  70}: 43 (1933) ({\i S. atropurpureus} (Ledeb.) B. Fedtsch.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but 2-10(-20) cm, with more or less persistent, dark purplish or brownish tomentum at least above; basal leaves 1-6 × 0·5-2 cm, oblong-ovate to lanceolate, gradually narrowed into petiole; capitula solitary (rarely 2-3); achenes glabrous or sparsely hairy.{\i  Tundra. N.E. Russia.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp. ({\b h}) shows some approach to{\i  S. helenitis} subsp. {\i candidus} but is distinguished especially by the leaves being equally hairy or glabrescent on both surfaces, not strongly discolorous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. S. balbisianus} DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 360 (1838). Perennial (20-)50-100 cm. Stock short, erect. Stems very stout, sparsely floccose and more or less glabrescent. Basal leaves 20-45 × 3·5-9 cm, erect, ovate to oblong, usually rounded to cordate at base, very coarsely dentate, floccose and glabrescent; petiole 1½-4 times as long as lamina, often winged; middle cauline becoming oblong-ovate to linear-lanceolate, shortly petiolate or sessile and narrowed at base; upper cauline sessile, amplexicaul. Capitula 8-30, 25-35 mm in diameter, in a lax, sometimes compound corymb. Involucre 8-12 mm, more or less floccose-lanate at least below. Ligules 15-18, 10-15 mm, yellow. Achenes 3-4 mm, glabrous.{\i  Damp places. • Mountains of S.E. France and N.W. Italy.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Small plants from Alpi Marittime (Pizzo d'Ormea) approach {\b 33} and {\b 39}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. S. elodes} Boiss. ex DC., {\i Prodr.} {\b 7}: 301 (1838) ({\i Cineraria elodes} (Boiss. ex DC.) Nyman). Like {\b 34} but up to 170 cm; stems and leaves more completely glabrescent; basal leaves elliptic-oblong, entire or obscurely repand-dentate.{\i  Damp places,} 2300-2700{\i  m. S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Perhaps not specifically distinct from {\b 34}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   S. coincyi} Rouy, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  37}: 163 (1890) ({\i Cineraria coincyi} (Rouy) Willk.), described from C. Spain (near Ávila), is like {\b 34} but has the leaves more or less lanate beneath, the upper cauline leaves smaller and fewer, and the marginal achenes sometimes hairy; further information is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. S. helenitis} (L.) Schinz & Thell.,{\i  Viert. Naturf Ges. Zürich}{\b  53}: 569 (1908). Perennial 30-70(-120) cm. Stems slender. Basal leaves 5-20 × 1-4 cm, more or less erect and not appressed to the ground, ovate to spathulate or elliptic-oblong, petiolate;
\par

\par
199}
\par