{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. D. hungaricum} Reichenb. fil.,{\i  Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  16}: 34 (1853) ({\i D. longifolium} sensu Griseb., non Reichenb.). Like {\b 6} but more or less entirely glandular-pubescent; rhizome glabrous or sparsely sericeous; basal leaves 2-3·5( 6) × 0·5-1·5(-2) cm, oblong to narrowly elliptical, narrowed to an often indistinct petiole. 2n = 60. •{\i  Balkan peninsula and E.C.Europe.} Bu Cz ?Gr Hu ?It Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. D. pardalianches} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 885 (1753) ({\i D. cordatum} Lam.). Stems up to 90 cm, more or less pubescent. Rhizome with tufts of sericeous hairs. Basal leaves (6-)7-12(-15) × (5-)7-11(-14) cm, ovate-orbicular, cordate, pubescent, long-petiolate, dentate to subentire; lower cauline leaves ovate, cordate, petiolate; middle cauline panduriform; upper cauline ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, amplexicaul. Capitula 3-5(-6) cm in diameter, (1-)2-6(-8) in a terminal corymb; peduncles glandular-pubescent. Involucral bracts (8-)12-18 mm, linear, c. 2/3 as long as ligules. Achenes of marginal florets without a pappus. 2n = 60.{\i  Woods. W. Europe, northwards to} c. 51°{\i  N. and extending eastwards to S.E. Germany and Italy; cultivated for ornament and naturalized elsewhere.} *Be Co Ga Ge *Ho Hs It [Au Br Cz].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Records from Romania and the Ukranian Carpathians are apparently errors, or refer to short-lived escapes from cultivation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. D. cataractarum} Widder, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  22}: 115 (1925). Like {\b 8} but more robust, 80-130 cm; basal leaves (10-)15-20 × 10-18 cm, glabrous or glabrescent; capitula 4-10, 4-7(-10) cm in diameter; involucral bracts c. ½ as long as the ligules.{\i  Stream sides and other shady places,} 1250-2000{\i  m. S.E. Austria }({\i Koralpe}). Au.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. D. grandiflorum} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  2}: 313 (1786) ({\i Arnica scorpioides} sensu Jacq.). Stems up to 35 cm, pubescent. Rhizome with axillary tufts of sericeous hairs. Basal leaves 3·5-9 × 3-7 cm, ovate, more or less abruptly narrowed to a long petiole c. 6 cm, dentate or subentire, pubescent; lower cauline leaves long-petiolate; middle cauline more or less panduriform; upper lanceolate, amplexicaul. Capitula solitary, 3·5-6·5 cm in diameter; peduncles densely glandular-pubescent. Involucral bracts (13-)15-22 mm, linear-lanceolate, densely glandular pubescent, c. 2/3 as long as ligules. All achenes with a pappus. 2n = 60. {\i Mountain rocks and screes; usually calcicole. • From the Alps southwards to N. Spain, Corse and Albania.} Al Au Co Ga Ge He Hs It Ju ?Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. D. glaciale} (Wulfen) Nyman,{\i  Syll. }1 (1854-55). Stems up to 20 cm. Rhizome more or less glabrous. Basal leaves 2-4·5 × 1·2-2 cm, elliptic-oblong to -ovate, thick, tapered to a petiole 2-5 cm, entire or sinuate-dentate to weakly lobed; lower cauline leaves similar but more shortly petiolate; middle cauline elliptic-lanceolate, amplexicaul; upper cauline lanceolate. Capitula solitary, 3·5-4·5 cm in diameter. Involucral bracts 8-14 mm, c. ½ as long as ligules, linear-lanceolate. All achenes with a pappus. {\i Screes and stony slopes. • E. Alps.} Au Ge It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b glaciale}: Leaf-margin with long eglandular and short glandular hairs. Involucral bracts with short glandular hairs on the margin, occasionally intermixed with long hairs.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except for part of N.E. Alps.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b calcareum} (Vierh.) Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  6}({\b 2}): 723 (1928) ({\i D. calcareum} Vierh.): Leaf-margin hairy, but short glandular hairs absent. Involucral bracts with long glandular hairs on the margin and few or no eglandular hairs. 2n = 60.{\i  Calcicole. N.E. Alps}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. D. clusii} (All.) Tausch, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 11}: 178 (1828) ({\i D. stiriacum} (Vill.) Dalla Torre, {\i Aronicum clusii} (All.) Koch). Like {\b 11} but stems up to 35 cm; leaves thin, more or less densely villous, eglandular on the margin; involucral bracts villous with some long glandular hairs on the margin; capitula 4·5-7·5 cm in diameter. 2n = 60, 120.{\i  Alps, Carpathians, Pyrenees, Cordillera Cantábrica.} Au Cz Ga He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from the E. Alps and Carpathians have densely villous leaves and may warrant being separated as subsp.{\b  villosum }(Tausch) Vierh.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  50}: 205 (1900).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 95.       Erechtites}              Rafin.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Leaves simple, alternate. Capitula in terminal panicles. Involucral bracts in 1 row, with a few supplementary bracts below. Receptacle flat, without scales. All florets tubular, yellow, the outer female, the rest hermaphrodite or functionally male. Achenes linear-oblong, costate; pappus of numerous hairs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. hieracifolia} (L.) Rafin. ex DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 294 (1838). More or less pubescent annual 50-100(-180) cm. Leaves c. 10 cm, those at the bottom and top of the stem much smaller, oblanceolate, acute, gradually narrowed at base, sessile, coarsely and irregularly serrate. Capitula 6-7 mm in diameter; involucre campanulate to almost cylindrical; bracts c. 15 mm, linear-lanceolate. Achenes 2·5 mm, sparsely puberulent; pappus 12-14 mm, white, silky.{\i  Naturalized in E. C. Europe.} [Au Cz Hu Ju Po Rm.] ({\i Temperate N. & S. America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 96.               Senecio}               L. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.O. Chater & S.M. Walters.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or dwarf shrubs with alternate leaves. Leaves not or scarcely sheathing at the base. Capitula in corymbs, more rarely solitary; involucral bracts in one row, sometimes with shorter supplementary bracts at the base of the capitulum. Receptacle flat, without scales. Outer florets usually ligulate and female; inner florets hermaphrodite, tubular, yellow. Achenes usually more or less cylindrical, ribbed; pappus usually present, of simple or denticulate (rarely sub-plumose) hairs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   One of the largest genera in the world, of cosmopolitan distribution.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The leaf-shape of many species is very variable and identification on this character alone is unreliable. In the descriptions leaf-measurements include the petiole and measurements of diameter of capitulum include the ligules at anthesis.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   S. farfarifolius} Boiss. & Kotschy in Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  3}: 400 (1875), from S. Anatolia, has been doubtfully recorded from Greece. It is a perennial with erect, leafless stems and cordate-reniform, palmately veined basal leaves which are densely white-tomentose beneath, and has solitary capitula c. 20 mm in diameter with 8-14 orange-yellow ligules and 2-5 supplementary bracts.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves palmately veined
\par
2 Scrambling, glabrous plant; supplementary bracts present ... {\b 1. mikanioides}
\par
2 Erect plant, hairy at least in part; supplementary 
\par
  bracts absent
\par
3 Ligules 5-6, 10-12 mm, yellow .................................................. {\b 32. petasitis}
\par
3 Ligules 7-12, 4-9 mm, purple or bluish ................................ {\b 31. malvifolius}
\par
1 Leaves pinnately veined
\par
4 Ligules absent
\par
5 Glabrous annual ............................................................................ {\b 67. flavus}
\par
5 Perennial, usually obviously hairy, or hairy annual
\par

\par

\par
191}
\par