{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from the eastern part of the range which are glabrous or subglabrous (except sometimes for the involucre) have been called{\b  S. glaberrimus} (Rochel) Simonkai,{\i  Enum. Fl. Transs.} 329 (1887) ({\i S. doronicum} subsp.{\i  transylvanicus} (Boiss.) Nyman,{\i  S. transylvanicus} Boiss.), but similar plants occur in other parts of the range, especially in Spain, and they do not seem to merit even subspecific status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. S. scopolii} Hoppe & Hornsch. ex Bluff & Fingerh., {\i Comp. Fl. Germ.}{\b  2}: 380 (1825) ({\i S. lanatus} Scop., non L., {\i S. arachnoideus} Sieber ex DC.). Stems stout. Basal leaves ovate, rounded or cuneate at base, more or less abruptly contracted into the petiole, glabrescent above, arachnoid-lanate beneath, thin and soft. Capitula 30-60 mm in diameter, solitary. Involucre 10-15 mm, arachnoid-lanate, with 12-20 supplementary bracts c. ½ as long as the involucre. Ligules 12-17, pale yellow.{\i  Dry places; calcicole. • Italy and W. part of Balkan peninsula. }Al Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. S. lagascanus} DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 357 (1838). Stems slender. Basal leaves elliptical to ovate, gradually narrowed into the petiole, sparsely hairy, but more or less villous on midrib beneath, thick and somewhat coriaceous. Capitula 1-4, c. 25 mm in diameter, solitary. Involucre 8-10 mm, sparsely hairy, with (5-)10-12 supplementary bracts 1/3-1/2 as long as the involucre. Ligules 10-13, golden-yellow.{\i  Dry places; calcicole. • Mountains of N. & E. Spain.} Hs ?Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from C. Portugal, known as{\b  S. doronicum} subsp.{\b  lusitanicus} Coutinho,{\i  Fl. Port.} 641 (1913), are probably referable to this species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. S. eriopus} Willk. in Willk. & Lange, {\i Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  2}: 116 (1865). Like {\b 26}({\b a}) but up to 30 cm; lower part of stems and petioles densely arachnoid-lanate; basal leaves in a distinct rosette, ovate to ovate-oblong, cordate or rounded at base; cauline leaves few, small, linear-lanceolate, sessile; capitula 1-2; supplementary bracts c. ½ as long as involucre. {\i Rocky places,} 800-1300{\i  m. • Mountains of S.W. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. HUALTATA Cabrera. Perennial herbs, more or less floccose. Leaves more or less ovate, undivided. Involucre with small supplementary bracts. Achenes cylindrical, glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. S. smithii} DC., {\i Prodr.} {\b 6}: 412 (1838). Perennial 60-120 cm. Stems erect, stout, usually branched only in inflorescence, floccose-lanate to glabrescent. Basal leaves (10-)20-35 cm, oblong-ovate, truncate to subcordate at base, dentate, densely floccose-lanate beneath, sparsely so above, with petiole about equalling lamina; lower cauline similar but smaller; upper cauline ovate-triangular, sessile. Capitula many, 40-50 mm in diameter, in a lax or dense corymb. Involucre 10-13 mm, sparsely arachnoid-lanate, dark green or blackish, with 8-20 supplementary bracts ¼-½ as long as involucre. Ligules 15-20, 15-25 mm, white. Achenes 5-9 mm.{\i  Naturalized in Scotland.} [Br.] ({\i Temperate South America}.)
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. PERICALLIS (Webb) O. Hoffm. Perennial herbs, glabrous or variously hairy. Leaves broad, more or less palmately lobed, palmately veined. Involucre without supplementary bracts. Ligules usually purple. Achenes subcylindrical, usually hairy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. S. malvifolius} (L'Hér.) DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 410 (1838). Perennial up to 120 cm. Stems erect, branched, glabrous. Basal and lower cauline leaves 10-15 cm, suborbicular, subcordate at base and long-petiolate, often with lobes on the petiole and large auricles, callose-denticulate, at least the upper shallowly and obtusely palmately lobed, glabrous, or sparsely glandular above, densely grey-tomentose beneath; upper cauline ovate to ovate-lanceolate, cuneate at base. Capitula many, 10-15 mm in diameter, in a rather dense, compound corymb. Involucre 4-5 mm, glabrous. Ligules 7-9, 4-5 mm, pale purple or bluish.{\i  Ravines and roadsides. Açores. }Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. PALMATINERVII  O. Hoffm. Perennial herbs or shrubs,glabrous or variously hairy. Leaves broad, more or less palmately lobed, palmately veined. Involucre with or without small supplementary bracts. Achenes subcylindrical, glabrous.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. S. petasitis} (sims) DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 431 (1838). Perennial up to 120 cm. Stems erect, rather fleshy, branched, densely pubescent. Basal and lower cauline leaves 5-20 cm, suborbicular, more or less cordate at base and long-petiolate, shallowly palmately lobed, sparsely callose-denticulate but otherwise entire, sparsely tomentose-pubescent above, more densely so beneath. Capitula many, 20-30 mm in diameter, in an ovoid panicle. Involucre 9-11 mm, pubescent, without supplementary bracts. Ligules 5-6, 10-12 mm, bright yellow.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and naturalized in S. Europe.} [Az It Si.] ({\i Mexico}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. TEPHROSERIS (Reichenb.) Hallier, Wohlf. & Koch. Perennial herbs, usually more or less floccose. Leaves undivided, usually entire. Involucre without supplementary bracts. Achenes subcylindrical, glabrous or hairy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 33-39}).{\b  S. integrifolius} group. Perennial (rarely biennial) herbs. Stock usually short and erect or oblique, with one rosette (rarely rhizomatous and branched); stolons absent. Stems less than 1 cm in diameter, erect, branched only in inflorescence. Leaves in a basal rosette and few or many on the stem, entire to dentate. Capitula solitary or in a simple or compound usually more or less umbelliform corymb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 An extremely difficult group, in which most of the taxa are very variable. The following treatment is conservative, and an attempt has been made to evaluate most of the more commonly recognized taxa; it is not, however, possible to key more than a proportion of the material involved and the treatment must be regarded as very provisional.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: G. Cufodontis, {\i Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih.}) {\b 70}: 1-266 (1933). L. Brunerye,{\i  Les Seneçons du Groupe} Helenitis. Paris. 1969.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Basal leaves ± appressed to the ground, persistent at
\par
  anthesis, with petiole not longer than lamina; cauline
\par
  leaves few, small .................................................................... {\b 33. integrifolius}
\par
1 Basal leaves not appressed to the ground, usually 
\par
  withered at anthesis, with petiole usually longer than
\par
  lamina; cauline leaves usually many, well-developed
\par
2 Achenes hairy
\par
3 Leaves entire or remotely denticulate ......................................... {\b 36. helenitis}
\par
3 Leaves coarsely dentate
\par
4 Plant glandular ± throughout ...................................................... {\b 38. ovirensis}
\par
4 Plant eglandular except in inflorescence ..................................... {\b 37. rivularis}
\par
2 Achenes glabrous
\par
5 Basal leaves more than 20 cm
\par
6 Basal leaves strongly and irregularly dentate ......................... {\b 34. balbisianus}
\par
6 Basal leaves entire or obscurely repand-dentate ............................ {\b 35. elodes}
\par
5 Basal leaves not more than 20 cm
\par
7 Basal leaves persistently arachnoid-tomentose beneath;
\par
  ligules c. 15 ................................................................................. {\b 39. papposus}
\par
7 Basal leaves glabrescent; ligules usually more than 15
\par
8 Plant glandular ± throughout ...................................................... {\b 38. ovirensis}
\par
8 Plant eglandular except in inflorescence
\par

\par
198}
\par