{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   Typical plants of subsp. ({\b a}) have more or less deeply pinnatifid leaves which are usually densely sericeous-lanate, whilst those of subsp. ({\b b}) have shallowly lobed or crenate leaves much less densely hairy and sometimes subglabrous. There is much variation in hairiness, however, and many intermediates occur; one of these, in the E. Alps, has been called subsp.{\b  insubricus} (Chenevard) Br.-Bl.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1913).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. persoonii} De Not.,{\i  Repert. Fl. Ligust.} 229 (1844). Like {\b 6} but capitula few and relatively large; involucral bracts 8-12, 9-10 mm; ligules absent; achenes always hairy. 2n = 40. {\i Rocks, between} 1500 {\i and} 2400{\i  m. Alpi Marittime} ({\i region of Ormea}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. leucophyllus} DC.,{\i  Cat. Pl. Horti Monsp.} 114 (1813). Like {\b 6} but more robust, up to 20 cm; basal leaves thick in texture, pinnatifid, with more or less cuneate lobes; cauline always pinnatifid; capitula larger, with 12-15 involucral bracts and 2-4 supplementary bracts; ligules 5-7; achenes always hairy. 2n = 40.{\i  Mountain screes. E. Pyrenees and S.C. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. halleri} Dandy,{\i  Taxon}{\b  19}: 625 (1970) ({\i S. uniflorus} (All.) All., non Retz.). Perennial 3-10 cm, whitish-sericeous-lanate, with short, branched woody stock, and erect, unbranched stems bearing a single large capitulum. Basal leaves up to 5 cm, long-petiolate, entire, dentate or incised, oblong-obovate in outline; cauline simple, linear to lanceolate, semi-amplexicaul. Capitulum 20-25 mm in diameter. Involucral bracts c. 20, 7-10 mm; supplementary bracts (0)1-3. Ligules 10-16, 8-10 mm, narrowly elliptical, orange-yellow. Achenes c. 2·5 mm, hairy. {\i Pastures and rocky ground on mountains; calcifuge. • S.W. & S.C. Alps.} Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants otherwise resembling{\b  9} but with 2-4 capitula occur rarely throughout the range of the species; they are probably hybrids between {\b 9} and {\b 6}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. boissieri} DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  7}: 300 (1838). Dwarf, caespitose perennial with branched, woody stock and simple, slender, sericeous scapose stems 5-12 cm, each with few, distant, linear bracts and a single capitulum. Leaves up to 3 cm, with cuneate-obovate lamina attenuate into a petiole, distally incise-crenate, more or less sericeous especially beneath. Capitula 12-15 mm in diameter; involucral bracts 12-15, lanceolate, obtuse; supplementary bracts few and small. Ligules absent; tubular florets reddish. Achenes c. 2 mm, hairy. 2n = 40.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada, Sierra de Segura}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. FRUTICULOSI DC. Shrubs or dwarf shrubs, usually sparsely hairy or glabrescent. Leaves usually narrow, undivided. Involucre with small supplementary bracts. Achenes subcylindrical, glabrous or hairy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. linifolius} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2}: 1215 (1759). Sparsely hairy or glabrescent dwarf shrub 20-50 cm. Stems erect, usually branched throughout, densely leafy and usually with axillary fascicles of leaves. Leaves 2-5(-7) × 0·1-0·3(-0·4) cm, linear to linear-lanceolate, acute, entire or obscurely dentate, grey-green, fleshy. Capitula many, 10-15 mm in diameter, in compound corymbs or panicles. Involucre 6-8 mm, with 3-6(-12) linear supplementary bracts c. 1/3 as long as the involucre and herbaceous throughout; involucral bracts 2-carinate on the back. Ligules 10-15, 5-8 mm, golden-yellow. Achenes c. 3 mm, shortly and densely hairy. 2n = 40. {\i Dry, rocky and stony places. S. & S.E. Spain, Islas Baleares.} Bl Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. inaequidens} DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 401 (1837). Like {\b 11} but stems less densely leafy; leaves mostly c. 0·1 cm wide, linear, usually entire; supplementary bracts 10-20, with conspicuous, white, scarious, fimbriate margins.{\i  Naturalized in N. Italy and parts of W. Europe.} [Be Ga It.] ({\i South Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The identity of the plant naturalized in Europe has long been in doubt; it has been called{\i  S. harveianus} MacOwan, and, quite erroneously, {\i S. lautus} Solander ex Willd. It now seems most probable that it is{\i  S. inaequidens} DC., although further work on the group in South Africa may lead to some change of opinion.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   S. longifolius} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1222 (1763), also from South Africa, is perhaps becoming naturalized in S.E. France; it is similar to {\b 11} but has the involucre c. 4 mm and only 5 ligules c. 4 mm long.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. S. nevadensis} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 60 (1852). Like {\b 11} but up to 25 cm; stems ascending, less branched and less leafy, usually without axillary fascicles of leaves; leaves 2-5 × 0·3-0·7 cm, oblong- to linear-lanceolate, obtuse; capitula usually fewer; involucral bracts not carinate; achenes sparsely hairy.{\i  Stony places,} 2100-3450{\i  m. • S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. S. quinqueradiatus} Boiss. ex DC., {\i Prodr.} 7: 300 (1838). Subglabrous dwarf shrub 20-50 cm. Stems erect, sparsely leafy, divaricately branched throughout with long, slender internodes. Leaves 3-7 × 0·3-0·7(-1) cm, linear-oblong to -lanceolate, entire to sinuate-dentate, not fleshy. Capitula 10-15 mm in diameter, solitary on long peduncles. Involucre 5-7 mm, with 1-3 supplementary bracts c. ¼ as long as the involucre. Ligules 5, 5-6 mm, yellow. Achenes c. 4 mm, glabrous.{\i  Rocks and screes, }2000-3450 {\i m. S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. DORIA (Fabr.) Reichenb. Perennial herbs, usually subglabrous or sparsely hairy, usually with stolons. Leaves usually undivided, usually not strongly decreasing in size up the stem. Involucre with supplementary bracts. Ligules few or absent, never more than 13, rather short. Achenes subcylindrical, glabrous or hairy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. S. othonnae} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 308 (1808). Perennial 80-200 cm. Stock short, with long stolons. Stems erect, branched only in inflorescence, glabrous. Basal and lower cauline leaves 30-60 × 12-35 cm, pinnatisect, with oblong-lanceolate, incise-serrate segments, glabrous above, crispate-puberulent beneath; upper cauline leaves with more or less dentate segments. Capitula many, 5-15 mm in diameter, in compound corymbs. Involucre 5-7 mm, sparsely tomentose, with 1-4 supplementary bracts; bracts often black-tipped. Ligules 1-2, 8-12 mm, yellow. Achenes 3-6 mm, with dense, appressed hairs. {\i Woods and mountain grassland. C. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. S. fluviatilis} Wallr., {\i Linnaea}{\b  14}: 646 (1841). Perennial 60-200 cm. Stock short, with long, fleshy stolons up to 60 cm. Stems erect, branched above or only in inflorescence, glabrous above, puberulent below, densely leafy. Leaves 10-20 × 2-4 cm, elliptical to linear-lanceolate, glabrous, narrowed at the base, acute, serrate or 2-serrate with the outer margin of the teeth convex. Capitula many, 15-30 mm in diameter, in more or less compound corymbs. Involucre 5-8 mm, sparsely tomentose, with 3-5 supplementary bracts up to ½ as long as the involucre; bracts sometimes black-tipped. Ligules 6-8, 8-12 mm, yellow. Achenes 3-4 mm, glabrous. 2n = 40.{\i  Damp meadows and woods. C. & E. Europe, extending to the Netherlands and C. Jugoslavia; naturalized locally in N.W. Europe.} Au Cz Ga Ge Ho Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) [Br Da Hb].
\par

\par
195}
\par