{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 6 Supplementary bracts absent ........................... ({\b 33-39}). {\b integrifolius} group
\par
6 Supplementary bracts present
\par
7 Scapose, with solitary capitulum ............................................... {\b 10. boissieri}
\par
7 Not scapose, the capitula several or many
\par
8 Stems and lower surface of leaves densely white-tomentose
\par
9 Achenes 3-4 mm, glabrous ....................................................... {\b 5. thapsoides}
\par
9 Achenes c. 2 mm, hairy .............................................................. {\b 7. persoonii}
\par
8 Stems and leaves glabrous or sparsely hairy
\par
10 Biennial to perennial; at least the marginal achenes glabrous
\par
11 Cauline leaves ± pinnatifid; inner achenes hairy .................... {\b 44. jacobaea}
\par
11 Cauline leaves dentate; all achenes glabrous ....................... {\b 18. cacaliaster}
\par
10 Annual; all achenes hairy
\par
12 Supplementary bracts 1-3; cauline leaves usually at 
\par
   least as wide as long ...................................................................... {\b 67. flavus}
\par
12 Supplementary bracts at least 4; cauline leaves usually
\par
   longer than wide
\par
13 Supplementary bracts 8-10 ....................................................... {\b 65. vulgaris}
\par
13 Supplementary bracts 4-6 ......................................... {\b 59. leucanthemifolius} 
\par
4 Ligules present (sometimes small and revolute) 
\par
14 Supplementary bracts absent 
\par
15 Stems 1-4 cm thick, hollow; achenes with ± winged ribs ..... {\b 40. congestus} 
\par
15 Stems less than 1 cm thick; achenes terete or with obtuse ribs
\par
16 Annual
\par
17 Leaves unlobed or the cauline shallowly lobed ....................... {\b 61. petraeus}
\par
17 At least the cauline leaves deeply lobed or pinnatisect
\par
18 Achenes compressed, elliptical ................................................ {\b 57. minutus}
\par
18 Achenes subcylindrical ............................................................. {\b 58. gallicus}
\par
16 Perennial (rarely biennial)
\par
19 Leaves unlobed; plant glabrous to arachnoid-tomentose
\par
   .......................................................................... ({\b 33-39}). {\b integrifolius} group
\par
19 Cauline leaves usually lobed to pinnatifid; plant
\par
   ± sericeous-lanate
\par
20 Capitulum solitary ......................................................................... {\b 9. halleri}
\par
20 Capitula in a dense corymb ......................................................... {\b 6. incanus}
\par
14 Supplementary bracts present
\par
21 Dwarf shrub
\par
22 Sparsely hairy or glabrescent throughout
\par
23 Ligules 5; achenes glabrous ......................................... {\b 14. quinqueradiatus}
\par
23 Ligules 10-15; achenes hairy
\par
24 Leaves 3-7 mm wide, obtuse; stems ascending, usually 
\par
   without axillary fascicles of leaves ........................................ {\b 13. nevadensis}
\par
24 Leaves 1-3(-4) mm wide, acute; stems erect, usually 
\par
   with axillary fascicles of leaves
\par
25 Supplementary bracts 3-6(-12), entirely herbaceous .............. {\b 11. linifolius}
\par
25 Supplementary bracts 10-20, with a conspicuous, white-
\par
   scarious, fimbriate margin .................................................... {\b 12. inaequidens}
\par
22 Densely white-tomentose, at least on stems and lower 
\par
   surface of leaves
\par
26 Leaves linear, entire or with up to 4 distant lobes on
\par
   each side ................................................................................ {\b 2. gnaphalodes}
\par
26 Leaves lanceolate to ovate, pinnatifid to pinnate with
\par
   ± approximate lobes
\par
27 Stems with few, slender branches at the base, ± equally
\par
   leafy throughout ......................................................................... {\b 3. ambiguus}
\par
27 Stems with many, stout branches from the base, with 
\par
   leaves crowded at the base and sparse above ................................. {\b 4. bicolor}
\par
21 Herb, sometimes with a woody stock
\par
28 Achenes strongly compressed, elliptical ......................... {\b 56. delphinifolius}
\par
28 Achenes subcylindrical
\par
29 All achenes glabrous
\par
30 Capitula 1-2
\par
31 Supplementary bracts fewer than 10
\par
32 Annual, without non-flowering shoots at anthesis .................... {\b 58. gallicus}
\par
32 Perennial, with non-flowering shoots at anthesis
\par
33 Lower leaves 2- to 3-pinnatisect ..................................... {\b 53. abrotanifolius}
\par
33 Lower leaves entire to lyrate-pinnatifid
\par
34 Plant 3-20 cm; involucre green ........................................... {\b 55. resedifolius}
\par
34 Plant 25-50 cm; involucre purplish .......................................... {\b 43. pancicii}
\par
31 Supplementary bracts 12-20
\par
35 Stems usually more than 30 cm; cauline leaves well
\par
   developed at least below .................................... ({\b 26-28}).{\b  doronicum }group
\par
35 Stems usually less than 30 cm; cauline leaves very few
\par
   and small ...................................................................................... {\b 29. eriopus}
\par
30 Capitula 3 or more
\par
36 Very viscid; ligules often becoming revolute .......................... {\b 64. viscosus}
\par
36 Not viscid (but sometimes glandular in inflorescence);
\par
   ligules not revolute
\par
37 Basal and lower cauline leaves 2- to 3-pinnatisect,
\par
   with linear segments
\par
38 Ligules c. 13,10-15 mm .................................................. {\b 53. abrotanifolius}
\par
38 Ligules 3-6, 3-6 mm ......................................................... {\b 54. adonidifolius}
\par
37 Basal and lower cauline leaves entire to pinnatisect,
\par
   the segments not linear
\par
39 Basal leaves oblanceolate-spathulate, fleshy, glaucous
\par
   (Sicilia) ................................................................................... {\b 51. aethnensis}
\par
39 Basal leaves not spathulate, thin, green
\par
40 Ligules 1-8
\par
41 Plant ± sericeous-lanate; some leaves usually lobed .................. {\b 6. incanus}
\par
41 Plant not sericeous-lanate; leaves not lobed
\par
42 Cauline leaves rapidly decreasing in size up the stem,
\par
   merging into the bracts ................................................................... {\b 19. doria}
\par
42 Cauline leaves ± uniform, similar to the basal, very
\par
   distinct from the bracts 
\par
43 Ligules 1-3 ............................................................................ {\b 18. cacaliaster}
\par
43 Ligules 5-8
\par
44 Leaves with outer margin of teeth convex; supplementary
\par
   bracts usually not more than ½ as long as involucre ............... {\b 16. fluviatilis}
\par
44 Leaves with outer margin of teeth straight or concave;
\par
   supplementary bracts often about as long as involucre ......... {\b 17. nemorensis}
\par
40 Ligules 10-22
\par
45 Ligules white or purple
\par
46 Ligules white; perennial, with dentate leaves ............................ {\b 30. smithii}
\par
46 Ligules purple; annual, with pinnatipartite leaves .................... {\b 66. elegans}
\par
45 Ligules yellow to orange
\par
47 Involucre purplish .................................................................... {\b 43. pancicii}
\par
47 Involucre green
\par
48 Capitula less than 25 mm in diameter
\par
49 Leaves entire or finely dentate; achenes 3·5-5 mm .............. {\b 25. pyrenaicus}
\par
49 At least some leaves ± pinnatifid; achenes 2-3 mm
\par
50 Supplementary bracts 5-13, usually black-tipped .................. {\b 48. squalidus}
\par
50 Supplemenatry bracts 2-5(-6), usually greenish throughout
\par
51 Robust biennial or perennial; leaf-segments wide ................. {\b 45. aquaticus}
\par
51 Annual, often slender; leaf-segments very narrow ................... {\b 58. gallicus} 
\par
48 Capitula at least 25 mm in diameter
\par
52 Supplementary bracts 2-5 ....................................................... {\b 45. aquaticus}
\par
52 Supplementary bracts 5-20
\par
53 Basal leaves ovate to triangular-ovate, cordate or 
\par
   rounded at base
\par
54 Basal leaves about as long as wide; upper cauline 
\par
   leaves laciniate to pinnatisect ................................................. {\b 42. subalpinus}
\par
54 Basal leaves longer than wide; upper cauline leaves 
\par
   dentate, crenate-dentate or doubly dentate, sometimes
\par
   sub-pinnatifid at base ................................................................. {\b 41. cordatus}
\par

\par
192}
\par