{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b montana}: Lower leaves obovate to elliptical, 2-5 cm wide, subsessile. Involucral bracts 18-24; capitula 5-8 cm in diameter.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b atlantica} A. Bolós, {\i Agron. Lusit.}{\b  10}: 113 (1948): Lower leaves oblanceolate, (1·2-)1·7-2·5 cm wide, shortly petiolate. Involucral bracts 11-18; capitula 4-5 cm in diameter. {\i From S.W. France to S. Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 94.             Doronicum}            L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By I.K. Ferguson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbaceous perennials, usually with tubers or stolons.Leaves simple, alternate. Flowers yellow. Involucral bracts in 2-3 rows, herbaceous. Receptacle convex, often hairy. Ligulate florets female, in 1 row; tubular florets hermaphrodite. Achenes ribbed; pappus of 1-2 rows of simple hairs or sometimes absent in ligulate florets.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: F. Cavillier, {\i Annu. Cons. Jard. Bot. Genève }{\b 10}: 177-251 (1907);{\b 13-14}: 195-368 (1911). G. Rouy,{\i  Rev. Bot. Syst. Geogr. Bot.}{\b  1}: 17-22, 33-40, 49-56 (1903).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Basal leaves narrowed at base
\par
2 Ligulate florets without a pappus
\par
3 Rhizome ± glabrous; cauline leaves oblong to narrowly
\par
  elliptical .................................................................................. {\b 7. hungaricum}
\par
3 Rhizome with tufts of sericeous hairs; cauline leaves 
\par
  ovate-elliptical ...................................................................... {\b 6. plantagineum}
\par
2 Ligulate florets with a pappus
\par
4 Inflorescence with 3-8 capitula .................................................. {\b 1. corsicum}
\par
4 Inflorescence with 1 capitulum
\par
5 Rhizome with tufts of sericeous hairs; basal leaves 
\par
  ovate .................................................................................... {\b 10. grandiflorum}
\par
5 Rhizome ± glabrous; basal leaves elliptic-oblong
\par
6 Leaves thick, somewhat fleshy, with short glandular 
\par
  hairs on margins .......................................................................... {\b 11. glaciale}
\par
6 Leaves thin, with eglandular hairs on margins .............................. {\b 12. clusii}
\par
1 Basal leaves cordate or subcordate, not or scarcely 
\par
  narrowed at base
\par
7 Ligulate florets with a pappus ........................................... {\b 10. grandiflorum}
\par
7 Ligulate florets without a pappus
\par
8 Inflorescence with 4-12(-17) capitula
\par
9 Lower cauline leaves panduriform, amplexicaul .................... {\b 2. austriacum}
\par
9 Lower cauline leaves ± petiolate
\par
10 Robust,up to 130 cm; basal leaves (10-)15-20 × 10-18 cm,
\par
   glabrous or glabrescent ........................................................ {\b 9. cataractarum}
\par
10 Smaller, up to 90 cm; basal leaves (6-)7-12(-15) ×
\par
   (5-)7-11(-14) cm, pubescent ............................................... {\b 8. pardalianches}
\par
8  Inflorescence with 1-3 capitula
\par
11 Petioles densely villous ..................................................... {\b 8. pardalianches}
\par
11 Petioles glabrous or sparsely hairy
\par
12 Rhizome with very conspicuous tufts of sericeous hairs
\par
13 Capitula solitary; cauline leaves 1-2(-3) ................................... {\b 4. orientale}
\par
13 Capitula (1-)2-3- cauline leaves 6-8 ..................................... {\b 5. carpetanum}
\par
12 Rhizome glabrous or with very small sparse tufts of
\par
   sericeous hairs
\par
14 Lower cauline leaves sessile amplexicaul ............................... {\b 3. columnae}
\par
14 Lower cauline leaves distinctly petiolate, not 
\par
   amplexicaul ............................................................................ {\b 5. carpetanum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. corsicum} (Loisel.) Poiret in Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot., Suppl.}{\b  2}: 517 (1812) ({\i Aronicum corsicum} (Loisel.) DC.). Stems up to 120 cm, glandular-hairy above, more or less glabrous below. Basal leaves 9-16 × 3-7 cm, ovate, shortly petiolate; cauline leaves ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, acute or acuminate, amplexicaul, sinuate-dentate, glabrous or sparsely pubescent.Capitula 2·5-4·5(-5) cm in diameter, 3-8 in a terminal corymb; peduncles glandular-pubescent. Involucral bracts 7-11(-15) mm, lanceolate, glandular-pubescent, shortly ciliate. All achenes with a pappus. 2n = 60.{\i  By mountain streams. • Corse.} Co.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. D. austriacum} Jacq., {\i Fl. Austr.}{\b  2}: 18 (1774) ({\i D. orphanidis} Boiss.). Stems up to 100 cm, glabrous, or hairy with long crispate hairs. Basal leaves 9-13 × 6-8 cm, ovate, obtuse, somewhat cordate, petiolate; lower cauline leaves ovate to lanceolate, panduriform, amplexicaul; upper cauline leaves ovate-lanceolate, pubescent or more or less glandular-puberulent, entire or denticulate. Capitula 3·5-6 cm in diameter, 5-12(-17) in a terminal corymb; peduncles glandular-pubescent. Involucral bracts 11-15 mm, linear-lanceolate, more or less pubescent. Achenes of marginal florets without a pappus. 2n = 60. {\i Damp or shady places. Mountains of C. & S. Europe, from C. France and the Carpathians southwards to N.W. Spain, N. Appennini and N. Greece.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. D. columnae} Ten., {\i Fl. Nap. }{\b 1}, {\i Prodr.}: 49 (1811) ({\i D. cordatum} auct., non Lam.). Stems 12-60 cm, glabrous or sparsely pubescent. Rhizome glabrous or sparsely pubescent. Basal leaves 3-7(-8) × 3-6·5(-7·5) cm, ovate-orbicular or cordate, long-petiolate, glabrous or pubescent, especially on the margin, crenate-dentate; cauline leaves 3-4, the lower elliptical to ovate-lanceolate, sometimes weakly panduriform, amplexicaul, the upper ovate-lanceolate, amplexicaul. Capitula solitary, (2-)2·5-5(-6) cm in diameter; peduncles glandular-pubescent. Involucral bracts 8-14(-18) mm, linear-lanceolate, c. ½ as long as ligules, densely glandular-pubescent. Achenes of marginal florets without a pappus. {\i Shady mountain rocks. E. Alps, Appennini, mountains of Romania and Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Bu Ge Gr It Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. D. orientale} Hoffm., {\i Comment. Soc. Phys.-Med. Univ. Mosq.}{\b  1}: 8 (1808) ({\i D. caucasicum} Bieb.). Like {\b 3} but rhizome with conspicuous tufts of sericeous hairs; cauline leaves 1-2(-3) usually weakly crenate. 2n = 60. {\i Woods and shady mountain rocks. S.E Europe, extending to the Carpathians and C. Italy}. Al Bu Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from the E. & S. Carpathians with all the achenes with a pappus have been described as{\b  D. carpaticum} (Griseb. & Schenk) Nyman,{\i  Syll., Suppl.} 1 (1865) but are doubtfully distinct from{\b  4}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. D. carpetanum} Boiss. & Reuter ex Willk. in Willk. & Lange, {\i Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  2}: 108 (1865). Stems (15-)40-80 cm. Rhizome glabrous or with sparse tufts of sericeous hairs. Basal and lower cauline leaves 4-7 × 3-6 cm, ovate-orbicular, cordate, long-petiolate, crenate-dentate to subentire; cauline leaves 6-8, the middle ovate, shortly petiolate with expanded petioles clasping the stem, or leaves sub-panduriform; the upper lanceolate, sessile, amplexicaul. Capitula (1-)2-3, 4-5 cm in diameter; peduncles glandular-pubescent. Involucral bracts 8-14 mm, linear-lanceolate, glandular-pubescent. Achenes of marginal florets without a pappus. 2n = 60, 120.{\i  Mountain pastures and rocky places. N. & C. Spain, N. Portugal.} ?Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. D. plantagineum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 885 (1753). Stems up to 80 cm, glabrous below, pubescent above. Rhizome with tufts of sericeous hairs at nodes. Basal leaves 5-11 × 3-5(-6) cm, ovate-elliptical, narrowed to a long petiole, entire or weakly dentate; lower cauline leaves ovate-elliptical, amplexicaul; upper lanceolate. Capitula usually solitary, 3-5 cm in diameter; peduncles glandular-pubescent. Involucral bracts 14-20 mm, linear, ciliate, c. 2/3 as long as ligules. Achenes of marginal florets without a pappus. 2n = 120. {\i Woods, pastures and heaths. • W. Europe, northwards to N. France.} Ga Hs It Lu [Br Ho].
\par

\par

\par
190}
\par