{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 141 Pedicels more than 1 mm; partial inflorescences lax ....... {\b 111. austriacum}
\par 140 Stems scarcely reddish at base; leaves usually 
\par     oblanceolate and less than 12 times as long as wide
\par 142 Leaf-margin smooth .......................................................... {\b 108. sudeticum}
\par 142 Leaf-margin mostly ± scabrid, ciliate or hairy ............. {\b 112. anisophyllon}
\par 136 At least the distal part of the leaf-margin or the 
\par     upper surface with antrorsely directed papilliform 
\par     teeth or cilia
\par 143 Leaves ± fleshy, ciliolate only at the non-revolute 
\par     margin; fruit mostly more than 1·5 mm .................. {\b 113. pseudohelveticum}
\par 143 Leaves thin to ± coriaceous, the margin ± revolute,
\par     the upper surface often papillose or hairy; fruit 
\par     mostly less than 1·5 mm
\par 144 Flowers less than 2 mm in diameter
\par 145 Leaves linear, mostly less than 1 mm wide ......................... {\b 101. timeroyi}
\par 145 Leaves narrowly oblanceolate, mostly more than 1·2 mm
\par     wide ....................................................................................... {\b 97. papillosum}
\par 144 Flowers more than 2 mm in diameter; leaves oblanceo-
\par     late to linear-lanceolate, often more than 1 mm wide
\par 146 Pedicels mostly less than 1 mm; stem occasionally reddish at base;
\par      middle internodes often more than twice as long as the leaves
\par 147 Leaves usually 1·2-2 mm wide .......................................... {\b 97. papillosum}
\par 147 Leaves usually 0·9-1·2 mm wide ........................................ {\b 98. pinetorum}
\par 146 Pedicels mostly more than 1 mm; stem not reddish at
\par     base; leaves often more than 1·1 mm wide
\par 148 Middle internodes usually more than twice as long as the leaves
\par 149 Plant green to brownish when dry; inflorescence 
\par     broadly ovoid ............................................................................. {\b 95. rivulare}
\par 149 Plant blackish when dry; inflorescence broadly 
\par     pyramidal ................................................................. {\b 96. asturiocantabricum}
\par 148 Middle internodes usually less than twice as long as
\par     the leaves
\par 150 Fruit c. 1·5 mm; leaves rather thick .................................. {\b 99. marchandii}
\par 150 Fruit c. 1·1 mm; leaves thin, membranous ....................... {\b 100. nevadense}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. PLATYGALIUM Koch. Perennial dwarf shrubs or herbs, with a taproot, or with a rhizome and stolons. Stems with patent hairs or glabrous and smooth, mostly 4-angled. Leaves in whorls of 4 (with the stipules sometimes clearly smaller), usually with 3 parallel veins, rather obtuse. Inflorescence many-flowered, pyramidal to corymbose; ultimate branches ebracteate. Corolla usually rotate, sometimes infundibuliform, white to yellowish; lobes acute. Fruit dry, often with hooked or curved hairs, or glabrous.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. paradoxum} Maxim., {\i Bull. Acad. Imp. Sci. Pétersb.}{\b  19}: 281 (1874) ({\i G. syreistschikowii} Lipsch.). Stock with slender, rooting stolons. Stems (4-)10-20(-25) cm, slender, somewhat hairy. Leaves 10-25(-40) × 10-15(-20) mm, suborbicular to ovate, subacute, widest near the middle, narrowed into a distinct petiole, distinctly pinnately veined, delicate, membranous, with slender hairs particularly along margin. Stipules less than half as long as the leaves, the lower scale-like, the upper leaf-like. Inflorescence corymbose, 3- to few-flowered; bracts few. Corolla 2·5-3 mm in diameter, shallowly infundibuliform. Fruit c. 2 mm, with patent, hooked hairs.{\i  Open coniferous woods. S. Ural} ({\i about half-way between Ufa and Zlatoust}). Rs (C). ({\i C. & E. Asia.})
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. G. rotundifolium} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 108 (1753) ({\i G. scabrum} auct., non L.). Stolons slender, creeping, mostly rooting. Stems up to 20(-35) cm, slender, glabrous, or rarely with short, scattered hairs. Leaves 14-18 × 6-10(-12) mm, ovate to suborbicular, subacute, shortly petiolate, delicate, more or less glabrescent. Inflorescence corymbose, rather few-flowered; bracts few; pedicels (2-)5-15 mm. Corolla 3-3·5(-4) mm in diameter, rotate. Fruit c. 2 mm, with patent, hooked hairs. 2n = 22.{\i  Woods. W., C. & S. Europe, extending northwards to Gotland and Latvia.} Al Au Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, W) Sa Si Su Tu [Da Ho No].
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. G. scabrum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 108 (1753) ({\i G. ellipticum }Willd. ex Hornem.). Stock without or with scarcely rooting stolons. Stem 30-50 cm, stout, almost always with dense, patent hairs. Leaves 20-35 × 10-16 mm, broadly ovate, subacute, sessile. Inflorescence long, ovoid, many-flowered; bracts numerous; pedicels (2-)4-8(-9) mm. Corolla 2·5-3·5(-4) mm in diameter, rotate. Fruit c. 2 mm, with patent, hooked hairs. 2n = 22.{\i  Mediterranean woods. S. Europe.} Co Hs It Sa Si.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. G. baillonii} Brandza, {\i Anal. Acad. Romane} ser. 2,{\b  2}({\b 2}): 538 (1881). Stolons stout, rooting. Stems 15-30 cm, ascending, slender, usually glabrous, 4-angled. Leaves (13-)15-40(-45) × 5-16 mm, rhombic-lanceolate, usually widest in the lower half or in the middle, with a long, obtuse apex, hairy especially on the margins and the veins. Inflorescence broadly corymbose, few-flowered; partial inflorescences with monochasial ultimate branches; flowers subsessile. Corolla 2-3 mm in diameter. Fruit c. 2 mm; pericarp scarcely inflated, glabrous. 2n = 22. {\i Rocky woods. • Foothills of the S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. G. broterianum} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Nov. Hisp. }15 (1842). Stolons rooting. Stems 35-70 cm, more or less ascending, lax, 4-angled, glabrous or with long, scattered hairs especially below. Leaves (10-)18-30 × (3-)8-11(-15) mm, narrowly to broadly elliptical, obtuse, thin, with distinct veins, hairy, especially on the margin and the veins. Inflorescence pyramidal, interrupted, dense-flowered; partial inflorescences corymbose, with dichasial ultimate branches; pedicels (1-)2-3 mm. Corolla 3-3·5 mm in diameter, shallowly infundibuliform. Fruit c. 1·2 mm, finely papillose, otherwise glabrous. 2n = 22. {\i Damp or shady places in the mountains. • C. Spain, Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. G. boreale} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 108 (1753). Stolons rooting. Stems 30-65 cm, erect, stout, 4-angled, usually glabrous, rarely shortly hairy. Leaves 15-40 × (2-)3-5(-8) mm, elongate-lanceolate, widest at or below the middle, obtuse, somewhat coriaceous, usually glabrous (or somewhat rough or shortly hairy), with indistinct veins. Inflorescence oblong-pyramidal, dense-flowered; pedicels (1-)2-3 mm. Corolla 3-4 mm in diameter, rotate. Fruit 1·5-2 mm, with short, appressed (rarely patent) hooked hairs, or glabrous; pericarp more or less appressed. 2n = 44, (55), 66. {\i Grassy places. Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region}. Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    The tetraploids and hexaploids have widely overlapping distributions, and are morphologically indistinguishable.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. G. rubioides} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 105 (1753). Stolons rooting. Stems 45-130 cm, erect, stout, weakly 4-angled below, distinctly 4-angled above, glabrous or hairy. Leaves 35-80 × 9-25 mm,
\par 
\par 19}
\par