{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 53 Basal leaves ovate-lanceolate or narrower, rounded or
\par
   cuneate at base
\par
55 Leaves mostly basal, persistent at anthesis; involucre
\par
   8-15 mm ............................................................. ({\b 26-28}). {\b doronicum} group
\par
55 Stems ± densely leafy, at least in the middle; basal 
\par
   leaves usually withered at anthesis; involucre 6-8 mm
\par
56 Leaves with patent teeth or entire, glabrous or 
\par
   sparsely crispate-hairy beneath .............................................. {\b 25. pyrenaicus}
\par
56 Leaves serrate, usually lanate or tomentose beneath ............. {\b 21. paludosus} 
\par
29 At least some achenes hairy
\par
57 Marginal achenes glabrous
\par
58 Inner achenes sparsely hairy; basal leaves lyrate or
\par
   undivided, ± persistent at anthesis ........................................... {\b 45. aquaticus}
\par
58 Inner achenes densely hairy; basal leaves usually
\par
   pinnatifid, withered at anthesis ................................................. {\b 44. jacobaea}
\par
57 Marginal achenes hairy
\par
59 All leaves entire to dentate
\par
60 Ligules 5-6 .................................................................................... {\b 19. doria}
\par
60 Ligules more than 6
\par
61 Annual
\par
62 Ligules not more than 5 mm, revolute immediately
\par
   after anthesis ................................................................................. {\b 63. lividus}
\par
62 Ligules more than 5 mm, not revolute
\par
63 Plant ± fleshy; basal leaves obovate-spathulate ....... {\b 59. leucanthemifolius}
\par
63 Plant not fleshy; basal leaves not obovate spathulate ............ {\b 48. squalidus}
\par
61 Perennial
\par
64 Plant sericeous-lanate; capitula solitary ........................................ {\b 9. halleri}
\par
64 Plant not sericeous-lanate; capitula usually several
\par
65 Upper cauline leaves more strongly toothed than the 
\par
   lower ...................................................................................... {\b 47. carpetanus}
\par
65 Leaves entire, or the upper cauline less strongly
\par
   toothed than the lower
\par
66 Leaves closely and evenly serrate ......................................... {\b 21. paludosus}
\par
66 Leaves entire or with ± remote, patent teeth
\par
67 Stems branched from the base or the middle; supplementary 
\par
   bracts black-tipped ................................................................... {\b 48. squalidus}
\par
67 Stems branched only in inflorescence; supplementary 
\par
   bracts concolorous, usually green 
\par
68 Involucre ± arachnoid-lanate .................................................... {\b 22. eubaeus} 
\par
68 Involucre sparsely hairy or glabrous 
\par
69 Supplementary bracts 2-6
\par
70 Basal leaves 3-10 cm, fleshy-coriaceous, glabrous or
\par
   glabrescent .................................................................................. {\b 24. auricula}
\par
70 Basal leaves more than 10 cm, not fleshy coriaceous,
\par
   crispate-pubescent beneath ............................................................. {\b 19. doria}
\par
69 Supplementary bracts 10-15
\par
71 Upper cauline leaves very few, linear lanceolate ....................... {\b 20. lopezii}
\par
71 Upper cauline leaves numerous, lanceolate ..................... {\b 23. macedonicus}
\par
59 At least some leaves pinnatifid or pinnatisect
\par
72 Plant ± grey, with dense, appressed, ± lanate tomentum
\par
73 Capitula solitary ............................................................................ {\b 9. halleri} 
\par
73 Capitula several, in corymbs
\par
74 Involucral bracts 12-15; supplementary bracts 2-4 ............ {\b 8. leucophyllus}
\par
74 Involucral bracts 6-10; supplementary bracts 1-2 ...................... {\b 6. incanus}
\par
72 Plant not grey, subglabrous to floccose or arachnoid-lanate 
\par
75 Ligules 1-2; basal leaves 30-60 cm ........................................ {\b 15. othonnae} 
\par
75 Ligules 5 or more; basal leaves not more than 30 cm
\par
76 Perennial (more rarely biennial); stems erect, robust,
\par
   usually branched only in inflorescence
\par
77 Glandular-hairy at least in inflorescence ........................... {\b 52. nebrodensis}
\par
77 Eglandular
\par
78 Supplementary bracts 10-12, 1/2-2/3 as long as involucre {\b 23. macedonicus}
\par
78 Supplementary bracts usually fewer than 10 usually less
\par
   than 1/2 as long as involucre
\par
79 Middle cauline leaves 2-pinnatifid, with distant,
\par
   linear lobes ................................................................................... {\b 49. siculus}
\par
79 Middle cauline leaves entire to pinnatifid, with wider lobes
\par
80 Ligules revolute immediately after anthesis (Britain) ......... {\b 50. cambrensis}
\par
80 Ligules not revolute
\par
81 Ligules c. 8 ........................................................................... {\b 47. carpetanus}
\par
81 Ligules 12-18
\par
82 Supplementary bracts c. ½ as long as involucre .................. {\b 46. erucifolius}
\par
82 Supplementary bracts c. ¼ as long as involucre .................... {\b 48. squalidus}
\par
76 Annual; stems relatively weak (sometimes succulent),
\par
   often branched in lower half
\par
83 Ligules not more than 5 mm, revolute immediately after anthesis
\par
84 Achenes 3-4 mm
\par
85 Stems usually simple, ± glandular-hairy above ......................... {\b 63. lividus}
\par
85 Stems usually branched, not glandular-hairy ...................... {\b 50. cambrensis}
\par
84 Achenes less than 3 mm
\par
86 Glandular at least in inflorescence ........................................ {\b 62. sylvaticus}
\par
86 Eglandular ................................................................................ {\b 65. vulgaris}
\par
83 Ligules more than 5 mm, not revolute
\par
87 Ligules purple ........................................................................... {\b 66. elegans}
\par
87 Ligules yellow
\par
88 Subglabrous, usually fleshy, with unlobed ± obovate 
\par
   basal leaves; auricles of upper cauline leaves entire
\par
   or shallowly dentate ................................................... {\b 59. leucanthemifolius}
\par
88 Usually hairy, rarely fleshy; basal leaves often lobed,
\par
   elliptical to ovate in outline; auricles of upper 
\par
   cauline leaves dentate to laciniate
\par
89 Supplementary bracts few (rarely up to 6); all leaves
\par
   ± pinnatisect, with linear-oblong, often patent,
\par
   remote segments ......................................................................... {\b 58. gallicus}
\par
89 Supplementary bracts 5-13; leaves variably dissected,
\par
   but rarely with linear-oblong, patent, remote segments
\par
90 Young shoots usually arachnoid-lanate; branches of 
\par
   inflorescence ± erect ................................................................... {\b 60. vernalis}
\par
90 Young shoots subglabrous to floccose; branches of 
\par
   inflorescence ± patent .............................................................. {\b 48. squalidus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. DELAIRIA (Lemaire) Bentham. Scrambling, glabrous perennials with more or less woody stems. Leaves more or less angled or reniform, palmately veined. Involucre with supplementary bracts. Florets yellow. Achenes subcylindrical, glabrous or hairy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. mikanioides} Otto ex Walpers, {\i Allgem. Gartenz.}{\b  13}: 41 (1845). Up to 300(-600) cm. Stems climbing, woody at least below and rather fleshy, much-branched, slender. Leaves 3-10 cm, orbicular- or triangular-reniform, fleshy, with 3-11 triangular, acute lobes or angles; petioles mostly longer than leaves, often with small auricles at the base. Capitula many, 5-7 mm in diameter, in dense axillary and terminal panicles. Involucre 3-4 mm, with 2-4 supplementary bracts ¼-½ as long as the involucre. Ligules absent; florets yellow. 2n = 20. {\i Cultivated for ornament and naturalized in S. & W. Europe.} [Az Br Co Ga Hs It Lu.] ({\i South Africa}.)
\par

\par
193}
\par