{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 blackish. 2n = 20. {\i Maritime sands and rocks; rarely inland. W. & C. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Al Bl Co Ga ?Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Very variable. Robust plants with thick, fleshy, unlobed or only slightly lobed leaves have been called{\b  S. crassifolius} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.} {\b 3}: 1982 (1803), and contrast very strongly with small spring-flowering ephemerals with only slightly fleshy leaves. Nevertheless, a series of intermediates seems to connect all the variants.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Variants occur with poorly developed ligules (e.g.{\b  S. caroli-malyi} Horvatic,{\i  Biol. Glas.} ({\i Zagreb}) {\b 8}: 37 (1955), described from N.W. Jugoslavia (Kverneri Otoki)), or with small capitula wholly without ligules (e.g.{\b  S. pygmaeus.} DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 341 (1838) from Sicilia, Malta and Lampedusa).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b S. rodriguezii} Willk. ex Rodr.,{\i  Anal. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat.}{\b  3}: 36 (1874), a dwarf, fleshy, almost entire-leaved plant from Islas Baleares (Mallorca and Menorca), differs strikingly from {\b 59} in its pale lilac ligules. It is nevertheless not clearly distinguishable on any other character, has 2n = 20, and seems best treated as a local variant of {\b 59}, typical yellow-flowered plants of which are recorded from Ibiza.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. S. vernalis} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  1}: 23 (1800). Erect annual up to 50 cm, unbranched or with suberect branches above. Young stems and leaves usually arachnoid-lanate, but variably glabrescent at maturity. Basal leaves oblong in outline, more or less pinnatifid with wide, dentate rhachis, petiolate middle and upper cauline similar in shape, but amplexicaul with dentate auricles. Capitula 20-25 mm in diameter in a laxly subcorymbose, terminal inflorescence. Involucral bracts 8-10 mm, glabrous, concolorous or black-tipped; supplementary bracts several, up to 3 mm, usually black-tipped. Ligules c. 13, c. 10 mm, yellow. Achenes 2-3 mm, appressed-hairy. 2n = 40.{\i  Cultivated and waste ground and open, sandy or stony habitats. Native in E. & E.C. Europe; introduced in the nineteenth century to W.C. & W. Europe and Fennoscandia, and still extending its range.} Al Au Bu Gr Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Tu [Be Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho No Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Although typical plants are very different in habit from {\b 59} there are no clear characters unequivocally separating the two species, and the taxonomic position of some populations in parts of S. & E. Europe is very uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. S. petraeus} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Pugillus} 59 (1852). Subglabrous, erect annual up to 50 cm with ascending branches mainly in the upper half. Basal leaves ovate, entire or dentate, shortly petiolate; cauline ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, dentate to shallowly lobed, auriculate-amplexicaul. Capitula few, 20-30 mm in diameter. Involucre c. 10 mm; supplementary bracts absent. Ligules c. 13, 8-10 mm, yellow. Achenes c. 3 mm, hairy.{\i  Limestone rocks. • S.W. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. S. sylvaticus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 868 (1753). Erect annual up to 70 cm, with sulcate stem and ascending branches, usually somewhat floccose, glandular-hairy at least in inflorescence but not viscid. Leaves irregularly pinnatifid; basal and lower cauline leaves oblanceolate in outline, shortly petiolate; middle and upper cauline leaves oblong in outline, auriculate-amplexicaul. Capitula numerous, 4-6 mm in diameter, in a large terminal corymb. Involucral bracts 7-10 mm, concolorous or slightly dark-tipped, glandular-hairy; supplementary bracts 2 or 3, 1-2 mm. Ligules 8-15, very short and revolute immediately after anthesis, yellow. Achenes c. 2·5 mm, rather sparsely subappressed-hairy. 2n = 40.{\i  Wood-margins and disturbed ground, especially on sandy soils. From C. Fennoscandia and N.C. Russia southwards to C. Portugal C. Italy and Bulgaria. }Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 63. S. lividus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 867 (1753). Erect, usually unbranched annual up to 40 cm, with sparse, eglandular hairs in lower half, more or less glandular-hairy in inflorescence. Leaves glabrous or somewhat glandular; basal leaves oblong-obovate, sinuate-lobed or pinnatifid, petiolate; middle and upper cauline leaves oblong, dentate, sometimes lobed, amplexicaul, with large, more or less dentate auricles. Capitula numerous, 6-10 mm in diameter, in a terminal corymb. Involucral bracts 8-10 mm, glabrous or subglabrous; supplementary bracts 4-6, 2-3 mm; all more or less dark-tipped. Ligules yellow, very short, revolute immediately after anthesis. Achenes 3-4 mm, covered with stiff, dense, erectopatent or subappressed hairs. 2n = 40. {\i W. & C. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. S. viscosus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 868 (1753). Very viscid, foetid annual up to 60 cm, usually freely branched, with somewhat flexuous stems. Leaves dark green, densely glandular-hairy, deeply and regularly pinnatifid; basal and lower cauline obovate in outline, shortly petiolate; middle and upper cauline oblong in outline, sessile but not or scarcely amplexicaul. Capitula numerous, 6-10(-12) mm in diameter, in a large, irregular terminal corymb. Involucral bracts 8-11 mm, densely glandular; supplementary bracts 3 or 4, 2-4 mm; all usually concolorous. Ligules c. 13, short and often becoming revolute, yellow. Achenes 3-4 mm, glabrous. 2n = 40. {\i Waste ground, railway-lines and other open sandy or gravelly habitats. From the Netherlands and N.C. Russia southwards to C. Spain and Greece, but absent from most of the south-east; recently naturalized in parts of N. & W. Europe.} Al Au Be Bl *Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Si [Da Fe Hb No Rs (N) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. S. vulgaris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 867 (1753). Subglabrous or somewhat floccose, rather succulent annual up to 40 cm, with weak, irregularly-branched stems. Leaves coarsely pinnatifid with distant, obtuse, toothed lobes; basal and lower cauline leaves oblanceolate in outline, shortly petiolate; middle and upper cauline leaves oblong in outline, auriculate-amplexicaul. Capitula numerous, 4-5 mm in diameter (in common discoid variant), subsessile in dense, subcorymbose clusters at anthesis; peduncles elongating in fruit. Involucre cylindrical; involucral bracts 5-8 mm, usually glabrous and often black-tipped; supplementary bracts 8-10, 1-2 mm, usually black-tipped, sometimes blackish throughout. Ligules usually absent, sometimes 6-12, yellow, short, revolute immediately after anthesis. Achenes 1·5-2(-2·5) mm, appressed-hairy between the ribs. 2n = 40. {\i Cultivated ground, waste places and maritime sands. Throughout Europe, but only as a casual in the extreme north.} All except Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in habit, leaf-shape and hairiness. Populations with ligulate capitula (subsp.{\i  denticulatus} (O. F. Mueller) P. D. Sell, {\i Watsonia}{\b  6}: 303 (1967)) have a mainly coastal distribution in W. Europe and may be native. Ligulate variants are rare inland, except in Britain, where recent experimental evidence suggests that they may arise by introgressive hybridization with {\b 48}. 
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   In coastal parts of the Mediterranean region plants occur which are somewhat intermediate between {\b 65} and {\b 59}. Such plants may be of hybrid origin, but experimental evidence is lacking.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b S. dubius} Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Alt.}{\b  4}: 112 (1833), an Asiatic species recorded from S.E. Russia (Kamysin), differs from {\b 65} mainly in
\par

\par
204}
\par