{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. S. aquaticus} Hill, {\i Veg. Syst.}{\b  2}: 120 (17613. Like {\b 44} but more constantly biennial; stems often branched in lower part; basal leaves often undivided, more persistent at anthesis; corymb less dense; capitula 12-30 mm in diameter; achenes all glabrous or the inner with rather sparse hairs confined to the ribs. 2n = 40. {\i Wet places. S., W. & C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden and the western margin of the U.S.S.R.} All except Bl Cr Fa Fe Is Rs (N, C, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b aquaticus}: Segments of upper cauline leaves forwardly-directed. Branches of inflorescence ascending. Capitula few, (20-)25-30 mm in diameter.{\i  Marshes,fens and wet meadows. W. & C. Europe}.
\par
  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b barbareifolius} (Wimmer & Grab.) Walters,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 273 (1976) ({\i S. erraticus} Bertol.,{\i  S. aquaticus} var.{\i  barbareifolius} Wimmer & Grab.): Segments of upper cauline leaves at right angles to rhachis. Branches of stem and inflorescence widely divaricate. Capitula numerous, 12-20(-25) mm in diameter. 2n = 40.{\i  Ditches, roadsides and other disturbed, seasonally wet habitats. Throughout the range of the species except the north-west and north.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Hybrids between {\b 44} and {\b 45}, which have intermediate characters and are apparently fertile, occur occasionally in W. & C. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. S. crucifolius} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} [1231] (1753). Perennial 30-120 cm. Stock short, creeping, producing short stolons with terminal leaf-rosettes. Stems floccose, branched above the middle. Basal and lower cauline leaves petiolate, more or less pinnatifid, usually persistent to anthesis; middle and upper cauline pinnatisect with a small, narrow terminal lobe and sub-parallel, linear, forwardly directed lateral lobes; all leaves with somewhat revolute margins, and floccose at least beneath. Capitula 12-15 mm in diameter, numerous, in a narrow corymb. Involucre 6-8 mm, floccose, with 4-6 supplementary bracts about ½ as long as the ovate-lanceolate, acute involucral bracts. Ligules 12-15, yellow. Achenes c. 2 mm, all shortly hairy; pappus c. 6 mm, persistent.{\i  Much of Europe, but absent from most of the north and parts of the west.} ?Al Au Be Br Bu ?Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E )Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   S. grandidentatus} Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Ross.}{\b  2}: 636 (1845) ({\i S. velenovskyi} Borbás, {\i S. arenarius} Bieb., non Thunb.), from S.E. Europe (especially the Black Sea coast), and{\b  S. lycopifolius} Desf. ex Poiret in Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot., Suppl.}{\b  5}: 131 (1817), from Sicilia, are densely grey-tomentose variants with less deeply dissected leaves. Such variants may be worthy of subspecific rank, but further information is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. S. carpetanus} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 59 (1852) (incl.{\i  S. celtibericus} Pau). Perennial 20-45 cm. Stock shortly creeping, without stolons. Stems erect, branched only in inflorescence, densely leafy throughout, sparsely arachnoid-villous. Basal and lowest cauline leaves 5-10 × 1·5-2·5 cm, oblong-lanceolate, narrowed at base, scarcely petiolate, obtuse, crispate-hairy to villous, entire to crenate-dentate; middle and upper cauline very gradually decreasing in size, strongly crenate-dentate, becoming more or less pinnatifid towards the apex of the stem and subamplexicaul. Capitula 3-15, 10-15 mm in diameter, in a corymb. Involucre 5-9 mm, sparsely hairy, with 5-8 supplementary bracts 1/3-1/2 as long as the involucre. Ligules c. 8, 5-7 mm, yellow. Achenes shortly hairy.{\i  Damp places. • C. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. S. squalidus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 869 (1753) ({\i S. nebrodensis} auct., non L.). Subglabrous to more or less floccose short-lived perennial, biennial or annual up to 60 cm, with erect, branching stems. Leaves glabrescent above, the lower usually deeply pinnatifid with rather distant lobes, attenuate into a winged petiole, the upper cauline more or less pinnatifid, auriculate-amplexicaul (more rarely all leaves merely dentate.) Capitula 15-25 mm in diameter, few to numerous in a lax, irregular corymb. Involucral bracts c. 20, 7-10 mm; supplementary bracts 5-13, 2-3 mm; all lanceolate, black-tipped. Ligules c. 13, 10-12 mm, bright yellow. Achenes 2-3 mm, usually hairy. 2n = 20. {\i Woodland and scrub, and also on disturbed rocky ground, especially in the northern part of the range. • C. & S. Europe, mainly in the mountains; abundantly naturalized in Britain and locally elsewhere in N. & C. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cr Cz Ge Gr He It Ju Rm Sa Si [Br Da Ga Hb Hu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The plant naturalized in Britain is very variable in leaf-shape, but the native plant of C. Europe (which was described as{\b  S. rupestris} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  2}: 136 (1803)) is much less variable. Variants indistinguishable from typical {\i S. rupestris }are often found in Britain, and the plants are completely interfertile. The species was described from Oxford, where it was already naturalized on old walls in the seventeenth century.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b S. fruticulosus} Sibth. & Sm., Fl. Graec. {\i Prodr.}{\b  2}: 178 (1813), from mountains in Kriti, is a rather dwarf, glabrous perennial with a woody stock, differing from small variants of {\b 48} mainly in its undivided, remotely dentate leaves. It may merit subspecific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. S. siculus} All.,{\i  Auct. Syn. Stirp. Horti Taur}. 18 (1773). Like {\b 48} but perennial, slightly glaucous, sparsely hairy with long, whitish hairs on young shoots; lower and middle cauline leaves 2-pinnatifid, with distant, linear, ascending lobes; ligules c. 8 mm, often revolute soon after anthesis. 2n = 20.{\i  Open, sandy ground; lowland. ?• Sicilia.} Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The relationships of this species to {\b 48} are obscure; they have often been treated as conspecific, but typical plants are quite distinct.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. S. cambrensis} Rosser, {\i Watsonia }{\b 3}: 228 (1955). More or less floccose, short-lived perennial (more rarely annual) up to 50 cm, with erect, branched stems from a slightly woody stock. Lower leaves petiolate; middle and upper cauline leaves auriculate-amplexicaul; all deeply and irregularly pinnatifid with distant, more or less lanceolate, toothed lobes. Inflorescence branched, leafy. Capitula numerous, c. 12 mm in diameter. Involucre broadly cylindrical; involucral bracts c. 10 mm; supplementary bracts several, 3-4 mm; all black-tipped. Ligules c. 13, c. 5 mm, yellow, ovate, revolute immediately after anthesis. Achenes 3-3·5 mm, hairy in grooves; pappus caducous. 2n = 60.{\i  Roadsides and waste ground. • Britain} ({\i N. Wales}). Br.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A natural allopolyploid derived from {\b 48} and {\b 65}. The triploid hybrid is rare and highly sterile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. S. aethnensis} Jan ex DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 345 (1838). Subglabrous, glaucous perennial up to 40 cm, with erect stems from a branched, woody stock. Leaves fleshy, entire or dentate, the lowest oblanceolate-spathulate, more or less petiolate, the middle and upper cauline lanceolate, auriculate-amplexicaul. Capitula (20-)25-40 mm in diameter, few, in a terminal corymb. Involucral bracts c. 20, 8-10 mm, usually green; supplementary bracts several, 3-4 mm, often black-tipped. Ligules 8-12, c. 15 mm, bright yellow. Achenes (3-)3·5-4 mm, glabrous.{\i  Lava-slopes, mainly above} 1000{\i  m. •  Sicilia} ({\i Etna}). Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Typical plants occur frequently on the higher parts of the mountain; in the intermediate zones (500-1500 m) there are many variants with more or less dissected leaves, smaller capitula and
\par

\par
202}
\par