{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min14}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min14}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1029}{\nofchars5869}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 smaller, hairy achenes (}{\b\fs28 S. incisus}{\fs28  (C. Presl) C. Presl,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Sic}{\fs28 . xxviii (1826)). Such plants are probably hybrids with }{\b\fs28 49}{\fs28 ; some closely resemble }{\b\fs28 48}{\fs28  (differing mainly in their glaucous colour), and the specific distinction between }{\b\fs28 51}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 48}{\fs28  is thereby confused.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 52. S. nebrodensis}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  ed. 2, 1217 (1763) (}{\i\fs28 S. duriaei}{\fs28  Gay). Glandular-hairy perennial up to 50 cm, viscid in inflorescence, with erect, rather narrowly branching, deeply striate stems. Lowest leaves petiolate, withering early; cauline leaves up to 10 cm, sessile, amplexicaul, sinuate-pinnatifid with wide, often toothed lobes. Capitula (15-)20-25 mm in diameter, laxly corymbose on long peduncles. Involucral bracts 10-12 mm, linear, more or less densely glandular-hairy; supplementary bracts 1 or 2, 2-4 mm; all bracts concolorous. Ligules 15-20, 6-8 mm, yellow, revolute soon after anthesis. Achenes c. 2\'b75 mm, hairy.}{\i\fs28  Rocky places. \bullet  Mountains of Spain.}{\fs28  Hs.
\par 
\par  Said by Linnaeus to grow in Sicilia also, but apparently in error.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 53. S. abrotanifolius}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  869 (1753). Perennial (10-)15-30 cm, with thin, branched rhizome and erect, leafy stems subglabrous or sparsely floccose in upper part. Basal and lower cauline leaves subglabrous, 2- to 3-pinnatisect, with linear ultimate segments and narrow rhachis; upper cauline 1-pinnatisect with linear segments, or small, simple and bract-like. Capitula few or solitary, very showy, up to 40 mm in diameter. Involucre 6-7 mm; bracts ovate-lanceolate; supplementary bracts few, linear-lanceolate, up to half as long as bracts. Ligules c. 13, 10-15 mm, lanceolate, yellow to orange-red with brownish stripes. Achenes (2\'b75-)3-4 mm, glabrous, with prominent ribs.}{\i\fs28  Rocky mountain slopes. \bullet  C. & E. Alps; Carpathians; mountains of Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28  Al Au Bu Cz Ge He It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 abrotanifolius}{\fs28 : Capitula 2-5(-8) on long peduncles. Upper cauline leaves pinnatisect. 2n = c. 40.}{\i\fs28  C. & E. Alps; N.W. Jugoslavia}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 carpathicus}{\fs28  (Herbich) Nyman,}{\i\fs28  Consp.}{\fs28  356 (1879) (}{\i\fs28 S. carpathicus}{\fs28  Herbich): Capitula solitary. Uppermost cauline leaves small, simple, bract-like. 2n = 40.}{\i\fs28  Carpathians; mountains of Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28 
\par 
\par    .}{\b\fs28 54. S. adonidifolius}{\fs28  Loisel.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Gall.}{\fs28  566 (1807). Subglabrous perennial 30-70 cm, with thin, branched rhizome and erect, leafy stems. Basal and lower cauline leaves 3-pinnatisect with linear ultimate segments and rhachis not more than 2 mm wide; upper cauline leaves 1-pinnatisect with linear segments. Inflorescence a terminal compound corymb with numerous small capitula. Involucre 4-5 mm; bracts lanceolate, keeled, each closely enclosing an achene of a ligulate floret in fruit; supplementary bracts 2-3, very short. Ligules 3-6, 3-6 mm, ovate, bright yellow. Achenes c. 2 mm, glabrous, with prominent ribs. 2n = 40.}{\i\fs28  Rocky ground, mainly in the mountains; calcifuge. \bullet  S., C. & E. France, N.E. & C. Spain.}{\fs28  Ga Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 55. S. resedifolius}{\fs28  Less.,}{\i\fs28  Linnaea}{\b\fs28  6}{\fs28 : 243 (1831). Dwarf, subglabrous perennial 3-20 cm, with branched rhizome. Stems usually simple. Basal and lower cauline leaves elliptical to obovate in outline, entire to lyrate-pinnatifid, petiolate; upper cauline sessile, pinnatifid, or reduced to lanceolate, entire bracts. Capitula usually solitary. Involucre c. 8 mm; bracts lanceolate; supplementary bracts few, linear, grading into upper cauline leaves. Ligules c. 13, c. 10 mm, yellow, often with violet stripes. Achenes 3\'b75-4 mm, glabrous.}{\i\fs28  Tundra. Arctic Russia.}{\fs28  Rs (N). (}{\i\fs28 N. Asia, arctic America}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par   Sect. DELPHINIFOLIUS Reichenb. Annuals (or biennials), glabrous to more or less villous. At least the cauline leaves pinnatifid. Supplementary bracts small or absent. Achenes elliptic-obovate, compressed, papillose.
\par 
\par   Perhaps closely related to species from South Africa which are usually placed in the genus}{\i\fs28  Cineraria }{\fs28 L.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 56. S. delphinifolius}{\fs28  Vahl,}{\i\fs28  Symb. Bot.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 91 (1791). Sparsely hairy, erect annual up to 60 cm. Stem simple or branched only in inflorescence, slender, striate. Basal and lower cauline leaves withering early, ovate or lyrate, dentate, long-petiolate; middle and upper cauline leaves deeply 1- to 2-pinnatisect with more or less linear, often 3-fid segments. Inflorescence terminal, subcorymbose. Capitula 12-20 mm in diameter on long, slender peduncles. Involucral bracts 6-8 mm, pale; supplementary bracts 2-3 mm, filiform, grading into rather distant bracts on peduncles. Ligules c. 12, 8-10 mm, linear, pale yellow. Achenes 1-1\'b72 mm, covered with glandular tubercles.}{\i\fs28  Sandy ground. W. & S. Italy, Sicilia, Sardegna.}{\fs28  It Sa Si (}{\i\fs28 N.W. Africa}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 57. S. minutus}{\fs28  (Cav.) DC., }{\i\fs28 Prodr.}{\b\fs28  6}{\fs28 : 346 (1838). Annual up to 25 cm, simple or branched near base, with a very variably developed indumentum of long, whitish hairs, usually very obvious in the lower part of the stem. Stems slender, leafless in upper half, with a single capitulum. Basal leaves subspathulate, attenuate into petiole, coarsely dentate; middle cauline leaves more or less pinnatisect; uppermost cauline leaves simple, linear. Capitula (10-)20-35 mm in diameter. Involucral bracts 12-15, 6-8 mm, ovate-lanceolate with a scarious margin; supplementary bracts absent. Ligules c. 13, (4-)8-10 mm, linear, yellow (sometimes purplish). Achenes 1\'b75-2 mm, covered with rather long papillae.}{\i\fs28  Sandy or rocky ground. \bullet  S. & C. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs.
\par 
\par   Sect. SENECIO (incl. Sect.}{\i\fs28  Obaejaceae}{\fs28  DC., Sect. }{\i\fs28 Obaejacoideae}{\fs28  DC.). Annuals, glabrous or variously hairy. Leaves subentire to pinnatisect. Involucre usually with small supplementary bracts. Achenes subcylindrical, glabrous or hairy.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 58. S. gallicus}{\fs28  Chaix in Vill.,}{\i\fs28  Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 311 (1786) (incl.}{\i\fs28  S. coronopifolius}{\fs28  Desf., non Burm. fil.). Subglabrous or sparsely floccose annual up to 40 cm, usually with several branches from the base. Leaves rather thick, more or less pinnatisect, with linear-oblong, often patent, remote, entire to pinnatifid segments; basal leaves petiolate; middle and upper cauline sessile, amplexicaul with dentate to laciniate auricles. Inflorescence subcorymbose with few capitula. Capitulum 15-22 mm in diameter. Involucral bracts 5-7 mm, linear-lanceolate, glabrous, concolorous; supplementary bracts often absent, sometimes 1-6, 1-2 mm, grading into few, remote bracts on the peduncle. Ligules c. 13, c. 8 mm, yellow. Achenes 2-2\'b75 mm, usually shortly subappressed-hairy on ridges. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  Maritime sands, cultivated ground and other open habitats. S. Europe, extending to C. France; casual further north.}{\fs28  ?Al Bl Bu ?Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Si.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28   S. noeanus}{\fs28  Rupr., }{\i\fs28 Bull. Phys.-Math. Acad. P\'e9tersb.}{\b\fs28  14}{\fs28 : 231 (1856), recorded from the European part of Kazakhstan, is very similar to }{\b\fs28 58}{\fs28  but has thicker roots, scarcely fleshy leaves and smaller achenes, and has often been treated as conspecific with it; it is widespread in S.W. & W.C. Asia.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 59. S. leucanthemifolius}{\fs28  Poiret, }{\i\fs28 Voy. Barb.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 238 (1789). Like }{\b\fs28 58}{\fs28  but often very fleshy; basal leaves usually obovate, dentate; cauline leaves variously dissected, often coarsely pinnatifid, with entire to shallowly dentate auricles; involucral bracts often black tipped; supplementary bracts several, up to 2 mm, usually
\par 
\par 203}
\par }