{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 elliptical to ovate-oblong, usually widest below the middle, obtuse, usually coriaceous, glabrous or more or less hairy; veins conspicuous, especially beneath. Inflorescence broadly ovoid, many-flowered; pedicels (2-)3-5 mm. Corolla (3·5-)4·5(-6) mm in diameter, rotate. Fruit c. 3 mm, almost always glabrous, more or less inflated when ripe, with loosening pericarp. 2n = 66.{\i  Wet meadows and scrub. E. Europe, southwards to C. Bulgaria, and extending westwards to C. Austria.} Au Bu Cz Hu Ju ?Po Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) [He].
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 6} and {\b 7} are parts of a widespread polyploid complex, and there are many intermediates between them in E. Europe; in the U.S.S.R. many microspecies have been described on the basis of variation in the form of the leaf and in the indumentum of leaf and stem. In the European part of the U.S.S.R., the following may be mentioned:{\b  G. articulatum} Lam., {\i Tabl. Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 260 (1792) ({\i G. geniculatum} Roemer & Schultes),{\b  G. volgense} Pobed. in Schischkin, {\i Fl. URSS}{\b  23}: 715 (1958), {\b G. mugodsharicum} Pobed.,{\i  op. cit.} 717 (1958),{\b  G. exoletum} Klokov in Kotov,{\i  Fl. RSS Ucr. }{\b 10}: 458 (1961), {\b G. praeboreale} Klokov,{\i  op. cit.} 459 (1961) and {\b G. pseudoboreale} Klokov, {\i op. cit.} 460 (1961) related to{\b  6}; {\b G. pseudorubioides} Klokov,{\i  op. cit.} 460 (1961), intermediate; {\b G. dasypodum} Klokov,{\i  op. cit.} 461 (1961) and {\b G. salicifolium} Klokov, {\i op. cit.} 462 (1961), related to {\b 7}. The status of these taxa as species remains uncertain without detailed cytotaxonomic analysis.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. G. fruticosum} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  1}: 585 (1798). Switch-plant, woody at the base, with a strong tap-root but no stolons. Stems 35-90 cm, ascending, stiff, glabrous, 4-angled, much-branched at the base, forming a bush; internodes of the lateral branches 3-6 cm. Leaves 20-26 × (2-)4-5 mm, cuneate-oblong, widest above the middle, abruptly rounded at the apex, tough and more or less persistent, the 3 veins not distinct. Inflorescence broadly ovoid, interrupted, lax; pedicels 0·5-1(-2) mm, stout. Corolla 2·5-3 mm in diameter, whitish-yellow, rotate; apices of the lobes usually straight. Fruit c. 1·2 mm. 2n = 22. {\i Limestone cliffs. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. G. ephedroides} Willk.,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  25}: 30 (1852). Like {\b 8} but stems 35-50 cm; internodes of lateral branches mostly 1-3(-4) cm; leaves 5-10 × 2-3 mm, oblong-elliptical, very soon deciduous; apices of the corolla-lobes usually incurved; fruit c. 1·5 mm, very finely papillose.{\i  Dry rock-crevices. S.E. Spain} ({\i Almeria prov}.). Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. HYLAEA (Griseb.) Ehrend. Perennial herbs with slender rhizomes and subterranean stolons, often smelling of coumarin when dry. Stems smooth or hairy, sometimes aculeolate. Leaves in whorls of 6-9, membranous, with 1 main vein, the margins antrorsely or retrorsely scabrid, apex scarcely hyaline. Inflorescence elongate-pyramidal to corymbose, lax, few-flowered; ultimate branches bracteate or ebracteate. Corolla infundibuliform to rotate, greenish to white; lobes obtuse to apiculate. Fruit dry, ovoid, with hooked hairs.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. G. odoratum} (L.) Scop., {\i Fl. Carn.} ed. 2, {\b 1}: 105 (1771) ({\i Asperula odorata} L.). Rhizome creeping. Stems (10-)15-25(-35) cm, erect, 4-angled, glabrous except for a ring of hairs at the nodes. Leaves 20-50 × 5-14 mm, (2-)3-5(-7) times as long as wide, widest at the middle or in the upper third. Partial inflorescences usually 3, terminal, with long peduncles. Pedicels 1-3 mm in flower, 3-10 mm in fruit; bracts reduced, the terminal branches usually ebracteate. Corolla infundibuliform, 4-7 mm in diameter; tube c. 1·5 mm; lobes 2-3·5 mm, not apiculate. Fruit 2-3 mm, with hooked hairs 0·5-1 mm. 2n = 44.{\i  Base-rich, deciduous woods. Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Lu Sa Sb.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b Asperula eugeniae} K. Richter,{\i  Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien }{\b 38}: 219 (1888) is a name given to odourless plants.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. G. triflorum} Michx,{i  Fl. Bor. Amer.}{\b  1}: 80 (1803). Stems 30-80 cm, few, arising from a slender rhizome, decumbent to ascending, glabrous or with a few hairs, not hairy at the nodes. Leaves (12-)18-30(-45) × (4-)6-10(-14) mm, (2·5-)3-3·5(-4·5) times as long as wide, widest usually at or above the middle. Inflorescence narrowly pyramidal; partial inflorescences terminal and lateral, with long peduncles. Pedicels 1·5-10 mm in flower, up to 25 mm in fruit; bracts usually present throughout. Corolla 1·5-3·5 mm in diameter, greenish to whitish; lobes apiculate. Fruit 1·5-2 mm, with hooked hairs c. 0·5 mm. {\i Coniferous woods. Fennoscandia and N. half of U.S.S.R.; two stations in C. Alps.} Fe He No Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. TRACHYGALIUM K. Schum. Perennial herbs with slender rooting rhizomes and subterranean stolons. Stem 4-angled, retrorsely aculeolate and rough on the angles. Leaves in whorls of 6-10, shortly awned, thinly coriaceous, shiny above, 1-veined, the margins antrorsely and retrorsely scabrid. Inflorescence ovoid or cylindrical, lax, the ultimate branches usually ebracteate. Corolla infundibuliform or cup-shaped, rarely rotate, white, reddish or greenish-yellow; lobes acute to shortly apiculate, usually papillose. Fruit mostly granulate and glabrous or hairy.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. G. rivale} (Sibth. & Sm.) Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 156 (1844) ({\i Asperula rivalis} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  A. aparine} Bieb.). Stem (70-)90-120 cm, ascending from a slender base, stout. Leaves (20-)30-40(-45) × 4-8(-10) mm, ovate to oblanceolate, abruptly or gradually narrowing to the awned apex, rather rough above. Inflorescence rather broadly ovoid; pedicels 0·5-3 mm, glabrous, rarely pubescent. Corolla 1·8-3 mm, infundibuliform, rarely crateriform; tube 0·9-1·5 mm; lobes 0·8-2 mm, broadly to narrowly ovate. Filaments 0·2-0·6 mm; anthers 0·3-0·5 mm, suborbicular to oblong. Fruit 1-1·2 mm, granulate, glabrous, rarely somewhat pubescent. 2n = 66. {\i Damp scrub and riverbanks. S.E. & E.C. Europe, extending northwards to Estonia.} Au Bu ?Cr Cz Gr Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\i G. rivale} forms a very variable polyploid complex. In the western and northern parts of its range the populations consist mainly of plants with relatively narrow leaves, long filaments and short anthers, while in the southern and eastern, the plants usually have wide leaves, short filaments and long anthers. In the Balkan peninsula especially, transitional populations with intermediate characteristics occur. Any question of distinguishing two species in E. Europe (cf.{\i  Asperula rivalis} and {\i A. aparine} in{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  23}: 274-275 (1958)) must be considered in the light of further investigation of populations in Asia.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. G. uliginosum} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }106 (1753). Stem 10-100 cm, slender. Leaves (8-)10-20(-25) × 2-3(-4·5) mm, narrowly, rarely broadly lanceolate, gradually narrowed to the awned apex, smooth above. Inflorescence ovoid-oblong. Corolla 1·3-2 mm, broadly crateriform; tube 0·3-0·5 mm; lobes 1-1·5 mm, broadly ovate. Filaments 0·5-0·6 mm; anthers 0·2-0·3 mm, ovoid. Fruit 1-1·5 mm, granulate, glabrous. 2n = 22, 44.{\i  Marshes, fens and other wet habitats. Most of Europe, but absent from most of the extreme north, south-east and many of the islands.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par 
\par 20}
\par