{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 7 Middle cauline internodes 4-8 mm; upper leaves widest
\par
  near the middle or parallel-sided, scarcely amplexicaul .............. {\b 8. fiumensis}
\par
5 Inner involucral bracts reddish-purple, pink, white or
\par
  pale yellow
\par
8 Inner involucral bracts reddish-purple above, at least
\par
  towards the apex
\par
9 Perennial, not more than 10 cm; leaves glabrescent ................. {\b 5. barnebiana}
\par
9 Annual or biennial, up to 40 cm; leaves persistently
\par
  arachnoid-tomentose, at least beneath
\par
10 Annual; outer involucral bracts 10-12 mm wide (including
\par
   spines); inner involucral bracts reddish-purple above 
\par
   for most of their length .................................................................... {\b 12. lanata}
\par
10 Biennial; outer involucral bracts 15-20 mm wide 
\par
   (including spines); inner involucral bracts mainly 
\par
   white above, purplish-red only towards the apex ................. {\b 9. macrocephala}
\par
8  Inner involucral bracts white, pale pink or pale yellow
\par
   above (sometimes purplish beneath)
\par
11 Inner involucral bracts at least 30 mm; receptacle 
\par
   bearing stout, clavate hairs as well as scales .................................. {\b 10. acaulis}
\par
11 Inner involucral bracts not more than 20 mm; receptacle 
\par
   without stout, clavate hairs
\par
12 Inner involucral bracts white above, white or purplish beneath
\par
13 Perennial; inner involucral bracts 2·5-3 mm wide .......................... {\b 4. sicula}
\par
13 Biennial; inner involucral bracts 1·5-2 mm wide ............... {\b 9. macrocephala}
\par
12 Inner involucral bracts pale yellow or straw-coloured 
\par
   above and beneath
\par
14 Outer involucral bracts 20-25 mm wide, pinnatisect,
\par
   greatly exceeding the inner .............................................................. {\b 7. frigida}
\par
14 Outer involucral bracts 4-9 mm wide, spinose-dentate,
\par
   shorter than or only slightly exceeding the inner
\par
15 Biennial; leaves spinose-dentate, the spines shorter 
\par
   than the width of the remainder of the leaf .................................... {\b 6. vulgaris}
\par
15 Perennial; leaves deeply spinose-pinnatifid, the segments 
\par
   longer than the width of the remainder of the leaf ...................... {\b 8. fiumensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen.{\b  Lyrolepis} (Rech. fil.) Meusel & Kästner. Perennial, with procumbent, much-branched, woody stock; at least some of the leaves without spines. Inner involucral bracts bright yellow.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. diae} (Rech. fil.) Meusel & Kästner, {\i Feddes Repert.} {\b 83}: 228 (1972) ({\i Lyrolepis diae} Rech. fil.). Plant densely white-tomentose throughout. Flowering stems 40-60 cm, erect, sparsely leafy. Leaves mostly crowded on short non-flowering branches, oblanceolate, obtuse to acute, entire. Capitula 15-20 mm in diameter, in small corymbs of 2-4. Outer involucral bracts 10-15 × 3-5 mm, entire or pinnatifid; inner bracts 10-16 mm. Florets yellow.{\i  Calcareous maritime cliffs. • Small islands off the N. coast of Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. tragacanthifolia} Klatt, {\i Leopoldina}{\b  20}: 94 (1884) ({\i Atractylis conformis} W. Barbey & Major). Plant white-tomentose throughout. Stems 15-20 cm, branched from the base, forming a fairly dense cushion. Leaves dimorphic, the earliest of each year's growth oblanceolate, entire or somewhat pinnatifid, soft, without spines, the remainder c. 5 cm, narrowly linear, coriaceous, canaliculate, with a terminal spine and 2-3 lateral spines 12-15 mm on each side. Capitula 8-20 mm in diameter, terminal. Outer involucral bracts 20-50 mm, similar to the upper leaves; inner bracts c. 10 mm. Florets pale yellow.{\i  Karpathos.} Cr. ({\i Rhodos}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Carlina}. Annual to perennial, monocarpic or with subterranean stock. All leaves spiny. Inner involucral bracts variously coloured.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. corymbosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 828, [1231] (1753). Subglabrous to sparsely arachnoid-tomentose perennial (10-)20-50(-80) cm, with one or more stems arising from an underground rhizome. Leaves up to 9 × 3 cm, oblong-lanceolate to ovate, dentate to pinnatisect, undulate, with strongly spinose margin. Capitula 12-20 mm in diameter, solitary on short branches, forming a rather dense corymb. Inner involucral bracts 10-16 × 1·5-2·5 mm, bright or brownish yellow. Florets yellow. Achenes c. 2·5 mm; pappus c. 8 mm. 2n = 18, 20. {\i S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable, but not easily divided into subspecies. Of those recognized below, subsp. ({\b c}), of very limited distribution, is fairly distinct; subsp. ({\b b}) is distinct from ({\b a}) in the E. Mediterranean region, but some variants of the latter in S.W. Europe, especially Corse and Mallorca, come very close to subsp. ({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Outer involucral bracts not exceeding the inner, or 
\par
  exceeding them by not more than 10(-15) mm ............. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b corymbosa} 
\par
1 Outer involucral bracts exceeding the inner by
\par
  15-20(-60) mm
\par
2 Leaves and outer involucral bracts spinose-dentate to
\par
  -pinnatifid, with the margin between the principal
\par
   spines usually finely spinose-dentate .................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b graeca}
\par
2 Leaves and outer involucral bracts deeply and remotely
\par
  spinose-pinnatisect, with the margin between the 
\par
  principal spines usually ± entire ........................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b curetum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b corymbosa} (incl. {\i C. thracica} Velen.): Somewhat tomentose. Leaves dentate to pinnatifid, with segments shorter than or about equalling the width of the undivided portion; margin between the principal spines usually finely spinose-dentate. Outer involucral bracts not exceeding the inner, or exceeding them by 10(-15) mm.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except for most of the Aegean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b graeca} (Boiss.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 400 (1879) ({\i C. graeca} (Boiss.) Heldr.; incl. {\i C. rothii} (Boiss.) Halácsy): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but usually subglabrous; outer involucral bracts exceeding the inner by 15-20 mm. {\i Balkan peninsula and Aegean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b curetum} (Heldr. ex Halácsy) Rech. fil., {\i Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 105}({\b 1}): 644 (1943) ({\i C. curetum} Heldr. ex Halácsy): Subglabrous. Capitula rather few and small. Leaves remotely spinose-pinnatisect, with segments much longer than the width of the undivided portion; margin between the principal spines usually more or less entire. Outer involucral bracts exceeding the inner by up to 60 mm. •{\i  Kriti and Karpathos}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C. sitiensis} Rech. fil., {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  43}: 147 (1938), described from a single gathering from E. Kriti, is perhaps related to {\b 3}; it is said, however, to have straw-coloured inner involucral bracts and the surface of the leaves minutely spinose and glandular. It requires further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. sicula} Ten., {\i Cat. Pl. Horti Neap., App.} ed. 2, 74 (1819). Subglabrous perennial; stem 20-70 cm, simple or with very short branches. Leaves c. 7 × 2 cm, oblong, pinnatisect, spiny. Capitula 25-35 mm in diameter, in a crowded terminal cluster of 2-4; sometimes 1-2 capitula subsessile in leaf-axils lower down. Outer involucral bracts up to 45 mm, exceeding the inner; inner bracts 12-15 × 2·5-3 mm, silvery-white above, white or purplish beneath. Florets yellow. Achenes c. 3 mm; pappus c. 9 mm.{\i  S.E. Italy, Sicilia and smaller islands of C. Mediterranean region.} It Si.
\par

\par
209}
\par