{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. K. repens} (L.) Haw.,{\i  Syn. Pl. Succ.} 313 (1812). Like {\b 1} but not more than 30 cm, more pruinose and glaucous; leaves 3-4 × c. 0·75 cm, more or less crowded at apex of stem, flattened or sulcate on the adaxial surface, rounded on the abaxial surface, subobtuse, with a short mucro; capitula usually 2-3.{\i  Naturalized in Açores} ({\i Terceira}). [Az.] ({\i South Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 99.              Cacalia}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.O. Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs with alternate leaves. Leaves not or shortly sheathing at the base. Capitula in a raceme or panicle; involucral bracts in one row, usually without supplementary bracts. Receptacle usually flat, without scales. Florets 1-20, all tubular, hermaphrodite and fertile. Style-branches long, subclavate. Achenes more or less cylindrical, unbeaked, ribbed; pappus of simple, scabrid hairs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. hastata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 835 (1753). Stems 40-150 cm, erect, simple, subglabrous below, densely glandular-pubescent above. Cauline leaves 5-25 × 5-25 cm, hastate to triangular-reniform, acutely dentate, glabrous or hairy beneath, with broadly winged, more or less amplexicaul petiole; upper cauline leaves smaller, sometimes lanceolate. Capitula many, 5-8 mm in diameter, in a lax panicle. Involucre 9-13 mm, glandular-pubescent, with usually 2-4 minute supplementary bracts; bracts 8-10. Florets whitish. Achenes 6-8 mm; pappus about as long as achene.{\i  Damp woods and meadows. E. half of Russia}. Rs (N, C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   Tribe    {\b  Calenduleae}             Cass.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves alternate, simple. Capitula with ligules; outer florets female, the inner hermaphrodite or functionally male; corolla yellow or orange. Receptacle without scales. Anthers sagittate but not caudate at base. Style of female and functionally male flowers undivided, the style-branches of the hermaphrodite flowers flattened, truncate and papillose at apex. Pappus absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 100.               Calendula}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R.D. Meikle
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs, sometimes woody at the base, often glandular and aromatic. Leaves alternate, simple. Inflorescence sometimes branched. Involucral bracts in 1-2 rows, linear, acuminate, subequal, with a narrow scarious margin. Receptacle flat, without scales. Capitula medium. Outer florets ligulate, yellow or orange, female, fertile. Inner florets tubular, yellow, orange, brown or violet-purple, functionally male. Anthers sagittate-caudate; filaments free. Outer achenes with a narrow beak, sometimes cymbiform, or 3-winged; inner smaller, strongly falcate or almost annular, tuberculate-rugose on dorsal surface, usually unwinged; pappus absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: D. Lanza,{\i  Monografia del Genere} Calendula {\i L.} Palermo. 1919; {\i Atti Accad. Sci. Palermo} ser. 3, {\b 12}: 1-166 (1923). H. Meusel & H. Ohle, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  113}: 191-210 (1966). H. Ohle, {\i Feddes Repert.} {\b 85}: 245-283 (1974).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ligules usually less than twice as long as involucral bracts
\par
2 Outer achenes with a narrow beak or cymbiform,
\par
  not 3-winged ................................................................................... {\b 4. arvensis} 
\par
2 Outer achenes without a beak, broadly 3-winged .................. {\b 5. tripterocarpa}
\par
1 Ligules usually twice as long as involucral bracts
\par
3 Perennial, sometimes woody; florets normally concolorous;
\par
  outer (beaked) achenes often conspicuously long, patent
\par
  or weakly incurved .................................................................... {\b 1. suffruticosa}
\par
3 Usually annual; stems herbaceous or woody only at the base
\par
4 Ligules yellow or orange; tubular florets yellow, orange
\par
  or brownish; outer achenes usually strongly incurved ................. {\b 2. officinalis}
\par
4 Ligules violet at apex; tubular florets violet-purple;
\par
  outer achenes patent ......................................................................... {\b 3. stellata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. suffruticosa} Vahl, {\i Symb. Bot.}{\b  2}: 94 (1791). Perennial 20-50 cm or more, usually woody for some distance above base. Leaves (1·5-)2·5-7(-12) × (0·3-)0·8-3(-4) cm. Ligules often 2 cm, usually more than twice as long as involucral bracts, yellow or orange; tubular florets more or less concolorous with ligules. Capitula in fruit with an outer row of patent (occasionally deflexed) or weakly incurved, narrowly beaked achenes up to 3 cm, alternating with much shorter cymbiform (rarely 3-winged) achenes. {\i Rock-crevices, maritime sands and other dry habitats, usually near the coast. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Gr Hs It Lu Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   An extremely variable species which includes the following subspecies; these are frequently treated as species, but they are connected by numerous intermediates.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems procumbent to decumbent; leaves usually rather fleshy
\par
2 Capitula 3-5 cm in diameter; leaves densely and cons-
\par
  picuously glandular-pubescent .......................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b maritima}
\par
2 Capitula 2-3·5 cm in diameter; leaves minutely but ±
\par
  densely glandular-pubescent ........................................ ({\b f}) subsp. {\b algarbiensis}
\par
1 Stems erect or diffuse; leaves not fleshy
\par
3 Leaves and stems whitish-floccose-tomentose ............. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b tomentosa}
\par
3 Leaves and stems pubescent, green
\par
4 Flowering stems simple or sparingly branched; peduncles
\par
  often long and naked or with a few small, subulate 
\par
  bracts; leaves narrowly oblong-lanceolate, usually acute,
\par
  often conspicuously repand-dentate ............................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b suffruticosa}
\par
4 Flowering stems usually much-branched; peduncles rather
\par
  short, with well-developed, leaf-like bracts; leaves 
\par
  often broadly oblanceolate or spathulate, obtuse, often
\par
  subentire or obscurely toothed
\par
5 Ligules yellow, about twice as long as involucral bracts ({\b b}) subsp. {\b lusitanica}
\par
5 Ligules orange, usually more than twice as long as involucral 
\par
  bracts .................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b fulgida}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b suffruticosa} (incl. {\i C. noeana} Boiss.,{\i  C. suffruticosa} subsp. {\i gussonii} Lanza): Stems usually erect. Leaves linear-lanceolate to narrowly oblanceolate, acuminate, often conspicuously repand-dentate, glandular-pubsecent. Capitula 3-4 cm in diameter. Beaked achenes usually 3 cm, almost straight, patent or deflexed.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lusitanica} (Boiss.) Ohle, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  85}: 270 (1974) ({\i C. lusitanica} Boiss.): Stems erect or diffuse. Leaves sparsely glandular-pubescent or subglabrous, often remotely denticulate. Capitula (1·5-)2-4(-5) cm in diameter; ligules yellow, sometimes tipped with red. Outer achenes sometimes long-beaked, patent or weakly incurved, subglabrous or glandular-pubescent. 2n = 32. {\i Rocky ground; calcicole. • Spain and Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b fulgida} (Rafin.) Ohle,{\i  op. cit. }265 (1974) ({\i C. fulgida} Rafin.): Stems erect or diffuse. Leaves sometimes sparsely arachnoid-floccose, especially at margins, undulate or repand-dentate. Capitula 2·5-5(-6) cm in diameter, ligules orange, sometimes red at apex. Outer achenes usually long-beaked, weakly incurved, glabrous or subglabrous. 2n = 32. {\i Dry grassy and stony places; calcicole. Sicilia and small islands of C. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b tomentosa} Murb., {\i Lunds Univ. Årsskr.} nov. ser., {\b 1}({\b 4}): 9 (1905) (incl. {\i C. tomentosa} Desf., non L. fil., {\i C. incana} Willd.): Stems often diffuse or ascending, whitish-floccose
\par

\par
206}
\par