{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr10\min28}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min15}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords999}{\nofchars5699}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 the smaller size of all its parts and its usually unlobed leaves. It has often been treated as conspecific with }{\b\fs28 65}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 66. S. elegans}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  869 (1753). Subglabrous or sparsely floccose annual ( ? sometimes perennial) up to 60 cm. Stems ridged, usually branched only in the inflorescence. Leaves (except sometimes the basal) pinnatipartite, with 2-4 pairs of obtuse, crenate or shallowly lobed segments; lower cauline petiolate, upper sessile, auriculate-amplexicaul. Inflorescence subcorymbose with few capitula on long, sparsely bracteate peduncles. Capitulum 20-25 mm in diameter. Involucre 6-10 mm; supplementary bracts 8-15, 2-4 mm, more or less ovate. Ligules c. 13, 6-8 mm, purple. Achenes c. 2\'b75 mm, usually hairy.}{\i\fs28  Locally naturalized from gardens in S.W. Europe.}{\fs28  [Az ?Bl ?Hs Lu.] (}{\i\fs28 South Africa.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 67. S. flavus}{\fs28  (Decne) Schultz Bip. in Webb & Berth.,}{\i\fs28  Phyt. Canar.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 319 (1845) (}{\i\fs28 S. decaisnei}{\fs28  DC.). Glabrous, somewhat fleshy annual up to 30 cm; stems much branched. Leaves simple, dentate; basal and lower cauline leaves broadly ovate, often cordate, purplish beneath, petiolate; middle and upper cauline auriculate-amplexicaul, often wider than long. Capitula 4-6 mm in diameter, in a lax corymb. Involucre 7-9 mm; supplementary bracts 0-3, c. 1 mm. Ligules absent. Achenes 2-3 mm, strongly subappressed-hairy.}{\i\fs28  Sandy soils and coastal rocks; rare. S. Spain}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Prov. Almer\'eda}{\fs28 ). Hs. (}{\i\fs28 Africa, S.W. Asia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 97.         Ligularia}{\fs28               Cass.
\par (}{\i\fs28 Senecillis}{\fs28  Gaertner)
\par }{\fs24 By A.O. Chater.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Like }{\i\fs28 Senecio}{\fs28  but basal and lower cauline leaves with petioles broadly sheathing at the base.
\par 
\par   A large genus, mainly of temperate Asia, differentiated from}{\i\fs28  Senecio}{\fs28  by a number of inconstant characters. The presence or absence of a leaf-sheath is the only convenient character for separating the 2 genera as they are represented in Europe.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Inflorescence corymbose, bracteate only at base ............................ }{\b\fs28 3. dentata}{\fs28 
\par 1 Inflorescence spicate, bracteate throughout
\par 2 Basal leaves narrowed at base; pappus shorter than achene ............ }{\b\fs28 2. glauca}{\fs28 
\par 2 Basal leaves cordate or sagittate at base; pappus longer
\par   than achene ...................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. sibirica}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. L. sibirica}{\fs28  (L.) Cass.,}{\i\fs28  Dict. Sci. Nat.}{\b\fs28  26}{\fs28 : 402 (1823). Green or sometimes purplish-tinged perennial (15-)30-150 cm, with a stout, fibrous stock. Stems erect, usually simple, glabrous or hairy. Basal leaves (3-)10-25 \'d7 (3-)7-20 cm, triangular-reniform to subsagittate, dentate, subglabrous to densely hairy beneath, with petiole usually several times as long as lamina; cauline few, smaller, the upper narrower and subsessile. Capitula shortly pedunculate, in lax, bracteate spikes. Involucre 15-20 mm, with (6-)8-10 lanceolate bracts; supplementary bracts 2, linear, about as long as involucre. Ligules (5-)7-11, 8-20 \'d7 1-5 mm, yellow. Achenes 4-6 mm; pappus longer than achene, dirty white. 2n = 60.}{\i\fs28  Damp meadows and woods. E. & E.C. Europe southwards to E. Austria, Bulgaria and S. Ural; mountains of C. & S. France.}{\fs28  Au Bu Cz Ga Hu Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E).
\par 
\par   More or less densely hairy plants with few ligules from N. & C. Russia have been called}{\b\fs28  L. lydiae}{\fs28  Minder., }{\i\fs28 Ukr. Bot. Zur.}{\b\fs28  14}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 48 (1957), and dwarf plants with very slender stems have been called }{\b\fs28 L. arctica}{\fs28  Pojark. in Schischkin & Bobrov,}{\i\fs28  Fl. URSS}{\b\fs28  26}{\fs28 : 891 (1961) (described from Arctic Russia), or}{\b\fs28  L. bucovinensis}{\fs28  Nakai, }{\i\fs28 Jour. Jap. Bot.}{\b\fs28  20}{\fs28 : 135 (1944) (described from the E. Carpathians), but these all seem to be no more than ecological variants.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. L. glauca}{\fs28  (L.) O. Hoffm. in Engler & Prantl,}{\i\fs28  Nat\'fcrl. Pflanzenfam.}{\b\fs28  4}{\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28 ): 288 (1892) (}{\i\fs28 Senecillis glauca}{\fs28  (L.) Gaertner; incl.}{\i\fs28  L. carpathica}{\fs28  (Schott, Nyman & Kotschy) Pojark.). Glaucous perennial 50-150 cm, with a stout, fibrous stock. Stems erect, simple, glabrous. Basal leaves 5-25 \'d7 3-15 cm, oblong-ovate to -elliptical, entire or weakly denticulate, glabrous, narrowed at base into a petiole up to as long as the lamina; cauline smaller, the upper subsessile. Capitula several to many, shortly pedunculate in short, dense, bracteate spikes. Involucre 8-10 mm, with 10-12 linear-lanceolate bracts; supplementary bracts 1-2, linear, c. \'bd as long as involucre. Ligules 6-12, 10-13 \'d7 5-6 mm, yellow. Achenes 4-6 mm; pappus less than half as long as achene, dirty white. 2n = 60.}{\i\fs28  Steppe and mountain grassland. Carpathians, W. Ukraine and mountains of S.W. Bulgaria.}{\fs28  Bu Cz Rm Rs (W).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. L. dentata}{\fs28  (A. Gray) Hara,}{\i\fs28  Jour. Jap. Bot.}{\b\fs28  15}{\fs28 : 318 (1939) (}{\i\fs28 L. clivorum}{\fs28  Maxim.). Green, often purplish-tinged perennial 25-100 cm, with a stout, fibrous stock. Stems erect, simple, glabrous or hairy above. Basal leaves 20-30 \'d7 25-40 cm, reniform to cordate-orbicular, dentate, sparsely pubescent above, with petiole about as long as lamina; cauline smaller, shortly petiolate. Capitula few to many, long-pedunculate in a lax corymb bracteate at the base. Involucre 15-20 mm, with 9-13 oblong-lanceolate bracts; supplementary bracts absent. Ligules 10-14, 20-40 \'d7 5-8 mm, orange-yellow. Achenes 8-10 mm; pappus longer than achene, reddish.}{\i\fs28  Widely cultivated for ornament; naturalized in E. England.}{\fs28  [Br.] (}{\i\fs28 E. Asia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 98.              Kleinia}{\fs28               Miller 
\par }{\fs24 By A.O. Chater.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Succulent perennial herbs or dwarf shrubs, glabrous (or with hairs only in leaf-axils). Leaves more or less fleshy, fusiform or compressed. Capitula solitary or in corymbs or panicles. Involucral bracts in one row; supplementary bracts usually present. Receptacle flat, without scales. Florets tubular, white, usually all hermaphrodite. Anthers obtuse at base. Style-branches conical at apex. Achenes subcylindrical, glabrous or shortly hairy; pappus of several rows of weakly dentate hairs.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 Leaves terete or laterally compressed ...................................... }{\b\fs28 1. mandraliscae}{\fs28 
\par Leaves flattened or sulcate on the adaxial surface,
\par   rounded on the abaxial surface ......................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. repens}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. K. mandraliscae}{\fs28  Tineo,}{\i\fs28  Ann. Agric. Sic}{\fs28 . ser. 2, }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 : 315 (1855). Glabrous, pruinose perennial up to 150 cm. Stems erect, branched, stout, fleshy. Leaves 7-15 \'d7 0\'b78-1\'b73 cm, usually crowded towards base of stem, terete, fusiform, very fleshy, with a long mucro. Capitula 5-9 mm in diameter, in a compound corymb or panicle. Involucre 9-12 mm, with 2-5 supplementary bracts.}{\i\fs28  Isole Lipari.}{\fs28  *Si.
\par 
\par   The origin of this plant is uncertain and it may be a garden hybrid.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28   K. ficoides}{\fs28  (L.) Haw.,}{\i\fs28  Syn. Pl. Succ. }{\fs28 313 (1812), from South Africa, which has been reported as naturalized in N.W. Spain, is like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but its leaves are more or less compressed and ensiform rather than fusiform. Similar plants but with small, slightly compressed leaves 4-7 \'d7 0\'b72-0\'b75 cm are perhaps becoming naturalized in A\'e7ores (Faial), where they are cultivated for ornament; they are probably referable to}{\b\fs28  K. aizoides}{\fs28  DC., }{\i\fs28 Prodr.}{\b\fs28  6}{\fs28 : 337 (1838), also from South Africa.
\par 
\par 
\par 205}
\par }