{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 × 2-5 cm, ovate to elliptic-oblong, sinuate-dentate to subentire, usually gradually narrowed into a petiole which is usually longer than the lamina; cauline linear-lanceolate, sessile, sometimes amplexicaul. Capitula 5-15, 30-40(-50) mm in diameter, in a lax corymb. Involucre 8-10 mm. Ligules c. 15, 10-15 mm, yellow or golden yellow, sometimes absent. Achenes 3-3·5 mm, glabrous. 2n = 40.{\i  Stony or grassy, usually dry places. ?•  N. & C. parts of Balkan peninsula, extending to N.E. Italy; E. & S. Carpathians, W. Ukraine.} Al Bu Cz Gr It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W) ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Extremely variable, especially in leaf-shape and indumentum. The following subspecies may be recognized, but most of the rest of the variation follows no very clear pattern.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ligules absent; involucral bracts purplish-brown ............. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b wagneri}
\par
1 Ligules present; involucral bracts usually greenish
\par
2 Plant glabrescent before anthesis; basal leaves rather
\par
  fleshy ................................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b kitaibelii}
\par
2 Plant persistently arachnoid-tomentose at least on 
\par
  lower surface of leaves; basal leaves not fleshy .............. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b papposus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b papposus} (incl.{\i  S. procerus} (Griseb.) Boiss., non Salisb., {\i S. bosniacus} G. Beck): Stems arachnoid-tomentose, often glabrous or glabrescent below. Basal leaves ovate-lanceolate to elliptic-oblong, subglabrous above, persistently arachnoid-tomentose beneath, not fleshy. Capitula up to 15. Involucral bracts green, rarely purplish.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b wagneri} (Degen) Cuf., {\i Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih}.){\b  70}: 210 (1933) ({\i S. wagneri }Degen): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but involucral bracts purplish-brown; ligules absent. •{\i  C. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b kitaibelii} (Jáv.) Cuf., {\i loc. cit. }(1933): Stems, leaves and involucre arachnoid-tomentose but glabrescent before anthesis. Basal leaves ovate to elliptical, rather fleshy. Capitula 5-7. Involucral bracts brownish-green.{\i  N.W. Jugoslavia }({\i Velebit}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. igoschinae} Schischkin in Schischkin & Bobrov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  26}: 885 (1961), from C. Ural, is a more or less glabrous plant with narrow leaves and involucre c. 5 mm; it is probably related to subsp. ({\b a}) but its status is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. ERIOPAPPUS (Dumort.) Schischkin. Annual, biennial or perennial herbs, more or less pubescent. Leaves entire to pinnatifid. Involucre without supplementary bracts. Achenes subcylindrical, glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. S. congestus} (R. Br.) DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 363 (1838) ({\i S. palustris} (L.) Hooker, non Velloso, {\i S. tubicaulis} Mansfeld; incl.{\i  S. arcticus} Rupr.). Annual, biennial or perennial 15-200 cm; stems erect, branched above or only in inflorescence, 1-4 cm in diameter, hollow, pubescent, sometimes glabrescent, leafy throughout. Leaves 5-15 × 1-5 cm, oblong- or ovate- to linear-lanceolate, entire to coarsely dentate, rarely almost pinnatifid, usually undulate, pubescent or subglabrous; upper cauline leaves subentire, amplexicaul. Capitula many, 20-30 mm in diameter, in a lax or dense corymb or panicle. Involucre 10-12(-13) mm, arachnoid-villous at least below, green. Ligules c. 21, 7-10 mm, yellow. Achenes 2-3 mm, with almost winged ribs.{\i  Damp meadows and marshes. From Belgium, Denmark and arctic Russia southwards to C. France and C. Ukraine.} Be †Br Cz Da Ga Ge Ho Po ?Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. JACOBAEA (Miller) Dumort. Perennial, rarely biennial herbs, subglabrous or more or less floccose. Leaves, especially the cauline, more or less pinnatifid. Supplementary bracts usually more than ¼ as long as involucre. Achenes subcylindrical, hairy or glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. S. cordatus} Koch, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}){\b  17}: 613 (1834) ({\i S. alpinus} auct., non Scop.). Perennial 30-70 cm. Stems erect, usually branched only in inflorescence, leafy throughout, subglabrous. Leaves very gradually decreasing in size up the stem; basal and lower cauline 5-15 × 3-10 cm, ovate, cordate or rounded at the base, petiolate, sometimes with a pair of small lobes on the petiole, glabrous above, more or less greyish-arachnoid-tomentose beneath, strongly dentate or crenate-dentate, or doubly dentate; upper cauline ovate to ovate-lanceolate, narrowed at base, dentate, crenate-dentate or doubly dentate, sometimes subpinnatifid at base. Capitula (3-)5-20, 25-40 mm in diameter, in a corymb. Involucre 6-8 mm, arachnoid-lanate or subglabrous, with 5-10 supplementary bracts c. 1/3 as long as the involucre. Ligules 12-21, 10-15 mm, yellow or orange-yellow. Achenes c. 3·5 mm, glabrous. 2n = 40.{\i  Meadows, open woods and damp places. • Alps; N. & C. Appennini.} Au Ga Ge He It ?Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. S. subalpinus} Koch, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 17}: 614 (1834) ({\i S. alpinus }subsp.{\i  subalpinus }(Koch) Hayek). Like {\b 41} but basal and lower cauline leaves 3-6(-10) × 3-6(-8) cm, cordate- to triangular-ovate, glabrous or sparsely hairy and green beneath; middle cauline often with one or more pairs of lobes on the petiole or more or less lyrate; upper cauline laciniate or almost pinnatisect and auriculate at base. 2n = 40.{\i  Damp places. • Carpathians, E. Alps and mountains of W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Cz Ge ?Gr Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. S. pancicii} Degen,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  1}: 92 (1902) ({\i S. alpinus} subsp.{\i  arnautorum} (Velen.) Hayek). Perennial 25-50 cm. Stems erect, branched only in inflorescence, leafy more or less throughout, sparsely arachnoid-lanate. Leaves rather abruptly decreasing in size up the stem; basal and lower cauline 5-9 × 2·5-5 cm, ovate to oblong-elliptical, dentate, or almost laciniate at base, petiolate, sparsely arachnoid-lanate or subglabrous; upper cauline lanceolate, more or less laciniate, auriculate at base. Capitula (1-)2-8, 30-40 mm in diameter, in a lax corymb. Involucre 7-9 mm, purplish, arachnoid-lanate to subglabrous, with 5-8 supplementary bracts 1/2-2/3 as long as the involucre. Ligules 12-15, 7-10 mm, orange-yellow. Achenes c. 3 mm, glabrous. 2n = 100.{\i  Damp meadows. • Mountains of Bulgaria and Srbija.} Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. S. jacobaea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 870 (1753). Biennial or perennial 30-150 cm. Stock short, erect. Stems subglabrous to floccose, branched only in inflorescence. Basal and lower cauline leaves 10-20 cm, lyrate-pinnatifid, petiolate, usually withered at anthesis; middle and upper cauline 1- to 2-pinnatifid, with segments at right angles to rhachis, semi-amplexicaul, usually sparsely floccose beneath. Capitula 15-20 mm in diameter, numerous, in a rather dense corymb. Involucre 7-10 mm, subglabrous, with 2-5 supplementary bracts c. ¼ as long as the narrowly ovate, acute involucral bracts. Ligules 12-15, yellow, rarely (var.{\i  flosculosus }DC.) absent. Achenes c. 2 mm, the outer glabrous, the inner shortly hairy; pappus c. 4 mm, caducous. 2n = 40, 80.{\i  Most of Europe, but rare in the extreme south and north.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (*N, B, C, W, K, E) Su [Fe].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   S. borysthenicus} (DC.) Stankov in Stankov & Taliev, {\i Opred. Vyss. Rast. Evrop. SSSR} 651 (1949), widespread in the C. & S. parts of the U.S.S.R., differs from {\b 44} mainly in the 2- to 3-pinnatifid leaves, and may be worthy of subspecific rank.
\par

\par
201}
\par