{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min15}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min15}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords982}{\nofchars5602}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 oblong, entire to lyrate-pinnatifid. Capitula 4-7 cm in diameter. Involucral bracts more or less scarious, tomentose in centre but with a wide glabrous margin, the outermost very small and with a subulate, tomentose apical appendage. Ligules 15-25(-35) mm, creamy white above, purple beneath. Inner florets yellow. Achenes densely villous with brownish hairs.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated for ornament in S. & W. Europe, and more or less naturalized in sandy waste places in S. Portugal.}{\fs28  [Lu.] (}{\i\fs28 South Africa.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 103.            Arctotheca}{\fs28               Wendl.
\par }{\fs24 By D.A. Webb.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Like }{\i\fs28 Arctotis}{\fs28  but outer florets sterile; achenes without ridges; pappus of a single row of 4-8 short scales.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. A. calendula}{\fs28  (L.) Levyns, }{\i\fs28 Jour. S. Afr. Bot.}{\b\fs28  8}{\fs28 : 284 (1942). Annual, scapose or with decumbent, leafy stems up to 40 cm. Leaves 7-20 cm, lyrate-pinnatisect, scabrid-pubescent above, white-tomentose beneath. Capitula 3-5 cm in diameter. Outer involucral bracts mainly herbaceous, but with a scarious margin and often with a terminal, pinnatisect, scarious appendage; inner bracts mainly scarious, obtuse. Ligules 15-20 mm, pale yellow above, purplish beneath. Inner florets greenish-black. Achenes densely lanate. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Dry, open habitats. Widely naturalized in C. & S. Portugal and S. W. Spain.}{\fs28  [Hs Lu.] (}{\i\fs28 South Africa}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 104.            Gazania}{\fs28                     Gaertner
\par }{\fs24 By D.A. Webb.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Like }{\i\fs28 Arctotis }{\fs28 but involucral bracts in 2-3 rows, connate at the base so as to form a cupuliform involucre; outer florets sterile; achenes without ridges; pappus-scales linear-subulate, about equal in length.
\par 
\par   Literature: H. Roessler,}{\i\fs28  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 M\'fcnchen}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 : 71-500 (1959).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. G. rigens}{\fs28  (L.) Gaertner,}{\i\fs28  Fruct. Sem. Pl.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 451 (1791). Perennial; stems up to 50 cm, decumbent, woody at the base. Leaves 30-80 \'d7 6-15 cm, oblanceolate to oblong, entire, narrowed very gradually to a petiole about as long as the lamina, green and sparsely floccose-tomentose above, densely white-tomentose beneath; rarely a few leaves pinnatifid with 2-4 oblong lobes. Peduncles 8-25 cm, erect, usually with 1-2 linear bracts. Capitula 5-8 cm in diameter. Ligules bright orange, with a basal black patch with a white spot in the centre. Inner florets orange. Achenes c. 4 mm, densely sericeous; pappus c. 6 mm.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated for ornament in S. Europe and naturalized on roadsides in S. Portugal}{\fs28  [Lu.] (}{\i\fs28 South Africa.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par   The description applies to var. }{\i\fs28 rigens}{\fs28 , which is known only in cultivation and as an escape. Other varieties, found wild in South Africa, have smaller capitula and yellow ligules without a black and white patch.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28   Tribe           }{\b\fs28  Cardueae}{\fs28              Cass.
\par }{\fs24 Edit D.M. Moore
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Leaves alternate, often spiny. Capitula without ligules, though marginal florets often enlarged and with 2-lipped corolla; florets mostly hermaphrodite; corolla variously coloured. Receptacle with or without scales or setae. Anthers usually with appendages. Style thickened or hairy below the branches. Pappus usually of hairs.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 105.             Amphoricarpos}{\fs28               Vis.
\par }{\fs24 By D.A. Webb.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial herbs. Leaves alternate, entire, not spiny. Capitula solitary (rarely 2) on long peduncles. Involucral bracts in several rows, herbaceous with scarious margin, entire, without appendages. Receptacle convex, with entire or lacerate scales. Outermost florets female, the remainder hermaphrodite. Corolla shortly 5-lobed. Anthers caudate. Achenes hairy to subglabrous, the outer compressed, the inner cylindrical; pappus of c. 10 linear scales.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. A. neumayeri}{\fs28  Vis., }{\i\fs28 Fl. Dalm.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 28 (1847). Stock short, woody; stems 2-4 cm, with 1-3 small leaves. Basal leaves 5-18 cm, linear to elliptic-oblong, shortly acuminate to subobtuse, narrowed gradually to a short petiole, green above, white-tomentose beneath. Capitula 2-3 cm in diameter. Inner involucral bracts c. 13 mm, linear-oblong. Achenes 5-6 mm; pappus 5-8 mm. }{\i\fs28 Mountain rocks. \bullet  W. half of Balkan peninsula, from C. Bosna to N. W. Greece.}{\fs28  Al Gr Ju.
\par 
\par    (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 neumayeri}{\fs28 : Leaves 4-8(-10) mm wide, linear; margin revolute. Outer involucral bracts oblong-ovate, usually mucronate. Florets pink. 2n = 24. }{\i\fs28 S.W. Crna Gora and adjacent part of Hercegovina}{\fs28 .
\par    (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 murbeckii}{\fs28  Bosnjak, }{\i\fs28 Glasn. Hrvatsk. Prir. Drustva}{\b\fs28  41-48}{\fs28 : 62 (1936): Leaves (6-)10-25 mm wide, lanceolate to elliptic-oblong; margin usually flat. Outer involucral bracts ovate-orbicular, usually obtuse. Florets pink or white. }{\i\fs28 Almost throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 106.              Carlina}{\fs28                 L.
\par (incl.}{\i\fs28  Lyrolepis}{\fs28  Rech. fil.)
\par }{\fs24 By D.A. Webb.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs, sometimes woody at the base. Leaves alternate or basal, entire to deeply pinnatisect, usually with spinose-dentate margins. Capitula sessile to shortly pedunculate, solitary or in cymose, often corymbose inflorescences. Receptacle flat, with scales and sometimes also with bristles, the scales divided at the apex, or almost to the base, into linear segments. Involucral bracts in several rows, the outer usually similar to the upper leaves, the inner entire, scarious, shining, rigid, radiating when dry. Florets all hermaphrodite; corolla 5-lobed; anthers caudate. Achenes oblong, hairy; pappus of a ring of plumose hairs, usually united into groups at the base.
\par 
\par    Measurements of the diameter of capitula refer to the florets only and exclude the involucral bracts. Measurements of leaves include the spines.
\par 
\par    Literature: H. Meusel & A. K\'e4stner, }{\i\fs28 Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  83}{\fs28 : 213-232(1972). H. Meusel & K. Werner, }{\i\fs28 Wiss.  Zeitschr. Univ. Halle}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Math.-Nat.}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 11}{\fs28 : 279-292 (1962).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Plant entirely without spines (Kriti) ..................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. diae}{\fs28 
\par 1 At least the upper leaves and outer involucral bracts spiny
\par 2 Plant acaulescent, with a single, sessile capitulum
\par 3 Inner involucral bracts silvery-white or pinkish;
\par   pappus c. 13 mm ............................................................................. }{\b\fs28 10. acaulis}{\fs28 
\par 3 Inner involucral bracts yellowish; pappus 18-25 mm ............ }{\b\fs28 11. acanthifolia}{\fs28  
\par 2 Plant caulescent, usually with more than 1 capitulum
\par 4 Cushion-plant with much-branched, woody stock and spread
\par   ing branches (Karpathos) ................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. tragacanthifolia}{\fs28 
\par 4 Stem erect, scarcely woody, simple or with erecto-patent
\par   branches
\par 5 Inner involucral bracts bright yellow or brownish-yellow
\par 6 Annual to short-lived perennial; capitula \'b1 sessile,
\par   the terminal greatly overtopped by 1-2 axillary branches
\par   which arise immediately below it ............................................... }{\b\fs28 13. racemosa}{\fs28 
\par 6 Perennial; capitula mostly pedunculate, in a \'b1 corymbose
\par   inflorescence
\par 7 Middle cauline internodes 12-15 mm; upper leaves widest
\par   at base, amplexicaul ................................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. corymbosa}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 208}
\par }