{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 tomentose. Leaves narrowly obovate-spathulate, shortly acute or obtuse, sometimes subentire, more or less densely floccose-tomentose. Capitula usually 4-5 cm in diameter. Outer achenes as in subsp. ({\b a}). {\i S. W. Spain, S. W. Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b maritima} (Guss.) Meikle, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 274 (1976) ({\i C. maritima} Guss.): Stems procumbent or decumbent, leafy; leaves densely and conspicuously glandular-pubescent, rather fleshy, entire or rarely sparsely denticulate. Capitula 3-5 cm in diameter; ligules yellow (rarely orange). Outer achenes usually shortly beaked, rather strongly incurved, scabrid-pubescent.{\i  Maritime sands and gravels. • W. Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b algarbiensis} (Boiss.) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 398 (1879) ({\i C. algarbiensis} Boiss., {\i C. microphylla} Lange ex Ficalho): Stems procumbent or decumbent; leaves up to 7 cm, minutely but more or less densely glandular-pubescent, often rather fleshy, subentire or remotely toothed. Capitula 2-3·5 cm in diameter; ligules yellow, sometimes red at apex. Outer achenes often long-beaked, patent or weakly incurved, subglabrous or glandular-pubescent. 2n = 32, 32 + 2B. {\i Rocky and sandy sea-shores. • S. Spain, C. & S. Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. officinalis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 921 (1753). Annual to perennial, woody only at the base. Stems (17-)20-50(-10) cm, erect, diffuse or procumbent, much-branched, generally leafy almost to apex. Leaves (3-)7-14(-17) × 1-4(-6) cm, oblanceolate, narrowly obovate, oblong or spathulate, shortly acute or obtuse, glandular-pubescent to sparsely arachnoid-floccose, usually subentire to obscurely repand-dentate. Capitula usually 4-7 cm in diameter. Ligules often 2 cm, at least twice as long as the involucral bracts, yellow or orange; tubular florets usually more or less concolorous with ligules, sometimes brownish. Capitula in fruit with or without an outer row of incurved (or rarely patent) narrowly beaked achenes 2-2·5 cm, alternating with much shorter, cymbiform (rarely 3-winged) achenes.{\i  Cultivated for ornament throughout Europe; locally naturalized in S. & W. Europe and a frequent casual elsewhere.} [Az Br Hs It.] ({\i Origin unknown}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. stellata} Cav.,{\i  Icon. Descr.}{\b  1}: 3 (1791) ({\i C. algeriensis} Boiss. & Reuter). Annual (6-)14-40(-50) cm, erect or diffuse, usually much-branched. Leaves 1·5-10(-14) × 0·8-3(-4) cm, oblong-lanceolate to narrowly obovate, subglabrous to sparsely arachnoid-floccose, subentire or remotely denticulate. Capitula (2·3-)3-4(-5) cm in diameter. Ligules usually more than twice as long as involucral bracts, golden-yellow or orange, violet at apex. Tubular florets violet-purple or nearly black. Capitula in fruit with an outer row of patent, narrowly beaked achenes 1·5-3 cm, or sometimes with rather shorter, broadly winged and coarsely serrate achenes; cymbiform and annular achenes frequently few or none.{\i  Cultivated and waste ground. Sicilia.} Si. ({\i North Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   C. bicolor} Rafin.,{\i  Caratteri} 82 (1810), with smaller capitula, ligules usually less than twice as long as involucral bracts, thinly arachnoid-floccose leaves and short, narrow, incurved achenes (like those of{\b  4}) is very probably a hybrid between {\b 3} and{\b  4}. It occurs in S. Spain, Sicilia, Greece and perhaps elsewhere, though many records are referable to variants of {\b 4} with discolorous florets.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. arvensis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1303 (1763). Annual (5-)15-25(-30)cm, often thinly arachnoid-floccose, erect or diffuse, usually much-branched. Leaves (1-)3-8(-10) × 0·4-1·4(-2) cm, pubescent or thinly floccose, oblong or narrowly obovate, acute or obtuse, with subentire or obscurely denticulate margins. Capitula 1-2(-3·5) cm in diameter. Ligules yellow or orange, usually less than 1·8 cm, often distinctly exceeding, but not twice as long as involucral bracts. Tubular florets concolorous with ligules or sometimes brown or violet-purple. Capitula in fruit usually with an outer row of incurved, narrowly beaked achenes 1·3-2 cm, alternating with broadly cymbiform achenes 0·6-1 cm, the beaked achenes occasionally up to 2·5 cm and conspicuous (var.{\i  malacitana} (Boiss. & Reuter) Coutinho) or rarely wholly replaced by cymbiform or annular achenes. 2n = 44.{\i  Cultivated and waste ground. S. & S.C. Europe; naturalized or casual further north.} Al Az Bl Co Cr Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu [*Bu Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A polymorphic species in which the variants are so interconnected that attempts to separate them, at any rank, are unsatisfactory.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. tripterocarpa} Rupr., {\i Bull. Phys.-Math. Acad. Pétersb.}{\b  14}: 231 (1856). Like {\b 4} but usually smaller, with slender, much branched, diffuse or decumbent stems; leaves sparsely glandular-pubescent, linear-oblong, acute, usually with distinctly repand-dentate margins, rarely subentire; capitula 0·5-1·2 cm in diameter; florets concolorous, yellow or orange, the ligules usually less than 1 cm and not much exceeding the involucral bracts; capitula in fruit with an outer row of broadly 3-winged, toothed or lacerate, unbeaked achenes; beaked achenes usually absent.{\i  Cultivated and waste ground. W. Mediterranean region}. Bl Co Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 101.            Chrysanthemoides}              Fabr.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.M. Moore.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs. Leaves alternate, simple. Capitula in a terminal corymb; tubular florets, 5-lobed, functionally male; ligules female. Involucral bracts 2- to 3-seriate, free, herbaceous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. monilifera} (L.) T. Norlindh, {\i Stud. Calend.}{\b  1}: 314 (1943). Up to 1 m. Leaves 15-60 × 7-20 mm, ovate-lanceolate, subacute to obtuse, mucronate, cuneate at base, coarsely serrate, shortly petiolate. Capitula 15-25 mm in diameter; ligules 5-6 in 1 row, bright yellow. Achenes 5-7 mm, globose to ovoid, the wall fleshy when young, hard at maturity, black.{\i  Cliffs and screes. Naturalized in S. France and Sicilia.} [Ga Si.] ({\i South Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   Tribe               {\b  Arctotideae}              Cass.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit  †T.G. Tutin
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves alternate, simple or pinnatifid. Capitula with ligules; outer florets female, the inner hermaphrodite; corolla variously coloured. Receptacle without scales. Anthers sagittate but not caudate at base. Style-branches usually short; style thickened upwards. Pappus of scales.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 102.                 Arctotis}                    L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs, often woody at the base. Leaves alternate, entire to lyrate-pinnatifid. Capitula solitary, axillary, pedunculate. Involucral bracts imbricate, in several rows, free. Receptacle flat, alveolate, without scales. Outer florets ligulate, female. Inner florets hermaphrodite; corolla 5-lobed. Achenes obovoid, with 3 winglike ridges on one side; pappus of 2 rows of oblong scales, those of the inner row larger.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Literature: T. Norlindh, {\i Svensk Bot. Tidskr.}{\b  58}: 193-203 (1964).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. stoechadifolia} Bergius,{\i  Descr. Pl. Cap. Bonae Spei} 324 (1767). White-tomentose perennial; stems up to 100 cm, decumbent, woody below. Leaves 3-10 × 0·5-3 cm, obovate to linear
\par

\par
207}
\par