{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 cauline leaves few, oblanceolate to linear, sessile or scarcely petiolate, subamplexicaul. Capitula 3-12(-20), 20-25 mm in diameter, in a rather lax corymb; peduncles mostly 2-3 times as long as involucre. Involucre 8-12 mm. Ligules yellow or golden yellow (rarely orange). Achenes c. 3 mm. •{\i  From N. Spain and N.W. France eastwards to C. Austria and E.C. Germany}. Au Be Ga Ge He Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Achenes usually glabrous; basal leaves up to 7(-10) cm;
\par
  stems and leaves sparsely hairs, glabrescent ............ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b salisburgensis} 
\par
1 Achenes hairy; basal leaves up to 20 cm; stems and 
\par
  leaves more or less arachnoid-hairy, the leaves usually
\par
  densely so beneath
\par
2 Basal leaves fleshy, subcordate at base; ligules 6-8 mm
\par
  ........................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b candidus}
\par
2 Basal leaves not fleshy, abruptly or gradually narrowed
\par
  at base; ligules 8-15 mm, or absent
\par
3 Basal leaves regularly and finely dentate; bracts arach-
\par
  noid lanate in lower ¼, otherwise glabrous ............... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b macrochaetus}
\par
3 Basal leaves subentire or irregularly dentate; bracts
\par
  arachnoid-lanate throughout .............................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b helenitis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b helenitis} ({\i S. spathulifolius} Griesselich,{\i  S. lanceolatus} (Lam.) Gren., non Burm. fil.): Stock erect, usually simple. Stem sparsely arachnoid-lanate, with some sessile glands and eglandular straight hairs. Basal leaves not fleshy, abruptly or gradually narrowed at base into a winged petiole longer than the lamina, subentire or irregularly dentate, persistently greyish- or whitish-arachnoid-tomentose beneath, sparsely so above. Involucre arachnoid-lanate more or less throughout; bracts green. Ligules c. 13 (or sometimes absent), 8-12 mm. Achenes densely hairy (very rarely glabrous). 2n = 48.{\i  Damp, grassy or stony places. Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b candidus} (Corb.) Brunerye,{\i  Les Séneçons} 225 (1969): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but up to 45 cm, densely white-lanate throughout except for upper surface of leaves which is green and sparsely arachnoid; basal leaves 5-9 cm, fleshy, subcordate at base with petiole usually not longer than lamina and very broadly winged; ligules 13-26, 6-8 mm.{\i  Grassy and stony slopes by the sea. N. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b macrochaetus} (Willk.) Brunerye,{\i  op. cit.} 253 (1969): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but stock rhizomatous and branched, with several non-flowering rosettes; basal leaves regularly and finely dentate, glabrous above, sparsely arachnoid-lanate and often glabrescent beneath; involucral bracts arachnoid-lanate only in lower ¼; ligules 12-15 mm.{\i  Usually on damp, clayey soils. W. Pyrenees and adjacent coastal regions}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b salisburgensis} Cuf., {\i Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih.}) {\b 70}: 129 (1933): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but stems and leaves more or less sparsely hairy but glabrescent on both surfaces; basal leaves up to 7(-10) cm; involucral bracts reddish at least at apex; ligules 15-18 (sometimes absent); achenes usually glabrous.{\i  Damp grassy places. S.E. Germany and N.C. Austria}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Rather variable and showing similarities to both subsp. ({\b a}) and {\b 37}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from the Pyrenees with the basal leaves oblong to ovate-oblong and no ligules have been called {\b S. lapeyrousii} Rothm., {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  49}: 276 (1940) ({\i S. pyrenaicus} Gren. & Godron, non L.,{\i  S. spathulifolius} subsp. {\i pyrenaicus} (Nyman) Rouy, {\i Cineraria pyrenaica} Nyman), but are best considered as variants of subsp. ({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from subalpine habitats in S.C. France with densely arachnoid-lanate stems and leaves, elliptic- or ovate-oblong, slightly fleshy basal leaves and 13-19 ligules have been called subsp.{\b  arvernensis} (Rouy) Cuf., {\i Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih.}){\b  70}: 115 (1933) ({\i S. spathulifolius} subsp.{\i  arvernensis} (Rouy) Rouy, {\i Cineraria longifolia} subsp.{\i  arvernensis} (Rouy) Nyman); they show some approach to subsp. ({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. S. rivularis} (Waldst. & Kit.) DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 359 (1838). Perennial 20-80 cm. Stock erect, short. Stems subglabrous to arachnoid-tomentose and glabrescent. Basal and lower cauline leaves 5-15 × 2-6 cm, more or less erect, ovate, more or less cordate at base with winged petiole 1-2 times as long as lamina, strongly dentate or crenate-dentate, more or less floccose on both surfaces but glabrescent; middle and upper cauline ovate to linear-lanceolate, sessile, subamplexicaul. Capitula 5-15, 25-35(-40) mm in diameter, in a lax corymb; peduncles several times as long as involucre. Involucre 8-12 mm, glandular-hairy and sparsely arachnoid-tomentose or subglabrous, green, rarely purplish. Ligules 15-21, 10-12(-20) mm, yellow to orange. Achenes 3-4 mm. {\i Damp places in the mountains. • C. Europe, westwards to} c. 10° 30' {\i E. in C. Germany}. Au Cz Ge Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rivularis} (incl. {\i S. crispatus} DC.): Basal leaves with broadly winged petiole, often undulate-crispate at the margin. Capitula 5-15. Achenes glabrous; pappus at anthesis about as long as corolla-tube.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pseudocrispus} (Fiori) E. Mayer in Lazar, {\i Ad Annum Horti Bot. Labac. Solemn. CL} 40 (1960) ({\i S. alpestris} var.{\i  pseudocrispus} Fiori): Basal leaves with unwinged or very narrowly winged petiole, not undulate-crispate. Capitula 3-10. Achenes densely hairy; pappus at anthesis not more than half as long as corolla-tube.{\i  N.E. Italy, N.W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. S. ovirensis} (Koch) DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 360 (1838). Perennial 20-80 cm. Stock oblique, short. Stems more or less arachnoid-tomentose, rarely subglabrous. Basal leaves 4-20 × 1·5-3·5 cm, erect, mostly withered at anthesis, ovate to elliptic-lanceolate, gradually narrowed to subcordate at base, coarsely dentate, with broadly winged, long or short petiole. Capitula 3-15, 30-40 mm in diameter, in a corymb; peduncles mostly at least twice as long as involucre. Involucre 8-12 mm, arachnoid-tomentose but often glabrescent. Ligules 18-21, yellow or golden yellow. Achenes 3-4 mm. •{\i  S. & E. Alps, extending to W. Hungary and N. Jugoslavia; N. & C. Appennini; Pyrenees.} Al Au Ga Ge He Hu It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ovirensis}: Up to 60 cm, more or less glandular throughout. Basal leaves usually oblong to elliptic-lanceolate, arachnoid-tomentose and usually glabrescent. Capitula 3-10 in a usually lax corymb. Involucral bracts c. 21, often purplish at apex. Ligules 12-15 mm. Achenes glabrous (or rarely sparsely hairy and glabrescent). •{\i  S.C. & E. Alps, extending to W. Hungary and N. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b gaudinii} (Gremli) Cuf., {\i Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih.}){\b  70}: 152 (1933) (incl.{\i  S. brachychaetus} DC.): Up to 80 cm, not or very sparsely glandular. Basal leaves oblong to linear-lanceolate, arachnoid-tomentose and more or less glabrescent. Capitula 5-15 in a dense corymb. Involucral bracts c. 13, green throughout. Ligules 6-12 mm. Achenes densely hairy.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except the extreme east.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Intermediates between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}) have been called subsp.{\b  alpestris} (Hoppe) Beger in Hegi, {\i Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  6}({\b 2}): 738 (1928).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. S. papposus} (Reichenb.) Less.,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  6}: 244 (1831) ({\i S. spathulifolius} sensu Hayek, non Griesselich). Perennial 30-130 cm. Stock erect to horizontal, short. Basal leaves 10-25
\par

\par
200}
\par