{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min16}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min16}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1048}{\nofchars5974}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 2 Inner involucral bracts patent (at least in fine weather), 
\par   twice as long as the intermediate bracts; capitulum 
\par   usually with 70-120 florets ............................................................. }{\b\fs28 1. annuum}{\fs28 
\par 2 Inner involucral bracts suberect, not more than 1\'bd 
\par   times as long as the intermediate bracts; capitulum with
\par   not more than 50 florets .............................................................. }{\b\fs28 2. inapertum}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. X. annuum}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  857 (1753). Stem 25-75 cm, erect, branched from near the base with few (rarely numerous) sub-erect branches. Leaves 20-60 \'d7 2-8 mm, linear to oblong, densely white-tomentose beneath, more sparsely above. Capitula 30-50 mm in diameter, long-pedunculate. Outer and intermediate involucral bracts mucronate, glabrous; inner bracts 17-25 mm, oblong, patent, bright pink (rarely white). Fertile florets usually 70-120. Achenes 4-5 mm; pappus-scales 5, about equalling achene. 2n = 12.}{\i\fs28  Dry places. S.E. & E.C. Europe, westwards to E. Austria and extending northwards to}{\fs28  52\'b0}{\i\fs28  N. in S.E. Russia; cultivated for ornament and occasionally naturalized or casual elsewhere.}{\fs28  Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) [Hs It]
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. X. inapertum}{\fs28  (L.) Miller, }{\i\fs28 Gard. Dict.}{\fs28  ed. 8, no. 2 (1768). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but stem 10-20 cm; capitula 10-20 mm in diameter; inner involucral bracts 13-17 mm, suberect, usually pale pink; fertile florets 25-50.}{\i\fs28  Dry places. S.W. Europe and Mediterranean region, extending northwards to W.C. France and S. Switzerland.}{\fs28  Al Bl Cr Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. X. cylindraceum}{\fs28  Sibth. & Sm.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 : 172 (1813) (}{\i\fs28 X. foetidum}{\fs28  auct., non Moench,}{\i\fs28  X. inapertum}{\fs28  auct., non (L.) Miller). Stem 15-65 cm, with erecto-patent branches. Leaves 15-20 \'d7 2-5(-12) mm, linear to elliptic-oblong, densely white-tomentose beneath, more sparsely so above. Capitula 8-15 mm in diameter, ovoid, long-pedunculate. Outer involucral bracts obtuse or emarginate, with a whitish patch of appressed hairs in centre of lower surface, the intermediate subacute, and sometimes glabrous, the inner 10-13 mm, pink, suberect. Fertile florets 10-15. Achenes 5-6 mm; pappus-scales 10-15, very unequal, shorter than achene. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated ground and other dry, open habitats. S. Europe, extending northwards to }{\fs28 c. 47\'b0}{\i\fs28  N.in W. France and to}{\fs28  c. 48\'b0}{\i\fs28  N. in S.E. Czechoslovakia.}{\fs28  Al Bu Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Tu.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 109.          Cardopatum}{\fs28         Pers.
\par (}{\i\fs28 Brotera }{\fs28 Willd., non Cav.)
\par }{\fs24 By D.A. Webb.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial, very spiny herbs. Leaves alternate, pinnatisect. Capitula numerous, few-flowered, subsessile in clusters in a corymbose inflorescence. Involucral bracts in several rows, the outer herbaceous, with marginal and terminal spines, the inner scarious, scarcely spiny. Receptacle flat, with linear scales shorter than the florets. Florets all hermaphrodite; corolla deeply 5-lobed. Achenes densely sericeous-villous; pappus of 5-8 acuminate scales.
\par 
\par  Literature: E. Spach, }{\i\fs28 Ann. Sci. Nat.}{\fs28  ser. 3,}{\b\fs28  5}{\fs28 : 233-247 (1846).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. C. corymbosum}{\fs28  (L.) Pers., }{\i\fs28 Syn. Pl.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 500 (1807). Stem 8-25 cm, erect, spiny, profusely and corymbosely branched above, so that the plant is often as wide as high. Leaves 7-35 \'d7 3-12 cm,oblong-oblanceolate in outline, glabrous; segments spinose-pinnatifid. Capitula 5-10 mm in diameter, with 7-10 florets. Involucre with sparse arachnoid indumentum; outer bracts 12-18 mm. Corolla c. 10 mm, bright blue (rarely white); lobes much longer than tube. Achene 3 mm; pappus about as long as achene.}{\i\fs28  Dry, open habitats. E. Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  Cr Gr It Tu.
\par 
\par   Plants from a single gathering from S. Greece, which are said to differ in having inside the ordinary pappus a second ring of much shorter scales united at the base, have been distinguished as }{\b\fs28 C. boryi}{\fs28  Spach,}{\i\fs28  Ann. Sci. Nat.}{\fs28  ser. 3,}{\b\fs28  5}{\fs28 : 245 (1846). In other characters they differ only slightly from }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 , and are best included in it until more material is available.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 110.            Echinops}{\fs28            L.
\par }{\fs24 By S. Kozuharov.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial, rarely annual herbs with erect, sulcate stems. Leaves 1- to 2-pinnatifid. Capitula with 1 floret, grouped into 1 or more globose inflorescences with laciniate basal bracts. Involucral bracts in 3-5 rows, with branched or simple, white setae outside them; inner bracts linear, fimbriate, of intermediate length between the shorter outer and the middle bracts. Florets hermaphrodite; corolla tubular, blue or greyish to white; anthers bluish-grey. Achenes cylindrical, angled, densely hairy; pappus of free to connate, scale-like setae.
\par 
\par All species are found in dry, often rocky habitats.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Leaves with dense, patent, rigid hairs above; involucral
\par   bracts 28-36 ................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 4. strigosus}{\fs28  
\par 1 Leaves glabrous or indumentum not as above; involucral
\par   bracts 12-25
\par 2 Middle involucral bracts with spines at least twice as
\par   long as the rest of the involucre
\par 3 Leaves with arachnoid indumentum above; involucral 
\par   bracts puberulent ........................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. spinosus}{\fs28 
\par 3 Leaves with simple glandular hairs above; involucral
\par   bracts glabrous ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. spinosissimus}{\fs28 
\par 2 Spines of middle involucral bracts less than twice as 
\par   long as the rest of the involucre or absent
\par 4 Inner involucral bracts connate for at least the basal
\par   third
\par 5 Stem eglandular ............................................................................. }{\b\fs28 5. graecus}{\fs28 
\par 5 Stem glandular
\par 6 Outer involucral bracts narrowly linear to linear-lanceolate, 
\par   more than \'bd as long as involucre ................................................. }{\b\fs28 6. fontqueri}{\fs28 
\par 6 Outer involucral bracts spathulate, not more than \'bd 
\par   as long as involucre
\par 7 Involucral setae not exceeding outer involucral bracts . }{\b\fs28 2. spinosissimus}{\fs28 
\par 7 Involucral setae exceeding outer involucral bracts ........ }{\b\fs28 3. orientalis}{\fs28 
\par 4 Inner involucral bracts free to base
\par 8 Involucral setae up to 1/5 as long as capitulum, not
\par   more than 1/2 as long as outer involucral bracts
\par 9 Stem densely glandular-hairy; inflorescence purplish .......... }{\b\fs28 12. oxyodontus}{\fs28 
\par 9 Stem arachnoid-tomentose, sometimes also with a few 
\par   glandular hairs; inflorescence blue .................................... }{\b\fs28 11. microcephalus}{\fs28 
\par 8 Involucral setae at least 1/3 as long as capitulum, slightly
\par    shorter to much longer than outer involucral bracts
\par 10 Inflorescence bluish
\par 11 Involucral setae connate at base; leaves flat, with 
\par    densely scabridulous margin, the lobes with slender 
\par    apical spine 2-4 mm .................................................................. }{\b\fs28 9. bannaticus}{\fs28 
\par 11 Involucral setae connate at least in basal half;
\par    leaf-margin revolute, with stout apical spines 3-15 mm .................... }{\b\fs28 10. ritro}{\fs28 
\par 10 Inflorescence white or greyish
\par 12 Involucral setae connate at base or free; upper surface
\par    of leaves with glandular hairs not more than 0\'b75 mm,
\par    the margin never scabridulous ......................................... }{\b\fs28 7. sphaerocephalus}{\fs28 
\par 12 Involucral setae connate for basal half; upper surface
\par    of leaves with rigid hairs more than 0\'b75 mm, the margin
\par    densely scabridulous .................................................................... }{\b\fs28 8. exaltatus}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 212}
\par }