{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. barnebiana} B.L. Burtt & P.H. Davis, {\i Kew Bull.}{\b  4}: 103 (1949). Sparsely arachnoid-villous to glabrescent perennial; stems c. 8 cm, simple. Leaves up to 9 × 2 cm, linear-oblanceolate pinnatisect, undulate, with spinose margin. Capitula 15-20 mm in diameter, solitary. Outer involucral bracts 6 mm; inner bracts reddish-purple above and beneath, at least in apical part (sometimes white towards the base). Achenes c. 3 mm; pappus c. 8 mm. •{\i  E. Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. vulgaris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 828, [1231] (1753). Biennial 10-70 cm, subglabrous or with sparsely arachnoid indumentum. Leaves up to 15 cm, linear-oblong to narrowly ovate, more or less spinose-dentate, the lower tapered to a short petiole. Capitula 15-30 mm in diameter, solitary or in terminal groups of 2-3. Outer involucral bracts 10-35(-50) × 4-9 mm, linear-oblong to lanceolate, with spiny margin but scarcely lobed, shorter than or slightly exceeding the inner; inner bracts 12-20 × 1-1·5 mm, straw-coloured. Achenes 3-4 mm; pappus 8 mm. 2n = 20.{\i  Most of Europe, northwards to }62° 30' {\i N. in Finland.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Upper cauline leaves flat, with rather weak spines, and with the
\par
   lateral veins running parallel to the margin; outer involucral 
\par
   bracts 20-35 mm, exceeding the inner ........................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b longifolia}
\par
1 Upper cauline leaves undulate, at least in proximal half, with
\par
    strong spines in which the lateral veins terminate; outer involucral
\par
    bracts 10-20(-25) mm, not or scarcely exceeding the inner
\par
2 Usually less than 30 cm; all leaves more or less undulate 
\par
  throughout and with strong spines ................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b vulgaris}
\par
2 Usually more than 30 cm; lower leaves and distal half 
\par
  of upper leaves flat, with weak spines ....................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b intermedia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b vulgaris}: stem usually 15-30 cm, simple or variously branched. Cauline leaves lanceolate to narrowly ovate, undulate, with strong spines in which the lateral veins terminate. Capitula 15-25 mm in diameter, usually numerous. Outer involucral bracts lanceolate, shorter than the inner. {\i Throughout the range of the species except for most of the U.S.S.R}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b intermedia} (Schur) Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 694 (1931) ({\i C. biebersteinii} Bernh. ex Hornem.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but stem usually 30-70 cm, branched above; cauline leaves lanceolate, the lower and the distal part of the upper more or less flat, with weak spines, the proximal part of the upper undulate, with strong spines; outer involucral bracts linear-oblong, slightly shorter than or equalling the inner.{\i  E.C. & E. Europe and S. Fennoscandia.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Intermediate between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b c}), and often difficult to delimit satisfactorily.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b longifolia} Nyman, {\i Consp.} 400 (1879) ({\i C. longifolia} Reichenb., non Viv., {\i C. nebrodensis} auct., non Guss. ex DC.): Stem simple or sparingly branched. Leaves linear-oblong, flat, with weakly spiny margin; lateral veins running parallel to the margin and not terminating in teeth. Capitula 20-30 mm in diameter. Outer involucral bracts linear-oblong, somewhat exceeding the inner.{\i  Usually in rather damp grassland. Mainly in the mountain districts of C. Europe, but extending locally to N.E. Spain, N. Appennini, C. Jugoslavia and S. Fennoscandia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. frigida} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 6}): 109 (1846) (incl. {\i C. acanthophylla} Hausskn.). Biennial 15-50 cm. Leaves 8-10 × 2-4 cm, deeply pinnatisect with long spines, usually glabrous, rarely tomentose beneath. Capitula 13-20 mm in diameter, in crowded corymbs of 2-6. Outer involucral bracts 35-40 × 20-25 mm, spinose-pinnatisect, much exceeding the inner; inner bracts 12-15 × 1·5 mm, pale yellow or whitish. Florets yellow. •{\i  Mountains of Greece, Albania and W. Jugoslavia.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. fiumensis} Simonkai,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  6}: 15 (1907). Perennial 12-20 cm, with several stems arising from a short, vertical stock. Leaves 5-12 × 2-3 cm, oblong to oblanceolate, pinnatifid to pinnatisect, narrowed to the base, very crowded. Outer involucral bracts 15-20 × 5-8 mm, spinose-dentate, about equalling the inner; inner bracts 12-15 × 1·5 mm, pale to clear yellow. Florets yellow. •{\i  N.W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A little-known species, which has characters in common with {\b 3}, {\b 6} and {\b 7}, and has been, by different authors, related to each of these.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. macrocephala} Moris, {\i Stirp. Sard}. {\b 2}: 5 (1827). Arachnoid-tomentose to subglabrous biennial 15-40 cm; stem simple or sparingly branched. Leaves 7-11 × 2-3 cm, lanceolate, dentate to pinnatifid, undulate, spiny. Capitula terminal. Outer involucral bracts 25-40 × 15-20 mm; inner bracts 13-17 × 1·5-2 mm, white above (rarely purple at apex), purplish beneath. Achenes c. 4 mm; pappus c. 8 mm. •{\i  C. Mediterranean region.} Co It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b macrocephala}: Capitula 1-4, 25-30 mm in diameter. Outer involucral bracts distinctly exceeding the inner. 2n = 20. {\i Corse, Sardegna}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b nebrodensis} (Guss. ex DC.) D. A. Webb,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  68}: 279 (1974) ({\i C. nebrodensis} Guss. ex DC.): Capitula usually more than 4, c. 18 mm in diameter. Outer involucral bracts scarcely exceeding the inner. {\i Italy, Sicilia, ?Corse}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. acaulis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 828 (1753). Monocarpic perennial. Leaves up to 30 × 6 cm, elliptic-oblong, pinnatifid to pinnatisect with spinose-dentate to -pinnatisect segments, petiolate or subsessile, glabrous or with sparsely arachnoid indumentum beneath. Capitula 25-50 mm in diameter, terminal. Outer involucral bracts 30-50 mm, not or only slightly exceeding the inner; inner bracts 35-45 × 3 mm, silvery-white or pale pink above, tinged with purplish-brown beneath. Florets white to purplish-brown. Receptacular scales with some of the segments clavate at apex. Achenes 4-5 mm; pappus c. 13 mm. •{\i  From C. France and White Russia southwards to C. Spain and N. Greece}. Al Au Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b acaulis}: Usually acaulescent, rarely with a simple stem up to 15 cm. Leaves usually more or less flat, pinnatifid to pinnatisect; segments dentate to pinnatifid. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b simplex} (Waldst. & Kit.) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 400 (1879) (subsp.{\i  aggregata }(Waldst. & Kit.) Hegi): stem usually 15-60 cm, simple or branched, with up to 6 capitula, rarely short or absent. Leaves undulate-pinnatisect; segments pinnatisect. 2n = 20.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except parts of the north and north-east}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. acanthifolia} All., {\i Auct. Syn. Stirp. Horti Taur. }15 (1773). Acaulescent, monocarpic perennial. Leaves 10-30 × 6-15 cm, ovate- to oblong-elliptical, 1½-2½ times as long as wide, pinnatifid to pinnatisect, spinose-dentate, arachnoid-tomentose at least beneath, the lower petiolate, the upper usually sessile. Capitulum 30-70 mm in diameter. Outer involucral bracts 25-30 mm; inner bracts 35-55 mm, yellowish. Florets lilac. Achenes c. 5 mm; pappus 20-25 mm. 2n = 20. S. & E. C. Europe, mainly in the mountains, from C. France and S. Poland to the Pyrenees, S. Italy and N. Greece. Al Bu Ga Gr Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W).
\par

\par
210}
\par