{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. RYTRODES Bunge. Involucral bracts 16-34, in 4-5 rows, the inner connate to form a membranous tube.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. spinosus} L., {\i Mantissa }119 (1767). Stem 40-70 cm, branched, glabrous or with arachnoid indumentum. Leaves elliptic-lanceolate in outline, green and with arachnoid indumentum above, white-tomentose beneath, the basal 2-pinnatisect, the cauline pinnatifid or pinnatisect; segments linear-lanceolate, with long, stout, marginal spines. Inflorescence 8-16 cm in diameter, pale blue. Involucre 30-70 mm; setae as long as the outer involucral bracts; bracts 20, puberulent; outer bracts spathulate, dentate; middle bracts lanceolate, subulate distally, 1-2(-3) with hairy spines at least twice as long as capitulum. Corolla blue. Pappus-setae connate at base. {\i Lampedusa.} Si. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants like {\b 1} but differing in the much smaller, free, linear-lanceolate involucral bracts are reported from Spain. They are sterile and apparently of hybrid origin, but the parents have not yet been determined.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. spinosissimus} Turra, {\i Farset. Nov. Gen.} 13 (1765) ({\i E. viscosus} DC., non Schrader ex Reichenb.). Stem 50-80 cm, branched, densely arachnoid-tomentose and glandular-hairy. Leaves ovate-lanceolate in outline, usually 2-pinnatisect, with simple, glandular hairs above, white-tomentose and often glandular-hairy on the veins beneath; segments triangular to broadly lanceolate, with short, slender marginal spines. Inflorescence 3·5-7 cm in diameter, greyish to greenish or greenish-blue. Involucre 15-40 mm; setae equalling or slightly shorter than the outer bracts; bracts 20, glabrous; outer bracts spathulate, acuminate or subulate distally, dentate, not more than ½ as long as capitulum; middle bracts lanceolate, equalling or twice as long as the outer, with marginal spines twice as long as the capitulum or absent. Corolla white or pale blue. Pappus-setae connate at base.{\i  E. Mediterranean region, extending westwards to Sicilia.} Al Cr Gr Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Middle involucral bracts twice as long as the outer;
\par
  corolla white .................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b neumayeri}
\par
1 Middle involucral bracts less than twice as long as the
\par
  outer; corolla pale blue
\par
2 Involucre 15-25 mm, greenish; middle involucral bracts
\par
  shortly spinose or long-acuminate ............................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b spinosissimus}
\par
2 Involucre 25-40 mm, blue or greenish-blue; middle 
\par
  involucral bracts long-subulate ..................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b bithynicus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b spinosissimus}: Leaves glandular-hairy on the veins beneath. Inflorescence 3·5-5·5 cm in diameter, greenish. Involucre 15-25 mm; bracts acuminate or shortly spinose, patent, the middle equalling the outer. Corolla pale blue. Sicilia, Greece.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b bithynicus} (Boiss.) Kozuharov,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 41 (1975) ({\i E. bithynicus} Boiss., {\i E. viscosus} subsp.{\i  bithynicus} (Boiss.) Rech. fil.,{\i  E. spinosus} sensu Hayek, non L.): Leaves more or less glandular-hairy on the veins beneath. Inflorescence 4-7 cm in diameter, blue or greenish-blue. Involucre 25-40 mm. Middle bracts long-spinose, equalling the outer. Corolla pale blue.{\i  S. Aegean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b neumayeri} (Vis.) Kozuharov,{\i  loc. cit.} (1975) ({\i E. neumayeri} Vis.): Inflorescence 4-7 cm in diameter, greenish. Involucre 25-40 mm; bracts acuminate, not spinose, the middle twice as long as the outer. Corolla white.{\i  W. Jugoslavia, Albania}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Sicilia and the Aegean region with the inner involucral bracts free may either be of hybrid origin or have been collected in an immature state, and field study is necessary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. E. orientalis} Trautv., {\i Echin. Gen.} 22 (1833). Stem 50-80 cm, simple or branched, with glandular, arachnoid indumentum. Leaves broadly oblong in outline, deeply 2-pinnatisect, densely glandular-pubescent above, white-tomentose beneath; segments narrowly triangular to linear-lanceolate, dentate, with stout marginal spines. Inflorescence 4·5-7 cm in diameter, greyish-green. Involucre 25-30 mm; setae exceeding the outer bracts; bracts 18-20, glabrous; outer bracts spathulate, dentate, not more than as long as the capitulum; middle bracts lanceolate, subulate. Corolla greenish-white. Pappus-setae connate at base. {\i Turkey-in-Europe.} *Tu. ({\i Caspian region}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The European plant belongs to subsp. {\b byzantinus} (Form.) Kozuharov, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 41 (1975) ({\i E. byzantinus} Form.). Subsp.{\b  orientalis} differs in its broadly triangular leaf segments with soft marginal spines, its rather longer, white capitula c. 30 mm and in the involucral setae much exceeding the outer involucral bracts.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. E. strigosus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 815 (1753). Stem 20-100 cm, simple or branched, arachnoid-tomentose. Leaves elliptical in outline, deeply pinnatisect, with dense, patent, rigid hairs above, white tomentose beneath; segments linear. Inflorescence 2·5-7 cm in diameter, bluish. Involucre 20-25 mm; setae as long as the outer bracts; bracts 28-36, lanceolate, long-acuminate, long-fimbriate, otherwise glabrous, the innermost with bluish apex. Corolla blue. Pappus-setae free. 2n = 32.{\i  C. & S. Spain, C. & S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. OLIGOLEPIS Bunge. Involucral bracts 12-20, in 3 rows, the inner connate to form a coriaceous tube.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. E. graecus} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 4 (1768). Stem 25-70 cm, branched, glabrous or arachnoid-tomentose. Leaves elliptical in outline, 2-pinnatisect, glabrous or with arachnoid indumentum above, white-tomentose beneath; segments linear-lanceolate, with short, slender spines. Inflorescence 3-4 cm in diameter, shiny silver-white. Involucre 15-20 mm; setae shorter than the outer bracts; bracts 12-15, rigid, setulose or subglabrous; outer bracts broadly spathulate, acuminate, long ciliate; middle bracts lanceolate, ciliate. Corolla blue. Pappus setae connate at base. •{\i  E. Greece, Kikladhes.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. E. fontqueri} Pau in Font Quer,{\i  Iter. Maroc.} ({\i Sched}.) 409 (1928). Stem 40-70 cm, simple, with glandular, arachnoid indumentum. Leaves lanceolate or elliptical in outline, pinnatifid, glandular-hairy; segments triangular or lanceolate, with short, slender spines. Inflorescence 4-7 cm in diameter, bluish. Involucre 22-26 mm; setae much shorter than the outer bracts; bracts 15-20, soft, serrulate, ciliate, more than ½ as long as the capitulum; outer bracts linear to linear-lanceolate, brownish; middle bracts green, with arachnoid indumentum. Corolla blue. Pappus-setae connate for basal half. {\i  S.E. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. ECHINOPS. Involucral bracts 16-25, in 3 rows, the inner free.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. E. sphaerocephalus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 814 (1753). Stem 50-160(-200) cm, simple or branched, arachnoid-tomentose, sometimes glandular-hairy. Leaves oblong-elliptical to ovate in outline, 1- to 2-pinnatifid, amplexicaul, glandular-pubescent or with eglandular and glandular hairs above and white-tomentose beneath, the margin revolute; segments triangular to lanceolate, with short, slender spines. Inflorescence 3-6 cm in diameter, greyish or white. Involucre 15-25 mm; setae equalling or somewhat shorter than the outer bracts, ½ as long as the involucre, free or connate at base; bracts 16-20, long-acuminate, long-ciliate outer bracts oblanceolate, c. ½ as long as the involucre; middle
\par

\par
213}
\par