{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 111.             Berardia}           Vill.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By S. Kozuharov
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Capitulum solitary; receptacle fleshy. Involucral bracts subequal, in 3-4 rows, herbaceous, entire, without appendages. Florets hermaphrodite, cream to pale yellow or pinkish. Stamens with winged filaments, without bristles at the base. Achenes sub-cylindrical, with very short distal corona; pappus-hairs unequal, simple, twisted at base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. subacaulis} Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph. }28 (1779). Stem absent or up to 15 cm, coarsely sulcate, densely arachnoid-tomentose, covered with short, brown, membranous sheaths at the base. Leaves obovate to suborbicular, entire or slightly dentate, slightly decurrent at base, petiolate, coriaceous, with arachnoid indumentum above, densely arachnoid-tomentose beneath. Capitulum 50-70 mm, hemispherical. Involucral bracts cuneate, arachnoid-tomentose, the inner almost as long as the florets. Achenes brown or yellow; pappus 12-20 mm, yellowish. 2n = 36. {\i Rocks and screes above} 1500{\i  m. •  S.W. Alps}. Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 112.         Arctium}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By F.H. Perring.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Erect biennials, with long, stout taproots. Leaves alternate, tomentose, entire or remotely dentate. Capitula solitary or in corymbose to racemose clusters, ovoid-conical to globose or hemispherical. Involucre glabrous or with arachnoid indumentum; bracts numerous, imbricate, subulate, with appressed bases, the outer long, rigid, patent, with hooked apices. Receptacle flat, with numerous, rigid, subulate scales. Florets tubular, hermaphrodite, purple or white. Anthers acuminate above, sagittate below. Style swollen at base, the branches cuneate. Achenes oblong, compressed, rugose; pappus-hairs scabrid, golden-yellow, free to base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Specific limits within this genus cannot be clearly defined, each species showing great variation in hairiness of leaves and capitula length of peduncles, and colour of capitula and florets. All taxa are interfertile and, although they are normally autogamous, outbreeding sometimes occurs. This has resulted in innumerable intermediates which are fully fertile and breed true from seed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  All species occur in waste places, on roadsides or, occasionally, in woodland.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: J. Arènes, {\i Bull. Jard. Bot. Bruxelles }{\b 20}: 67-156 (1950).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Each main branch of inflorescence corymbose; peduncles
\par
  3-10 cm; petioles solid
\par
2 Involucre 12-20 × 15-25 mm in fruit, with dense 
\par
  arachnoid indumentum, rarely ± glabrous ............................... {\b 1. tomentosum}
\par
2 Involucre 20-25 × 35-42 mm in fruit, glabrous or sub-glabrous ....... {\b 2. lappa}
\par
1 Each main branch of inflorescence not corymbose;
\par
  peduncles absent or up to 4 cm; petioles hollow
\par
3 Involucre 15-18 × 15-25 mm in fruit; florets longer
\par
  than involucral bracts ........................................................................ {\b 4. minus}
\par
3 Involucre 20-25 × 30-35 mm in fruit; florets about as 
\par
  long as involucral bracts
\par
4 Involucre straw-coloured; peduncles 1-4 cm .................................. {\b 3. pubens}
\par
4 Involucre green or tinged with dark purple; peduncles 
\par
  less than 1 cm ........................................................................... {\b 5. nemorosum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. tomentosum} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 3 (1768) ({\i Lappa tomentosa} (Miller) Lam.). Plant 50-150 cm, petioles and peduncles slightly farinose and floccose. Basal leaves up to 50 cm, broadly ovate, cordate; petioles solid. Each main branch of inflorescence corymbose, occasionally elongate. Peduncles 3-10 cm. Involucre 12-20 × 15-25 mm in fruit, usually with dense arachnoid indumentum, rarely more or less glabrous. Florets longer than involucral bracts. Achenes 5-6 mm, pale brownish; pappus 1-3·5 mm. 2n = 36.{\i  Most of Europe, but rarer in the north and west.} Au Be Bl Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. lappa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 816 (1753) ({\i A. majus} Bernh., {\i Lappa officinalis} All.,{\i  L. major} Gaertner). Plant 90-150 cm. Stems, petioles and peduncles pubescent to subglabrous. Each main branch of inflorescence corymbose. Basal leaves up to 50 cm, broadly ovate, cordate, usually obtuse; petioles solid. Peduncles 3-10 cm. Involucre 20-25 × 35-42 mm in fruit, globose in bud, hemispherical and widely open above in fruit, shiny golden-green, glabrous or subglabrous. Florets about as long as involucral bracts. Achenes 6-7 mm; pappus 1·3-5 mm. 2n = 36.{\i  Most of Europe except the extreme north.} All except Az ?Cr Fa Is Lu Sb ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. pubens} Bab., {\i Ann. Nat. Hist.} ser. 2, {\b 17}: 376 (1856). Plant 60-150 cm; Stems, petioles and peduncles farinose. Basal leaves up to 40 cm, broadly ovate, cordate; petioles hollow. Each main branch of inflorescence racemose; peduncles 1-4 cm, the lower longest. Involucre 20-25 × 30-35 mm in fruit, hemispherical, straw-coloured, with dense arachnoid indumentum when young, becoming subglabrous and open above in fruit. Florets about as long as involucral bracts. Achenes 5-7 mm, brownish; pappus 1·3-5 mm. {\i W., C. & S. Europe; distribution incompletely known.} Be Br Co Da Ga He Ho Hs Hu It Rm Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Probably originated by hybridization between {\b 2} and {\b 4}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. minus} Bernh., {\i Syst. Verz. Erfurt} 154 (1800) ({\i Lappa minor} Hill). Plant 50-150 cm. Basal leaves up to 50 cm, broadly ovate, cordate; petioles hollow. Each main branch of inflorescence racemose, the terminal capitula usually solitary. Involucre 15-18 × 15-25 mm in fruit, globose, green or purple-tinged, often with dense arachnoid indumentum when young, becoming subglabrous, closed in fruit. Florets longer than involucral bracts. Achenes 5-7 mm, brownish; pappus 1-3·5 mm. 2n = 36.{\i  Most of Europe except the arctic.} All except Az Cr Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. nemorosum} Lej., {\i Mag. Hort.} ({\i Liège}){\b  1}: 289 (1833). Plant 100-250 cm. Basal leaves up to 50 cm, broadly ovate, cordate; petioles hollow. Each main branch of inflorescence racemose, often terminating in a cluster of three capitula. Involucre 20-25 × 30-35 mm in fruit, ovoid, subsessile, green or tinged with dark purple, usually with sparse arachnoid indumentum, closed in fruit. Florets about as long as involucral bracts. Achenes 6-9 mm, dark brown; pappus 1-3·5 mm. 2n = 36.{\i  Much of Europe, but rare in the south and parts of the north.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 113.         Cousinia}            Cass.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.M. Moore
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Leaves alternate, simple. Capitula few. Involucral bracts imbricate, the outer with recurved apical spines. Receptacular scales scarious, twisted, glabrous. Florets all tubular, hermaphrodite. Anthers with pinnate basal appendages. Achenes obpyramidal, with 4 narrowly winged angles; pappus a short, dentate corona.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. astracanica} (Sprengel) Tamamsch., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 16}: 468 (1954). Stem 10-30 cm, erect, arachnoid-tomentose,
\par

\par
215}
\par