{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 with few short branches above. Leaves 2-10 × 0·5-4 cm, oblong to ovate, serrate-dentate, the teeth with apical spines; basal and lower cauline attenuate into short petiole; upper cauline semiamplexicaul, sessile. Involucre 10-12 mm wide, ovoid; bracts ovate to oblong, with arachnoid indumentum, the inner acuminate, with short, slender apical spine and scabrid margin. Corolla whitish or yellowish. Achenes c. 3 mm. {\i Once reported in S.E. Russia} ({\i S. of Volgograd}). Rs (E). ({\i Transcaspian region}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 114.           Saussurea}              DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By S.J. Lipschitz.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Unarmed perennial herbs. Leaves alternate, entire to pinnatisect. Capitula solitary, or in corymbs or panicles. Involucre ovoid, campanulate or cylindrical; bracts in many rows, imbricate, rarely with membranous apical appendages. Receptacular scales numerous, paleaceous, rarely absent. Florets hermaphrodite, tubular; corolla narrow below, cupuliform distally, 5-fid. Anthers with entire or divided basal appendages. Achenes cylindrical, 4-ribbed, smooth or rugose, glabrous. Pappus in (1-)2 rows; outer setae short, free, simple and scabrid or slightly plumose, deciduous, the inner longer, connate at base into a ring, plumose, persistent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: O. Mattirolo,{\i  Malpighia}{\b  3}: 468-478 (1890). J. Briquet & F. Cavillier in E. Burnat,{\i  Flore des Alpes Maritimes}{\b  7}: 245-252. Genève. 1931. E. I. Nyárády, {\i Verh. Mitt. Siebenb. Ver. Naturw.}{\b  89-90}: 231-241(1940).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Median and inner involucral bracts expanded at apex 
\par
  into rounded, pink, membranous appendages ................................... {\b 1. amara}
\par
1 Involucral bracts without apical appendages
\par
2 Capitula solitary; anther-appendages lanate ................................ {\b 4. pygmaea}
\par
2 Capitula 2 to many, in corymbs or panicles; anther-
\par
  appendages not lanate
\par
3 At least the lower leaves pinnatisect
\par
4 Middle leaves entire ........................................................................... {\b 2. salsa}
\par
4 All leaves (1-)2-pinnatisect ....................................................... {\b 3. turgaiensis}
\par
3 Leaves entire to dentate
\par
5 Stem winged
\par
6 Basal and lower cauline leaves long-petiolate, elliptical
\par
  to broadly lanceolate, serrate, glabrous ....................................... {\b 5. parviflora}
\par
6 Basal and lower cauline leaves shortly petiolate,
\par
  linear-lanceolate, entire or slightly dentate, arachnoid-
\par
  or crispate-puberulent beneath .......................................................... {\b 6. porcii} 
\par
5 Stem not winged
\par
7 Leaves sparsely greyish-arachnoid-villous to glabrous;
\par
  basal and lower leaves linear- to ovate-lanceolate,
\par
  rounded or cuneate at base; petiole narrowly winged ....................... {\b 7. alpina}
\par
7 Leaves densely whitish-tomentose beneath; basal and 
\par
  lower leaves ovate- to lanceolate-triangular, broadly
\par
  truncate or cordate at base; petiole not winged
\par
8 Stems 10-20(-45) cm, ascending near base; lower leaves
\par
  triangular-lanceolate, up to 60 mm wide ....................................... {\b 8. discolor}
\par
8 Stems 25-80 cm, erect; lower leaves triangular-ovate,
\par
  40-85 mm wide ........................................................................ {\b 9. controversa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. amara} (L.) DC., {\i Ann. Mus. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Paris}) {\b 16}: 200 (1810). Stems 15-60 cm, not winged. Lower leaves long-petiolate, elliptical or oblong-elliptical, sinuate-dentate, rarely entire, strongly scabrid above. Capitula 1-1·5 cm in diameter, campanulate, in a corymbose panicle. Outer involucral bracts with dentate or trifid green apical appendages; median and inner bracts with rounded, pink, membranous appendages.{\i  Saline grassland. S. & C. Russia, N.E. Ukraine.} Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. salsa} (Pallas) Sprengel,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  3}: 381 (1826). Stems 15-50 cm, often winged. Leaves 20-40 mm wide, rather thick, scabrid or glabrous, the lower lyrate-pinnatisect, the median entire. Capitula 1-1·2 cm, cylindrical, numerous, in corymbs grouped into a lax panicle. Involucral bracts without apical appendages.{\i  Saline steppes and grassland. S. Ukraine, S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. turgaiensis} B. Fedtsch., {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  8}: 497 (1910). Stems 15-40 cm, not winged. Leaves (1-)2-pinnatisect, with linear to ovate-triangular lobes, glaucescent, more or less pubescent. Capitula 1-1·2 cm, cylindrical, numerous, in corymbs grouped into a lax panicle. Involucral bracts without apical appendages. Calcareous or saline steppes and grassland. W. Kazakhstan (near Ural'sk); ?S.E. Russia. Rs (E). ({\i C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. pygmaea} (Jacq.) Sprengel, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  3}: 381 (1826). Stems 2-12 cm, not winged, densely leafy. Leaves sessile, 3-5(-12) mm wide, linear to linear-lanceolate, usually entire, rarely obscurely dentate. Capitula 2-3 × up to 2·5 cm, solitary, ovoid. Involucral bracts without apical appendages. 2n = 52.{\i  Mountain rocks and screes. E. Alps, W. Carpathians. }Au Cz Ge It Ju Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. parviflora} (Poiret) DC.,{\i  Ann. Mus. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Paris}){\b  16}: 200 (1810). Stems 20-100 cm, narrowly winged. Basal and lower cauline leaves 20-45 mm wide, elliptical or broadly lanceolate, long-acuminate, serrate, glabrous, long-petiolate, the upper narrower and sessile. Capitula 1-1·3 cm, cylindrical, in a panicle or compact terminal corymb. Involucral bracts without apical appendages, often arachnoid-ciliate.{\i  Wet places. E. Russia.} Rs (N, C, E). ({\i Siberia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. porcii} Degen,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  3}: 311 (1904). Stems 30-80 cm, broadly winged, densely leafy. Basal and lower cauline leaves shortly petiolate, linear-lanceolate, acute, entire to slightly dentate, arachnoid- or crispate-puberulent beneath. Capitula cylindrical, in compact terminal corymbs. Involucral bracts without apical appendages, villous.{\i  Subalpine meadows. E. Carpathians.} Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. alpina} (L.) DC., {\i Ann. Mus. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Paris}) {\b 16}: 198 (1810). Stems 2-50 cm, not winged, sparsely to densely leafy. Basal and lower cauline leaves ovate- to linear-lanceolate, rounded to cuneate at base, entire or somewhat dentate, with narrowly winged petiole, the upper linear to lanceolate, sessile. Capitula 1·5-2 × 0·7-1 cm, ovoid-cylindrical, in more or less contracted terminal corymbs or a corymbiform panicle. Involucral bracts without apical appendages, densely pubescent, rarely subglabrous. Corolla purple.{\i  Europe, southwards to the Pyrenees, S. Alps and S. Carpathians; mainly in the mountains but in the north and north-east also at low altitudes.} Au Br Cz Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hs It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   An extremely polymorphic species, showing variation especially in length of stem, in the shape, size, pubescence and margin of the leaves, in inflorescence-type, and in shape and pubescence of the involucre. The polymorphism of plants from W. Europe results partly from environmental variation, but also from hybridization, probably with {\b 8}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems 2-8(-10) cm, procumbent at base; upper leaves 
\par
  equalling or exceeding inflorescence; leaves arachnoid-
\par
  villous above ..................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b depressa}
\par
1 Stems usually 10-50 cm, erect; upper leaves not exceeding
\par
  inflorescence; leaves glabrous above
\par
2 Leaves glabrous or subglabrous beneath; inflorescence 
\par
  a lax panicle .................................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b esthonica}
\par
2 Leaves greyish-arachnoid-villous beneath; inflorescence
\par
  usually a compact corymb
\par

\par
216}
\par