{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. G. viridiflorum} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 51 (1852). Stem 40-80 cm, fairly stout. Leaves 13-30 × 4-6(-8) mm, broadly lanceolate to oblanceolate, mostly abruptly narrowed to the awned apex, rough above, with rather dense, patent long hairs beneath. Inflorescence long, cylindrical; partial inflorescences dense; pedicels 1-3 mm, slender. Corolla 2·5-3 mm in diameter, rotate, greenish-yellow; lobes 1-1·5 mm, more or less triangular, acute to apiculate. Filaments 0·4-0·5 mm; anthers 0·2-0·3 mm, subglobose to ovoid. Fruit 1-1·5 mm, granulate and with long, dense, patent hairs.{\i  Shady river-banks. • S.W. Spain} ({\i near Ronda}). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. APARINOIDES (Jordan) Gren. Perennial herbs with slender creeping rhizomes. Stems 4-angled, usually more or less retrorsely aculeolate, never with patent hairs. Leaves usually in whorls of 4-6, 1-veined, more or less rounded or obtuse, without a hyaline point, usually blackish when dry. Inflorescence cylindrical to broadly pyramidal; partial inflorescences cymose, 1- to many-flowered, the ultimate branches usually ebracteate. Corolla 3- to 4-merous, shallowly infundibuliform, white, pink or greenish; lobes acute, not appendiculate. Fruit globose, dry, smooth to verrucose or tuberculate, never with hooked setae or hairs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. G. debile} Desv., {\i Obs. Pl. Angers} 134 (1818) ({\i G. krymense} Pobed.). Stems (10-)20-60(-80) cm, more or less erect, smooth or somewhat retrorsely aculeolate on the 4 distinct, often whitish angles. Middle cauline leaves (7-)15-25(-30) × (0·5-)0·8-2(-3) mm, in whorls of 4-6, linear to linear-lanceolate, somewhat acute, erecto-patent or deflexed; margin usually revolute and smooth or slightly rough. Inflorescence many-flowered, more or less divaricately branched; partial inflorescences more or less glomerate; pedicels 2-4 mm, more or less convergent in fruit. Flowers (3-)4-merous. Fruit 2-3·5 mm, distinctly tuberculate. 2n = 24.{\i  Marshes. S. & W. Europe, northwards to S. England.} Al ?Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju ?Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. G. palustre} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }105 (1753). Stems (5-)15-70(-80) cm, slender, procumbent to erect, smooth or usually more or less retrorsely aculeolate on the scarcely whitish angles. Middle cauline leaves 5-20 × 1-3 mm, in whorls of 4-6, narrowly to broadly oblanceolate, obtuse, more or less patent; margin more or less flat, often rough. Inflorescence many-flowered, cylindrical; partial inflorescences rather dense; pedicels 1-4 mm, slightly elongating after anthesis, divaricate in fruit. Flowers (3)4-merous; corolla (1·5-)2-3(-3·5) mm in diameter. Fruit 2-3 mm, more or less smooth. 2n = 24, 48. {\i Wet places. Almost throughout Europe}. All except ?Al Az ?Bl Cr ?Rs (K) Sb ?Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Variable, closely related to {\b 17}, and connected with it by intermediates.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. G. elongatum} C. Presl in J. & C. Presl, {\i Del. Prag.} 119 (1822). Stems (40-)50-100(-150) cm, stout, weak and diffuse, retrorsely aculeolate on the whitish angles. Middle cauline leaves (15-)20-35(-50) × (2-)2·5-5(-7) mm, in whorls of 4-6, broadly oblong-oblanceolate, usually rough on margin and midrib. Inflorescence broadly and interruptedly pyramidal; pedicels (3-)4-5·5 mm, elongating after anthesis, divaricate in fruit. Flowers (3-)4-merous; corolla 3-4(-4·5) mm in diameter. Fruit 2·5-3·5 mm, smooth to more or less tuberculate. 2n = 96, 144. {\i Wet places. Most of Europe, eastwards to Finland, W. Ukraine and Turkey}. All except Fa Is Rs (N, ?B, ?C, E) Sb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. G. trifidum} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }105 (1753). Stems (5-)10-30(-40) cm, delicate, low-growing, laxly caespitose, retrorsely aculeolate on the obscure angles; internodes long. Middle cauline leaves (5-)8-15 × (1-)1·5-2·5(-3) mm, in whorls of 4, linear to narrowly oblanceolate, with more or less flat margin; midrib and margin rough. Inflorescence few-flowered; partial inflorescences with (1-)2-3 flowers; pedicels 7-15(-20) mm, filiform, rough, elongating and somewhat deflexed after anthesis. Flowers 3-merous; corolla c. 1·5 mm in diameter. Fruit 1·5-2·5 mm, smooth. 2n = 24. {\i Bogs and other wet places. Fennoscandia, N.E. Poland U.S.S.R. southwards to} 49°{\i  N. in E. Ukraine; isolated stations in E. Pyrenees and E. Alps.} Au Fe Ga No Po Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    Records of {\b G. brevipes} Fernald & Wieg., {\i Rhodora}{\b  12}: 78 (1910) from Iceland may refer to {\b 18}; it is native in North America, and is like {\b 18} but mat-forming; internodes short; leaves 5-8(-12) × (0·8-)1-2(-3) mm, oblanceolate; partial inflorescences with 1-2 flowers; pedicels 1·5-5 mm, somewhat thicker, smooth, elongating slightly after anthesis and scarcely deflexed; corolla c. 1 mm in diameter. It has 2n = 24.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. GALIUM. Perennial herbs with woody stock, without or with robust stolons, sometimes woody at the base. Stems 4-angled or rounded, often hairy, sometimes glabrous (rarely papillose or retrorsely aculeolate). Leaves in whorls of up to 12, 1-veined, acute or with short hyaline apex. Inflorescence often many-flowered, ovoid, and with patent branches, but sometimes reduced, bracteate up to the ultimate branches, usually divaricate after anthesis. Flowers sessile or with short pedicels. Corolla often yellow, infundibuliform to rotate; lobes acute to apiculate. Fruit ovoid, dry, hairy or glabrous, tuberculate or smooth.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. G. saturejifolium} Trev.,{\i  Ges. Naturf Freunde Berlin Mag.}{\b  7}: 146 (1815). Stems (30-)50-70(-80) cm, slender, erect; lateral non-flowering shoots, particularly in the middle, subterete and rather smooth below, with 4 whitish angles and rough with patent papillae above. Leaves (18-)25-28(-35) × (2-)3(-4) mm, in whorls of 4-6, linear-lanceolate, blackish when dried, dull with short cartilaginous apex and rather smooth mid-vein, with antrorsely directed papilliform teeth on the revolute margin and upper surface. Inflorescence many-flowered, ovoid; branches bracteate, papillose, divaricate after anthesis. Pedicels 1-2(-3) mm. Corolla (1·8-)2(-2·2) mm in diameter, white, rotate; lobes shortly apiculate. Fruit 1-1·5 mm, ovoid, papillose.{\i  Marshes. Volga delta.} Rs (E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. G. boissieranum} Ehrend. & Krendl,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  68}: 270 (1974) ({\i Asperula boissierana} Steudel, nom. illegit.,{\i  A. paniculata} Boiss., non Bunge,{\i  A. effusa} Boiss.,{\i  A. asperrima} Boiss.). Stems 35-50 cm, erect to ascending, much-branched from the base, stout, 4-angled, shortly hairy. Leaves 9-15 × 0·8-1 mm, in whorls of 6-8, linear, awned, rigid, green and shining above, usually strongly antrorsely scabrid, densely puberulent beneath, margin recurved to the midrib. Inflorescence pyramidal, with capitate partial inflorescences in several groups along the branches; flowers sessile. Corolla 4-6·5 mm, broadly or narrowly infundibuliform, yellow or reddish, sparsely hairy on the outside; corolla-tube 2·5-5 mm; corolla-lobes 1·5-2 mm longer than wide, apiculate. Fruit densely hairy.{\i  Scrub and shady hillsides. • Mountains of S.& S.C. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. G. baeticum} (Rouy) Ehrend. & Krendl,{\i  loc. cit.} (1974) ({\i Asperula baetica} Rouy, {\i A. pendula} Boiss.). Like {\b 20} but stems 35-80 cm; leaves (10-)15-35( 40) × (0·5-)1-2 mm, in whorls of 6-10; corolla 2·3-3 mm, shallowly infundibuliform, yellow; tube 0·6-1·5 mm; lobes 1·5-1·7 mm, acute to apiculate.{\i  Mountains of S.W. Spain.} Hs. ({\i Morocco.})
\par 

\par 
21}
\par