{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 bracts linear-lanceolate, acuminate. Corolla white or greyish.Pappus-setae connate for basal 2/3. 2n = 32.{\i  S. & C. Europe,extending northwards to C. France and C. Russia; frequently naturalized or casual further north.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu [?Be Ge Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucral bracts glabrous ................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b albidus}
\par
1 At least outer involucral bracts glandular-hairy
\par
2 All involucral bracts glandular-hairy ............................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b taygeteus}
\par
2 Inner involucral bracts glabrous or puberulent, 
\par
   eglandular ........................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b sphaerocephalus}
\par
 
\par
({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sphaerocephalus}: Stem, middle and outer involucral bracts glandular-hairy; inner bracts glabrous or puberulent, eglandular. Leaf-segments broadly triangular. Involucre 18-25 mm.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par
({\b b}) Subsp. {\b albidus} (Boiss. & Spruner) Kozuharov,{\i  Bot. Jour.Linn. Soc. }{\b 71}: 41 (1975) ({\i E. albidus} Boiss. & Spruner): Stem with simple eglandular or both eglandular and glandular hairs. Involucral bracts glabrous. Leaf-segments linear-triangular to lanceolate. Involucre 15-18 mm.{\i  Balkan peninsula, S.E. Italy}.
\par
 ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b taygeteus} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Kozuharov, {\i loc. cit.} (1975) ({\i E. taygeteus }Boiss. & Heldr.): Stem and involucral bracts densely glandular-hairy. Leaf-segments linear-triangular. Involucre 18-25 mm.{\i  S. Greece} ({\i Taïyetos}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  E. pungens} Trautv., {\i Echin. Gen.} 18 (1833), described from the Caucasus and also reported from Krym, appears to be a hybrid between {\b 7}({\b a}) and {\b 3}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. E. exaltatus} Schrader,{\i  Hort. Gotting.} 15 (1809) ({\i E. commutatus} Juratzka). Stem 40-150 cm, branched, arachnoid-tomentose, sometimes subglabrous. Leaves ovate or elliptical in outline flat, 1- to 2-pinnatifid, sparsely strigose above, tomentose beneath, with densely scabridulous margin; segments triangular, with few, short, slender spines. Inflorescence 3·5-6 cm in diameter, white or greyish, rarely greenish. Involucre 20-30 mm; setae equalling the outer bracts, ½ as long as involucre, connate for basal half; bracts c. 20, long-acuminate, ciliate; outer bracts spathulate; middle bracts lanceolate-subulate. Corolla white or greyish. Pappus-setae connate for basal half.{\i  E.C. Europe, N.E. Italy and N. part of Balkan peninsula}. Bu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W) [Au Da Ge].
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. E. bannaticus} Rochel ex Schrader,{\i  Blumenbachia} 48 (1827).Stem 50-120 cm, simple or branched, with eglandular hairs, sometimes subglabrous. Leaves ovate or elliptical in outline, flat, 2-pinnatisect, pinnatifid or subentire, glandular-hairy, sparsely strigose and with slightly arachnoid indumentum above, densely scabridulous on the margin, white-tomentose beneath; segments triangular, with few, slender spines 2-4 mm. Inflorescence 2·5-5 cm in diameter, blue or greyish-blue. Involucre 14-17 mm; setae equalling or shorter than the outer bracts, ½ as long as involucre, connate at base. Involucral bracts 20-21, usually lanceolate, long-acuminate, ciliate; outer bracts triangular-lanceolate, 1/3 as long as the capitulum and rather wider than the others. Corolla greyish-blue. Pappus-setae connate at base. {\i S.E. Europe, extending north-westwards to Slovenija.} Al Bu Gr ?It Ju Rm Rs (K).
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. E. ritro} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 815 (1753). Stem 20-60 cm, usually branched, white-tomentose or subglabrous, often with glandular hairs. Leaves elliptical in outline, 1- to 2-pinnatisect, glabrous, glandular-hairy, with few, simple hairs or slightly arachnoid indumentum above, white-tomentose beneath, the margin revolute; segments linear to oblong-lanceolate, triangular or oblong, with spines 3-15 mm. Inflorescence 3·5-4·5 cm in diameter, bluish. Involucre 12-17 mm; setae slightly shorter than the outer bracts, 1/3-1/2 as long as involucre; bracts 20-22, long-acuminate, ciliate; outer bracts linear-lanceolate. Corolla blue, rarely white. Pappus-setae connate at least in basal half. 2n = 32.{\i  S., S.E. & E.C. Europe, extending northwards to} c. 58° {\i N. in E. Russia.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves 2-pinnatifid; segments not more than 2 mm 
\par
   wide ............................................................................. ({\b e}) subsp. {\b ruthenicus} 
\par
1 Leaves 1- to 2-pinnatifid; segments more than 2 mm wide
\par
2 Pappus-setae connate for whole length  ...................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b sartorianus}
\par
2 Pappus-setae connate for basal half
\par
3 Stem and leaves with eglandular hairs .................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b ritro}
\par
3 Stem and leaves with both eglandular and glandular hairs
\par
4 Leaves glandular-hairy above ......................................  ({\b b}) subsp. {\b thracicus}
\par
4 Leaves glabrous or slightly arachnoid-tomentose above .. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b meyeri}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ritro}: Stem and leaves with eglandular hairs; leaf segments more than 4 mm wide at base, linear-triangular. Pappus-setae connate for basal half.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b thracicus} (Velen.) Kozuharov, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 42 (1975) ({\i E. thracicus }Velen.): Stem with eglandular hairs, glandular-hairy in basal half. Leaves glandular-hairy above; segments more than 3 mm wide, oblong-triangular. Pappus-setae connate for basal half.{\i  Bulgaria}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b sartorianus} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Kozuharov, {\i loc. cit.} (1975) ({\i E. sartorianus} Boiss. & Heldr.): Stem glandular-hairy, with few eglandular hairs. Leaves glabrous above; segments more than 3 mm wide, oblong-triangular. Pappus-setae connate for whole length. {\i Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b meyeri} (DC.) Kozuharov, {\i loc.. cit.} (1915) ({\i E. ritro} var.{\i  meyeri} DC.,{\i  E. meyeri} (DC.) Iljin): Stem glandular-hairy, with few eglandular hairs. Leaves glabrous or slightly arachnoid-tomentose above; segments 3 mm wide, oblong. Pappus-setae connate for basal half. {\i S.E. Russia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b ruthenicus} (Bieb.) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 399 (1879) ({\i E. ruthenicus} Bieb.,{\i  E. virgatus} Lam.): Stem and leaves with eglandular hairs; leaves deeply and narrowly pinnatifid; segments not more than 2 mm wide. Pappus-setae connate for basal half.{\i  From Italy and Austria eastwards}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 11. E. microcephalus} Sibth. & Sm., {\i Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  2}: 209 (1813). Stem 40-60 cm, branched, arachnoid-tomentose, sometimes with a few glandular hairs. Leaves lanceolate or linear-lanceolate in outline, pinnatisect, glabrous above, white-tomentose beneath; segments triangular, with short, slender spines. Inflorescence 1·5-4·5 cm in diameter, blue. Involucre 15-25 mm; setae c. 1/2 as long as and adnate to the outer bracts, up to 1/5 as long as involucre; bracts 20-22, long-acuminate, ciliate; inner bracts lanceolate-elliptical; middle bracts lanceolate, 2-4 times as long as the triangular, denticulate outer bracts. Corolla blue. Pappus setae connate for basal half.{\i  S. & E. parts of Balkan peninsula just extending to S.E. Romania.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 12. E. oxyodontus} Bornm. & Diels, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  17}: 42 (1919). Stem 30-80 cm, branched, densely glandular-hairy. Leaves lanceolate in outline, pinnatisect, glabrous above, white-tomentose beneath, with glandular hairs on veins; segments triangular, with short, slender spines. Inflorescence 4-5 cm in diameter, purplish. Involucre 15-18 mm; setae c. ½ as long as and adnate to the outer bracts, up to 1/5 as long as involucre; bracts 20, lanceolate, acuminate. Corolla blue. Pappus-setae connate for basal half. •{\i  Macedonia.} Bu Ju.
\par

\par
214}
\par