{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3 Lower leaves cuneate at base, gradually narrowed into
\par
  petiole ................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b alpina}
\par
3 Lower leaves rounded or inconspicuously cordate at base
\par
  abruptly narrowed into petiole ................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b macrophylla}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alpina}: Stems usually 10-50 cm, erect. Leaves glabrous above, greyish-arachnoid-villous beneath, the upper not exceeding the inflorescence, the lower ovate- to broadly lanceolate, cuneate at base, gradually narrowed into petiole. Inflorescence usually a compact corymb. 2n = 52, 54.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b macrophylla} (Sauter) Nyman,{\i  Consp}. 414 (1879) ({\i S. macrophylla} Sauter): Stems usually 10-50 cm, erect. Leaves glabrous above, greyish-arachnoid-villous beneath, the upper not exceeding the inflorescence, the lower ovate- to broadly lanceolate, rounded or inconspicuously cordate at base, abruptly narrowed into petiole. Inflorescence usually a compact corymb. •{\i  Carpathians, E. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b depressa} (Gren.) Nyman,{\i  loc. cit}. (1879) ({\i S. depressa} Gren.): Stems 2-8(-10) cm, procumbent at base. Leaves arachnoid-villous, more densely so beneath, the upper equalling or exceeding the inflorescence, the lower oblong-lanceolate, cuneate at base, gradually to abruptly narrowed into petiole. Inflorescence a compact corymb. 2n = 50-54. •{\i  Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b esthonica} (Baer ex Rupr.) Kupffer,{\i  Korrespondenzbl. Naturf.-Ver. Riga}{\b  45}: 94 (1902) ({\i S. esthonica} Baer ex Rupr.): Stems usually 10-50 cm, erect. Leaves glabrous or subglabrous, the upper not exceeding the inflorescence, the lower linear-lanceolate, narrowly cuneate at base. Inflorescence a lax panicle. •{\i  Estonia, ?N.W. Russia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. discolor} (Willd.) DC., {\i Ann. Mus. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Paris}){\b  16}: 199 (1810). Stems 10-20(-45) cm, erect, ascending near base, not winged. Lower leaves up to 60 mm wide, triangular-lanceolate, truncate to cordate at base, dentate, densely whitish-tomentose beneath; petiole not winged. Capitula 1·5-2 × 0·8-1 cm, ovoid campanulate, few, in a compact terminal corymb. Involucral bracts without apical appendages. Corolla bluish-violet. 2n = 26.{\i  Mountain rocks and stony slopes. Alps, Carpathians, Appennini; one station in Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b S.} × {\b hybrida} Degen & Gáyer, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  27}: 94 (1928), a hybrid between {\b 8} and {\b 4}, has been reported from Austria.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. controversa} DC.,{\i  Ann. Mus. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Paris}) {\b 16}: 199 (1810). Stems 25-80 cm, erect, not winged. Lower leaves 40-85 mm wide, ovate-triangular, truncate to cordate at base, dentate densely whitish-tomentose beneath- petiole not winged. Capitula 1·5-2 × 0·8-1 cm, ovoid-campanulate, many, in a lax corymbose panicle. Involucral bracts without apical appendages. Corolla bluish-violet.{\i  E. Russia.} Rs (N, C). ({\i N.C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b S}. × {\b uralensis} Lipsch.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou} nov. ser., {\b 59}({\b 6}): 75 (1954), a hybrid between {\b 9} and {\b 7}, has been reported from the Urals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 115.              Staehelina}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. do Amaral Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small caespitose shrubs. Leaves alternate, often crowded in rosettes near apices of branches, entire to pinnatifid, coriaceous. Capitula in terminal corymbose cymes, rarely solitary. Involucre more or less cylindrical; bracts imbricate, unequal, oblong to ovate, mucronate. Receptacular scales narrow, multifid. Florets all hermaphrodite. Corolla pink to purple, tubular, 5-fid. Achenes oblong, more or less costate, brown; pappus of one row of white hairs with branches about as long as the hair.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves glabrous; ovary and achenes white-villous ...................... {\b 1. fruticosa}
\par
1 Leaves sericeous or tomentose beneath; ovary and achenes
\par
  glabrous
\par
2 Leaves sericeous beneath; rosette-leaves 50-80 × 35-55 mm ........ {\b 3. arborea}
\par
2 Leaves tomentose beneath; leaves not more than 40 × 18 mm, 
\par
  not in rosettes
\par
3 Leaves ovate; involucre 8-10 × 2 mm .................................. {\b 2. uniflosculosa}
\par
3 Leaves obovate-oblong to linear; involucre 15-20 × 3-8 mm
\par
4 Leaves 8-15 × 4-8 mm, dentate to pinnatifid; involucre
\par
  7-8 mm wide .................................................................................... {\b 4. baetica} 
\par
4 Leaves 15-35 × 2-3 mm, sinuate-dentate to entire;
\par
  involucre 3-5 mm wide ...................................................................... {\b 5. dubia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. fruticosa} (L.) L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 12, {\b 2}: 538 (1767). Stems up to 150 cm, the branches slightly glandular-pubescent, with rosettes of leaves at the apices. Leaves 35-55 × 8-15 mm, lanceolate, acute, subpungent, entire, glabrous, glaucescent, sessile; rosette-leaves oblong-spathulate, obtuse, shortly petiolate. Capitula in corymbose cymes; involucre 10-12 × 4-5 mm; involucral bracts acute, glabrous, light brown, the lower green at apex. Corolla whitish. Achenes 5-6 × 1-1·5 mm, white-villous; pappus 10-12 mm.{\i  Limestone cliffs. S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. uniflosculosa} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.} {\b 2}: 162 (1813). Stems up to 50 cm, with white-tomentose branches. Leaves 15-40 × 10-18 mm, ovate, acute, denticulate, dark green and glabrescent above, white-tomentose beneath; petiole 5-10 mm. Capitula 1- to 2-flowered, in simple or compound corymbose cymes; involucre 8-10 × 2 mm, linear-oblong; involucral bracts purple, the lower shortly tomentose, the upper glabrous. Corolla pink. Achenes c. 3 × 1·5 mm, glabrous; pappus 8-10 mm. {\i Mountain rocks. • S. & W. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. arborea} Schreber,{\i  Icon. Descr. Pl.} 1 (1766) ({\i S. arborescens} L.). Stems up to 100 cm, the branches silvery-sericeous, with rosettes of leaves at the apices. Leaves ovate, entire, obtuse or subobtuse, dark green and glabrescent above, silvery-sericeous beneath; rosette-leaves 50-80 × 35-55 mm, the petiole 25-40 mm; other leaves smaller, with shorter petioles or the upper sessile. Capitula in simple or compound corymbose cymes; involucre 15-20 × 5-7 mm; involucral bracts glabrous to sericeous, brown. Corolla pink. Achenes c. 4 × 2 mm, glabrous; pappus c. 15 mm. {\i Limestone cliffs. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. baetica} DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 544 (1838). Stems up to 15 cm, the branches white-tomentose. Leaves 8-15 × 4-8 mm, obovate-oblong, dentate to pinnatifid, with usually 2 pairs of lobes, cuneate at base, dark green above and white-tomentose beneath, the lobes and apex mucronate; petiole short. Capitula solitary; involucre 15-20 × 7-8 mm; involucral bracts glabrous, red. Corolla purple. Achenes c. 4 × 1 mm, glabrous; pappus 15-20 mm.{\i  Shady places. • S. Spain} ({\i mountains W. of Malaga}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. dubia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 840 (1753). Stems 20-40 cm, with white. tomentose branches. Leaves dark green and arachnoid-pubescent above, white-tomentose beneath, acute and mucronate; leaves on vegetative shoots 15-35(-40) × 2-3 mm, linear-lanceolate, sinuate-dentate, narrowly cuneate at base, petiolate, those on flowering shoots narrower, remote and entire. Capitula solitary or 2-4 in a cyme; involucre 15-20 × 3-5 mm; involucral bracts shortly tomentose, green, with reddish apex, the inner entirely reddish, all becoming reddish-brown, with yellowish apex. Corolla purple. Achenes 4-5 × 1 mm, glabrous; pappus 20-25 mm. 2n = 30. {\i Dry, rocky or stony places. S.W. Europe, extending eastwards to C. Italy.} Bl Co Ga Hs It Lu.
\par

\par
217}
\par