{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b acanthifolia} ({\i C. utzka} Hacq.): Leaves usually pinnatifid, less than twice as long as wide, sometimes hairy above. Spines on middle involucral bracts mostly branched. Inner involucral bracts straw-coloured. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cynara} (Pourret ex Duby) Rouy,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  8}: 363 (1903) ({\i C. cynara} Pourret ex Duby): Leaves usually pinnatisect, at least twice as long as wide, glabrous above. Spines on middle involucral bracts mostly simple. Inner involucral bracts clear yellow.{\i  Pyrenees, S. France, N. Appennini}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The plants of Poland and the U.S.S.R. are usually distinguished as {\b C. onopordifolia} Besser ex Szafer, Kulcz. & Pawl.,{\i  Rósl. Polskie} 641 (1924), but except for a minute difference in the grouping of the pappus-hairs no distinctive characters have been ascribed to the taxon.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. lanata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 828 (1753). Annual; stems 5-40 cm, simple or sympodially branched. Leaves up to 7·5 × 2·5 cm, oblong, pinnatifid, spinose-undulate, persistently tomentose beneath, more or less glabrescent above. Capitula up to 40 mm in diameter, but often much smaller. Outer involucral bracts 25-40 × 15-20 mm, exceeding the inner; inner bracts c. 12 × 1·5 mm, reddish-purple on both surfaces. Florets purplish-pink. Achenes 3 mm; pappus 12-15 mm. 2n = 20.{\i  Mediterranean region, S. Bulgaria.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. C. racemosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 829 (1753). Annual to short-lived perennial, usually somewhat arachnoid-floccose; stem 10-40(-60) cm, freely and sympodially branched. Leaves up to 10 × 2 cm, narrowly lanceolate, strongly but remotely undulate-spinose-dentate. Capitula 8-15 mm in diameter, numerous, terminating the branches and subsessile in the apparent dichotomies of the stem. Outer involucral bracts 25-60 × 8-15 mm, much exceeding the inner; inner bracts 10-12 × 1-2 mm, bright yellow. Achenes 2 mm; pappus c. 6 mm. 2n = 20.{\i  Portugal, S. Spain, Sardegna.} Hs Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 107.            Atractylis}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. do Amaral Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or rhizomatous perennial herbs. Leaves in a basal rosette, usually also some cauline and alternate, coriaceous, with spiny lobes or teeth. Capitula solitary. Involucre campanulate to subglobose; bracts spiny, imbricate, the outer pectinate-bipinnatisect, the inner entire, scarious and with a slender apical spine. Receptacular bracts laciniate, scarious. Florets all hermaphrodite. Corolla purple or purplish-pink, 5-lobed. Achenes cylindrical, sericeous to villous. Pappus of 1-3 rows of plumose setae.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All species grow in open, usually dry habitats.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems absent; involucre 30-70 mm, the middle bracts with 3
\par
   patent apical spines much longer than the lateral spines ........ {\b 1. gummifera}
\par
1 Stems present; involucre 5-22 mm, the middle bracts with 
\par
  all spines similar
\par
2 Annual; upper cauline leaves shorter than to slightly 
\par
  longer than involucre ................................................................... {\b 4. cancellata}
\par
2 Perennial; upper cauline leaves much longer than 
\par
  involucre
\par
3 Outer involucral bracts not similar to upper cauline leaves .............. {\b 2. tutinii} 
\par
3 Outer involucral bracts similar to upper cauline leaves ................. {\b 3. humilis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. gummifera} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 829 (1753) ({\i Carlina gummifera} (L.) Less.). Stout perennial; stems absent. Leaves 15-40 × 5-12 cm, oblong-lanceolate in outline, pinnatipartite; segments 5-8 pairs, oblong, pinnatifid, acuminate, spinose-dentate; petiole 8-14 cm, sheathing at the base. Involucre 30-70 mm, arachnoid-lanate; middle involucral bracts ligulate, with 3 patent apical spines 10-25 mm and much shorter lateral spines; inner bracts somewhat glaucous, with a brown apical spine 3-5 mm. Achenes 5-6 × 2·5-3 mm; pappus 20-25 mm, white. 2n = 20.{\i  Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Co Cr Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. tutinii} Franco, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 47 (1975). stout perennial; stems 5-12 cm, whitish floccose-tomentose. Leaves light green, glabrous beneath, densely papillose above; lower up to 50 × 15 mm, oblanceolate-oblong, pinnatifid, with slender spines; upper wider (up to 18 mm), broadly oblanceolate, pinnately lobed or incise-dentate, spiny. Involucre 12-20 mm subglobose, surrounded by upper leaves which are up to 3 times its length; outer bracts erecto-patent, not similar to upper leaves; middle bracts rounded but abruptly subulate, the lower ovate-oblong, the remainder orbicular-ovate. Achenes unknown; pappus 12-15 mm, white.{\i  Dry, calcareous stony slopes. • S.E. Spain} ({\i Cabo de Gata}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. humilis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 829 (1753). Slender perennial; stems 5-30 cm, glabrous to floccose-tomentose. Leaves 25-50 × 5-8 mm; basal leaves oblanceolate-oblong, sinuate-serrate, shortly spiny, shortly petiolate; cauline leaves lanceolate-oblong, pinnatifid, spiny, sessile. Involucre 15-22 × 10-25 mm, surrounded by upper leaves which are up to twice its length; outer involucral bracts erecto-arcuate, pectinate-bipinnatisect at least at base and then leaf-like distally; middle bracts truncate or emarginate, abruptly subulate, the lower orbicular-obovate, the upper oblong. Achenes 5-7 × 2-3 mm; pappus slightly longer than the achene, white, brownish at base.{\i  Usually calcicole. • From S.C. Spain to S.E. France.} Bl Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. cancellata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 830 (1753). Slender annual; stems 3-30 cm, white-lanate, glabrescent. Leaves greenish, arachnoid-pubescent; basal up to 50 × 8 mm, oblong-obovate to spathulate dentate, shortly spiny; cauline up to 30 × 6 mm, oblong-lanceolate, dentate, spiny. Involucre 5-20 × 5-15 mm, surrounded by upper leaves; outer involucral bracts erect, with acicular-subulate, excurrent rhachis; middle and inner bracts very unequal, lanceolate, acute, subulate, more or less lanate. Achenes 3-4 × 1·5-2 mm; pappus 8-10 mm, white.{\i  Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Bl Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cancellata}: Involucre 5-15 × 5-12 mm, slightly exceeded by upper leaves. {\i Usually on calcareous or gypsaceous soils. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b gaditana} Franco,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 47 (1975): Involucre 15-20 × 12-15 mm, exceeding upper leaves.{\i  Wet, sandy habitats. • S.W. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 108.           Xeranthemum}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Erect annuals. Leaves alternate, entire, not spiny. Capitula terminal, solitary, pedunculate. Receptacular scales narrow, acute, simple, shorter than the florets. Involucre hemispherical to ovoid; bracts scarious, the outermost short, brown, the intermediate similar but longer, imbricate, the innermost coloured simulating ligules. Outermost florets sterile, with unequally 5-lobed corolla, the remainder hermaphrodite, with equally and very shortly 5-lobed corolla. Achenes obovoid, sericeous-; pappus of 5-15 unequal, acuminate scales.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Outer involucral bracts obtuse or emarginate, with a
\par
  whitish patch of appressed hairs on the lower surface .......... {\b 3. cylindraceum} 
\par
1 Outer involucral bracts mucronate, glabrous, without a
\par
  whitish patch
\par

\par
211}
\par