{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 116.           Jurinea}             Cass.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By S. Kozuharov.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs, sometimes woody at base. Leaves simple, entire or pinnatifid. Capitula solitary or in a corymbose inflorescence. Involucral bracts linear to lanceolate, straight to recurved, appressed to lax. Receptacular scales numerous. Florets tubular, hermaphrodite, pink, red or purplish. Anthers caudate, with free filaments. Stigma-lobes short, patent, hairy at the base. Achene usually with a distal membranous corona around base of pappus; pappus-hairs in several rows, unequal, simple, scabrid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems absent or not more than 4 cm
\par
2 Capitula obconical; involucral bracts recurved or patent ............ {\b 15. humilis}
\par
2 Capitula globose; involucral bracts appressed
\par
3 Leaves entire ............................................................................. {\b 17. fontqueri}
\par
3 Leaves pinnatifid ........................................................................ {\b 16. taygetea}
\par
1 Stems more than 5 cm
\par
4 Capitula cylindrical to obconical, longer than wide
\par
5 Involucral bracts not appressed .................................................. {\b 6. albicaulis}
\par
5 Involucral bracts appressed
\par
6 Basal leaves pinnatifid to pinnatisect
\par
7 Inner involucral bracts much shorter than florets .......................... {\b 4. pinnata}
\par
7 Inner involucral bracts longer than florets ................................... {\b 5. tanaitica}
\par
6 Basal leaves entire
\par
8 Capitula 27-30 mm .............................................................. {\b 2. stoechadifolia}
\par
8 Capitula 5-20 mm
\par
9 Involucral bracts pink or reddish-purple distally ..................... {\b 1. linearifolia}
\par
9 Involucral bracts white or pale green distally ................... {\b 3. tzar-ferdinandii}
\par
4 Capitula globose or hemispherical, not longer than wide
\par
10 Involucral bracts appressed or lax but not recurved or patent
\par
11 Stems woody at base; leaves entire, oblong-lanceolate 
\par
   to spathulate ........................................................................... {\b 7. kirghisorum}
\par
11 Stems not woody; leaves pinnatifid or at least some 
\par
   entire and linear to lanceolate
\par
12 Achenes tuberculate, ribbed or acutely verrucose,
\par
   often glandular-hairy .......................................................... {\b 13. consanguinea}
\par
12 Achenes longitudinally ribbed, otherwise smooth
\par
13 Achenes 3-4 mm, with entire distal corona; basal leaves
\par
   green above ................................................................................ {\b 8. cyanoides}
\par
13 Achenes 6-7 mm, with distal corona represented by small
\par
   teeth; basal leaves grey or white above ...................................... {\b 6. albicaulis}
\par
10 Involucral bracts recurved or straight and patent
\par
14 Achenes tuberculate, especially on angles, sometimes 
\par
   faintly ribbed
\par
15 Capitula 4·5-7·5 cm; cauline leaves not decurrent, or
\par
   absent .................................................................................... {\b 14. glycacantha}
\par
15 Capitula 2-4 cm; cauline leaves long-decurrent .................... {\b 12. ledebourii}
\par
14 Achenes ribbed or longitudinally rugose, not tuberculate
\par
16 Involucral bracts lanceolate to elliptic-lanceolate;
\par
   leaves not auriculate, the basal with segments more 
\par
   than 3 mm wide ............................................................................. {\b 10. mollis}
\par
16 Involucral bracts linear to cuneate; leaves auriculate,
\par
   the basal with segments less than 3 mm wide
\par
17 Capitula 1-4(-5), 1-3 cm in diameter; achenes 5-6 mm ........ {\b 9. ewersmanii}
\par
17 Capitula 5-many, up to 1-5(-2) cm in diameter; achenes
\par
   1-2 mm ................................................................................... {\b 11. polyclonos}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. J. linearifolia} DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 675 (1838) ({\i J. multiflora} (L.) B. Fedtsch.). Stems (12-)15-35(-40) cm, woody at base, leafy throughout. Basal leaves (2-)3-8(-10) × (0·1-)0·2-0·6(-0·9) cm, lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, shortly acuminate, usually with revolute margin, arachnoid-tomentose. Capitula (5-)7-15(-18) × 4-6 mm, cylindrical. Involucral bracts lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, shortly acuminate, straight and appressed, herbaceous, the inner longer, glabrous or slightly tomentose, white or pale green below, pink or reddish-purple distally, with scarious apex. Achenes 3·5-4·5 mm, tetragonal, ribbed, glabrous; corona conspicuous; pappus c. 3 times as long as achene. {\i Steppes and semideserts. S. & S.E. parts of U.S.S.R., S.E. Romania.} Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. J. stoechadifolia} (Bieb.) DC.,{\i  op. cit.} 674 (1838). Stems (10-)20-35(-40) cm, leafy throughout. Basal leaves 5-6(-7) × 0·2-0·3 cm, with revolute margin, setose and tuberculate above, arachnoid-hairy beneath. Capitula 3-many, 27-30 × 5-7 mm, cylindrical or obconical. Involucral bracts lanceolate, straight and appressed, herbaceous, with dense arachnoid indumentum, white or pink distally, the inner longer and narrower. Achenes 3·5-4·5 mm, tetragonal or conical, ribbed, glabrous; corona conspicuous; pappus about twice as long as achene. {\i Dry grassland; calcicole. From N.E. Bulgaria to S.E. Russia.} Bu Rm Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. J. tzar-ferdinandii} Davidov, {\i Sborn. Balg. Akad. Nauk.}{\b  15}: 28 44 (1909). Stems 15-30 cm, from a thick woody rhizome, leafy throughout. Basal leaves 4-15 cm, with entire, revolute margin, green and setose above, with arachnoid indumentum beneath; non-flowering rosettes sometimes present. Capitula 4-8, 15-20 × 4·5-7 mm, obconical. Involucral bracts narrowly linear-lanceolate, long-acuminate, straight and appressed, scabrid on margin, subglabrous or with arachnoid indumentum, purple below, white or pale green distally, the inner longer. Achenes 3-4 mm, tetragonal, finely ribbed, glabrous; corona conspicuous; pappus 3-4 times as long as achene, with 3-4 of the inner hairs twice as long as the outer.{\i  Calcareous slopes. • Bulgaria.} Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. J. pinnata} (Lag.) DC., {\i Prodr.} {\b 6}: 676 (1838). Stem (4-)6-10(-13) cm, caespitose, woody at base, usually leafy in basal half. Leaves deeply pinnatisect, whitish-grey-tomentose, with linear or linear-lanceolate segments c. 1 mm wide; non-flowering rosettes usually present. Capitula 2(-3), 15-23 × 6-15 mm, obovoid-obconical. Involucral bracts lanceolate, acuminate, straight and appressed, unequal, the outer shorter, shortly tomentose, the inner usually subglabrous, finely ribbed near base and with a yellow vein, purple or reddish distally. Achenes 3-4·5 mm, obscurely tetragonal, tuberculate or smooth, glandular, glabrous; corona conspicuous; pappus 3-4 times as long as achene. {\i Dry places. C. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. J. tanaitica} Klokov in Schischkin & Bobrov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  27}: 719 (1962). Stems 15-50(-60) cm, leafy throughout. Basal leaves deeply pinnatifid, arachnoid-hairy; segments 2-5, entire, 10 or more times as long as wide; cauline leaves with short auricles, the uppermost entire. Capitula 2-10 or more, 12-15 × 7-12 mm, obconical. Involucral bracts lanceolate, unequal, straight and appressed, coriaceous, with arachnoid indumentum or subglabrous, the inner exceeding florets, purple, yellowish or brown. Achenes (3·5-)4-4·5 mm, finely ribbed, glabrous; corona inconspicuous; pappus 2-2½ times as long as achene. {\i Sandy ground. • S.E. Russia} ({\i basin of the lower Don}). Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. J. albicaulis} Bunge, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}){\b  24}: 156 (1841). Stems 30-75 cm, woody at base, with few small leaves. Basal leaves 18-22 × (0·2-)0·3-0·6(-0·8) cm, linear or linear-lanceolate, the lower sometimes weakly pinnate with linear or linear-lanceolate, acuminate segments, with dense tomentose or tomentose
\par

\par
218}
\par