{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 arachnoid indumentum, white beneath. Capitula 18-25 × 7-18 mm, globose or cylindrical. Involucral bracts subequal, linear-lanceolate, long-acuminate, the outer with arachnoid indumentum, the inner longer, glabrous, with scabrid margin. Achenes 6-7 mm, prismatic, ribbed, glabrous; corona represented by small teeth; pappus longer than achene.{\i  Sandy ground. • S Ukraine; E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Rs (W, K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b kilaea} (Aznav.) Kozuharov, {\i Izv. Bot. Inst.} ({\i Sofia}) {\b 18}: 68 (1968) ({\i J. kilaea} Aznav.): Stems 30-50 cm, simple. Leaves grey above; cauline more or less auriculate at the base. Capitula 1-3, on very short peduncles; inner involucral bracts flat, with coriaceous appendages at apex. 2n = 30.{\i  E. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b laxa} (Fischer ex Iljin) Kozuharov, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 42 (1975) ({\i J. laxa} Fischer ex Iljin,{\i  J. paczoskiana} Iljin): Stems 40-75 cm, much-branched. Leaves greenish above; cauline long-decurrent. Capitula numerous; inner involucral bracts canaliculate distally, without coriaceous appendages at apex. • {\i S. Ukraine}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp. {\i albicaulis} is confined to C. Asia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. J. kirghisorum} Janisch., {\i Trudy Obsc. Estestv. Imp. Kazansk. Univ.}{\b  40}({\b 1}): 5 (1905). Stems 10-25 cm, woody at base, with sublinear leaves towards the base; non-flowering rosettes present. Basal leaves oblong-lanceolate to spathulate, acuminate, entire, with revolute margin, densely arachnoid-tomentose. Capitula 1-3, 11-13 × 10-12(-14) mm, hemispherical. Involucral bracts unequal, oblong-lanceolate, straight and appressed, the outer subobtuse, herbaceous, the inner longer, acuminate, scabrid. Achenes 4-5 mm, ribbed and distinctly tuberculate; corona inconspicuous; pappus slightly longer than achene. {\i Limestone hills. W. Kazakhstan} ({\i W. of Ural'sk}). Rs (E). ({\i N.W. Kazakhstan}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. J. cyanoides} (L.) Reichenb., {\i Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 290 (1831). Stems 20-60(-70) cm, leafy throughout. Basal leaves deeply 1- or 2-pinnatifid, sometimes entire and linear, glabrous above, white-tomentose beneath, the segments 1-2 mm wide, linear. Capitula 1-several, 1-3 cm, subglobose. Involucral bracts lax, straight or slightly incurved, herbaceous, the inner glabrous, the outer with arachnoid indumentum. Achenes 3-4 mm, obpyramidal, smooth or finely ribbed, glabrous; corona inconspicuous; pappus 2-2½ times as long as achene.{\i  Dry, usually sandy ground. C. Europe; U.S.S.R. northwards to} c. 58°{\i  N.} Cz Ge Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cyanoides}: Basal leaves with 5 pairs of linear segments, up to 5 times as long as wide. Involucral bracts 15-18(-20) mm, equal, linear-cuneate. •{\i  Throughout the range of the species except E. Russia and W. Kazakhstan}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tenuiloba} (Bunge) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 415 (1879) ({\i J. tenuiloba} Bunge; incl. {\i J. creticola} Iljin,{\i  J. transuralensis} Iljin, {\i J. pseudocyanoides} Klokov): Basal leaves with 1-2 pairs of segments, or entire and 10 or more times as long as wide. Involucral bracts 10-15 mm, unequal, lanceolate-cuneate.{\i  Semi-deserts and grass steppes. E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. J. ewersmanii} Bunge, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 24}: 155 (1841) ({\i J. charcoviensis} Klokov, {\i J. granitica} Klokov). Like {\b 8} but leaves auriculate; outer involucral bracts strongly recurved, often purple at least distally; achenes 5-6 mm, prismatic, subcylindrical. {\i Sandy steppes. S. part of U.S.S.R.} Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. J. mollis} (L.) Reichenb., {\i Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 290 (1831). Stems 30-70 cm, leafy at least at base. Basal leaves variably pinnatifid; segments lanceolate, oblong-lanceolate or ovate, with revolute or undulate margin, usually grey; cauline leaves pinnatifid, or entire and linear to linear-lanceolate, setose. Capitula 2-5 × (2-)3·5-4·5(-6) cm, globose or hemispherical. Involucral bracts lanceolate to elliptic-lanceolate, recurved and purple distally, the inner much longer than the outer, scabrid. Achenes 3-5 mm, glabrous; corona conspicuous; pappus as long as achene. 2n = 30, 34, 35, 36.{\i  E.C. & S.E. Europe, extending westwards to Italy.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu It Ju Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems much-branched, leafy throughout; inflorescence
\par
  with 5 or more capitula .................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b moschata}
\par
1 Stems simple, leafy in basal half; inflorescence with 
\par
  1-3 capitula
\par
2 Achenes obscurely tuberculate, sometimes ribbed; leaves
\par
  densely greyish-pubescent above ................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b anatolica}
\par
2 Achenes longitudinally rugose; leaves rather pubescent
\par
  and greenish above
\par
3 Leaves and involucral bracts glabrous ................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b transylvanica}
\par
3 Leaves and involucral bracts with arachnoid indumentum ({\b a}) subsp. {\b mollis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b mollis}: Stems simple, with arachnoid indumentum, leafy in basal half. Leaves with arachnoid indumentum. Capitula 1-3, 2-5 cm. Involucral bracts with arachnoid indumentum. Achenes longitudinally rugose. •{\i  E.C. Europe, N. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b moschata} (DC.) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 415 (1819) ({\i J. moschata} DC.): Stems much-branched, with arachnoid or densely arachnoid-tomentose indumentum, leafy throughout. Leaves with arachnoid indumentum. Capitula 5 or more, 4-5 cm. Involucral bracts with dense arachnoid indumentum, herbaceous. Achenes finely ribbed. •{\i  Appennini; N.W. part of Balkan peninsula.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b transylvanica} (Sprengel) Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 701 (1931) ({\i J. transylvanica} (Sprengel) Simonkai): Stems simple, glabrous, leafy in basal half. Leaves glabrous or subglabrous. Capitula 1-3, 2-3 cm. Involucral bracts glabrous, herbaceous. {\i Achenes ribbed. • C. Romania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b anatolica} (Boiss.) Stoj. & Stefanov,{\i  Fl. Balg.} 1156 (1925) ({\i J. anatolica} Boiss.): Stems simple, arachnoid-tomentose, leafy at the base. Leaves with arachnoid indumentum. Capitula up to 3 cm. Involucral bracts with arachnoid indumentum, coriaceous. Achenes obscurely tuberculate, sometimes ribbed. 2n = 30. {\i Bulgaria and Aegean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. J. polyclonos} (L.) DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 675 (1838) ({\i J. salicifolia} Gruner,{\i  J. amplexicaulis} Bobrov, {\i J. thyrsiflora} Klokov). Stems 40-80 cm, leafy throughout. Basal leaves narrowly pinnatifid, the segments linear, with revolute margin, glabrous and green above, arachnoid-hairy beneath; cauline leaves entire or shallowly pinnatifid, lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, auriculate or amplexicaul. Capitula 5-many, (0·5-)0·8-1·5(-2) cm, subglobose. Involucral bracts cuneate, the outer shorter, strongly recurved or straight and patent, glabrous, herbaceous, purple. Achenes 1-2 mm, longitudinally ribbed; corona inconspicuous; pappus slightly shorter than achene.{\i  Dry steppes and sandy ground. • C. & E. Ukraine, S.C. & S.E. Russia. }Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. J. ledebourii} Bunge, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}){\b  24}: 157 (1841) ({\i J. calcarea} Klokov, {\i J. cretacea} Bunge, {\i J. michelsonii} Iljin, {\i J. mollissima} Klokov,{\i  J. sordida} Steven). Stems 15-80 cm, finely sulcate, leafy towards base. Basal leaves linear-lanceolate in outline, pinnatifid, sometimes simple, amplexicaul, decurrent, with oblong-lanceolate to linear segments, the margin often undulate or revolute, puberulent above, arachnoid-hairy or tomentose beneath. Capitula 1-3, 2-3·5(-4) cm, globose. Involucral bracts lanceolate to subulate, the inner ovate, acuminate, subequal, subglabrous or with dense arachnoid indumentum, ciliate, recurved or hooked at the apex, the outer herbaceous. Achenes 3-4 mm, deeply tuberculate, puberulent; corona inconspicuous;
\par

\par
219}
\par