{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. C. cronius} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b 1}({\b 6}): 105 (1846). Perennial up to 100 cm. Stem arachnoid-hairy to tomentose; wings up to 15 mm wide, triangular or oblong-acute with an apical spine up to 10 mm. Leaves hairy, the hairs unicellular and sinuate, with 6-8 pairs of palmate, caudate lobes with oblong to oblong-linear lobules, with an apical spine up to 15 mm. Capitula 20-25 × 20-25 mm, ovoid to campanulate,usually sessile and in clusters of 2-5; involucral bracts imbricate,the outer and middle 1·5-2 mm wide at the base, 1 mm wide at the middle, lanceolate-subulate, with mid-vein raised throughout its length; inner bracts 3-veined (1-veined at apex). Corolla 18-20 mm. Achenes 3-4 mm, compressed, minutely verruculose; apical prominence short, sessile, entire; pappus 13-16 mm.{\i  Bare hillsides. • Mountains of Greece and S. Albania.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cronius}: Stem greyish- to whitish-arachnoid-hairy. Leaves densely greyish-arachnoid-hairy above and densely whitish-tomentose beneath. Inner involucral bracts longer than middle, slightly arachnoid-hairy.{\i  Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b baldaccii} Kazmi, {\i Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}) {\b 5}: 379 (1964): Stem densely white-tomentose. Leaves greyish-green above and white beneath, tomentose. Outer and middle involucral bracts subequal, arachnoid-hairy.{\i  S. Albania}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. C. personata} (L.) Jacq., {\i Fl. Austr.}{\b  4}: 25 (1776). Perennial up to 120 cm. Stem with narrow wings, the teeth with an apical spinule up to 1·5 mm. Leaves glabrous or sparsely hairy above, with more numerous hairs beneath, dimorphic; basal oblanceolate to lanceolate, lyrate-pinnatipartite, with 4-6 pairs of lobulate lobes; cauline lanceolate, acuminate, distinctly cuneate, more or less irregularly serrate with teeth up to 3 mm, each with an apical spine up to 2 mm. Capitula 15-25 × 15-35 mm, sub-globose, mostly sessile and in clusters on a very narrowly ciliate-winged common peduncle up to 8 cm and 1·5 mm in diameter-involucral bracts imbricate at base but usually free and curling in an S-shape in their distal 2/3, the outer bracts half as long as the middle bracts; middle bracts almost as long as the inner, linear-setaceous, up to 1·2 mm wide at the base, slightly arachnoid-hairy, with the mid-vein raised in the distal 3/4; inner bracts wider, 3-veined in the distal 1/3. Corolla 14-16 mm. Achenes 3-4 mm,swollen, almost smooth; apical prominence small, sessile, 5-lobed; pappus 8-12 mm. 2n = 18. {\i Streamsides, meadows and woods. • Mountains of Europe, from the Vosges and Carpathians southwards to C. Italy and S. W. Bulgaria.} ?Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge ?Gr He It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b personata}: Stem slightly arachnoid-hairy to glabrescent, with wings up to 2 mm wide. Leaves slightly discolorous, greyish and with sparse multicellular hairs on midrib and lax, slender, straight unicellular hairs near the margin beneath. Capitula usually in clusters of 2-3; involucral bracts minutely serrulate in the proximal 2/3, with apical spine up to 1 mm.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except parts of the south and east}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b albidus} (Adamovic) Kazmi,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}) {\b 5}: 376 (1964): Stem densely whitish-arachnoid-hairy, with wings up to 1 mm wide. Leaves distinctly discolorous, densely white-tomentose with only unicellular straight hairs beneath. Capitula usually in clusters of 3-5(-8); involucral bracts ciliate-serrulate, with apical spine 2-2·5 mm.{\i  Balkan peninsula,S. & E. Carpathians, Transylvania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. C. crispus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 821 (1753). Biennial up to 125 cm.Stem sparsely arachnoid-hairy; wings up to 6 mm wide, triangular, with an apical spinule up to 3 mm. Leaves lanceolate to oblanceolate, glabrescent above, with scattered short, multi-cellular, sinuate hairs and very sparse unicellular, arachnoid hairs and glabrescent beneath, lobed or crenate-dentate. Capitula 15-25 mm in diameter, subglobose, usually in clusters of 2-4 on narrowly winged peduncles up to 8 cm and 1·5 mm in diameter; involucral bracts imbricate or the outer and middle slightly recurved at apex, the inner larger, the outer and middle up to 1·2 mm wide at the base, linear-subulate, verruculose in the proximal 1/3, arachnoid-ciliate, with the mid-vein raised in the distal 2/3; inner bracts faintly 3-veined in the distal 1/5. Corolla 12-15 mm. Achenes 3-4 mm, swollen, almost smooth; apical prominence small, sessile, sinuately lobed; pappus 8-12 mm. Roadsides, waste places and streamsides. Europe, except the islands and parts of the south. Au Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b crispus}: wings of stem broadly triangular, dentate and obtuse, only the mid-vein raised beneath in its distal 1/2. Cauline leaves lobed for 1/3(-1/2) of way to midrib, with 4-6 pairs of shallow lobes each with an apical spine up to 2 mm, the veins not raised, more or less densely greyish-arachnoid-hairy beneath. Inner involucral bracts yellowish. 2n = 16.{\i  C., E. & S. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b multiflorus} (Gaudin) Franco,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 48 (1975) ({\i C. multiflorus} Gaudin): Wings of stem with triangular lobes, the veins distinctly raised beneath. Cauline leaves lobed for up to 2/3 of way to midrib, with 6-8 pairs of lobes, each with an apical spine up to 3 mm, the veins more or less raised, greenish and sparsely hairy beneath. Inner involucral bracts purplish. •{\i  W. & N.W. Europe.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. C. litigiosus} Nocca & Balbis, {\i Fl. Ticin.}{\b  2}: 99 (1821). Biennial up to 70 cm. Stem densely arachnoid-lanate; wings broadly triangular. Leaves oblanceolate or lanceolate, with wide lobes, densely arachnoid-hairy above, densely arachnoid-lanate beneath, with sinuate multicellular hairs on veins and unicellular sinuate and long hairs above. Capitula 20-30 mm in diameter, subglobose, rounded to slightly umbilicate at base, usually sessile and in clusters of 2-5; involucral bracts imbricate, the outer and middle sometimes slightly erecto-patent or slightly recurved at apex, the inner larger, the outer 1 mm wide, the middle 1·5 mm wide at base, lanceolate-subulate, arachnoid-ciliate, with the midvein raised in the distal 2/3; inner bracts 1·2-1·7 mm wide, acuminate-subulate, 3-veined except in the distal ¼. Corolla 17-19 mm. Achenes 3-4 mm, flattened, minutely verruculose-wrinkled; apical prominence sessile, 5-lobed; pappus 12-16 mm. •{\i  S.E. France, N. Italy.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b litigiosus} ({\i C. sanctae-balmae} Loisel.): Wings of stem dentate, up to 6 mm wide, with an apical spine up to 4 mm. Lower leaves up to 15 × 3·5 cm; leaves with 10-12 pairs of triangular-dentate lobes each with an apical spine up to 4 mm. Outer involucral bracts c. 6 mm. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b horridissimus} (Briq. & Cavillier) Franco,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 49 (1975) ({\i C. litigiosus} var. {\i horridissimus} Briq. & Cavillier): Wings of stem broadly triangular to subpalmate, up to 12 mm wide, with an apical spine up to 12 mm. Lower leaves up to 25 × 5 cm; leaves with 6-8 pairs of palmate lobes with acute lobules each with an apical subulate spine up to 15 mm. Outer involucral bracts c. 10 mm.{\i  S.E. France} ({\i Alpes Maritimes}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. C. euboicus} Franco,{\i  loc. cit.} (1975). Like {\b 19}({\b a}) but perennial; stem densely greyish-arachnoid-hairy, with the wings usually deeply 3-partite into narrowly triangular lobes up to 6 mm, each with an apical spine up to 5 mm; leaves oblong-lanceolate, with 12-14 pairs of 2- to 3-fid symmetrical lobes with narrowly triangular acuminate lobules. Capitula 25-30 × 30-45 mm, depressed-globose, distinctly umbilicate at
\par

\par
225}
\par