{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. chrysacanthus} Ten.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Neap.}{\b  1825}: 12 (1825). Perennial up to 40 cm. Stem more or less arachnoid-hairy; wings palmate with lobes up to 10 mm, with a rigid apical spine. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, glabrous or sparsely hairy above, densely arachnoid-hairy beneath with long, straight multicellular hairs. Capitula 30-50 × 40-60 mm, depressed-globose, usually sessile, or peduncles up to 6 cm and 3 mm in diameter; outer and middle involucral bracts 2-4 mm wide, lanceolate-subulate, the mid-vein raised in the distal ¾, tapering into a long-acuminate apex, arachnoid-hairy; inner bracts not exceeding the inner middle bracts. Corolla 20-25 mm. Achenes 3-4 mm, swollen, smooth; apical prominence sessile, 5-lobed; pappus 12-18 mm.{\i  Stony places and dry pastures. • C. & S. Appennini; E. Spain.} Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b chrysacanthus}: Lobes of wings of stem with a spine up to 5 mm. Leaves with 10-12 pairs of falcate-lanceolate lobes usually 2- to 3-partite on the upper margin, the main lobe with an apical spine up to 5 mm. Involucral bracts imbricate or the outer usually recurved for their distal 2/3, sparsely to densely arachnoid-hairy; inner bracts 3-veined in the distal ¾.{\i  C. & S. Appennini}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b hispanicus} Franco, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 48 (1975): Lobes of wings of stem with an apical spine up to 10 mm. Leaves with 6-8 pairs of palmate lobes deeply partite into lanceolate-acuminate lobules, the main lobules with an apical spine up to 10 mm. Involucral bracts imbricate and laxly arcuate-recurved, glabrous or very sparsely arachnoid-hairy; inner bracts 1-veined in the distal ¾.{\i  E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. aurosicus} Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  1}: 364 (1786). Perennial up to 40 cm. Stem sparsely arachnoid-hairy; wings up to 4 mm wide with wide palmate or broadly triangular lobes with an apical spine up to 5 mm. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, glabrous or with a few scattered multicellular, sinuate hairs beneath, with 8-10 pairs of patent, distant palmate or triangular lobes, each with an apical spine up to 5 mm. Capitula 25-30 × 25-40 mm, subglobose, sessile, solitary or in clusters of up to 3; outer and middle involucral bracts more or less patent in their distal 2/3, 2-3 mm wide, lanceolate-subulate, constricted into a long-acuminate apex, with mid-vein raised throughout its length, glabrescent, minutely verruculose in the lower 1/4; inner bracts shorter than inner middle, 3-veined in the distal 5/6. Corolla 17-19 mm. Achenes 5-6 mm, swollen, minutely rugulose-punctulate; apical prominence very short, sessile, 5-lobed; pappus 11-17 mm.{\i  Calcareous rocks and screes, }1800-2100{\i  m. • S.E. France} ({\i near Barcelonette and N.W. of Gap}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. acanthoides} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 821 (1753) (incl.{\i  C. fortior} Klokov). Biennial up to 150 cm. Stem sparsely arachnoid-hairy; wings up to 8 mm wide, palmate to broadly triangular, with an apical spine up to 5 mm. Leaves oblong to oblong-lanceolate, glabrescent above, glabrous except for sinuate multicellular hairs on the veins beneath, with 6-8 pairs of palmate lobes, the lobules with apical spines up to 5 mm. Capitula 20-25 × 25-35 mm, subglobose, sessile and solitary or in small clusters; outer and middle involucral bracts imbricate or patent to slightly deflexed, up to 2 mm wide, linear-lanceolate, long-acuminate; inner middle bracts obtuse, contracted into the spine, with mid-vein raised throughout its length, arachnoid-ciliate, minutely verruculose on the back; inner bracts longer than middle, 1-veined in the distal ¼. Corolla 16-18 mm. Achenes 3-4 mm, compressed, minutely rugulose-punctulate; apical prominence small, sessile, sinuate-lobed; pappus 11-13 mm. 2n = 16, 20, 22.{\i  Much of Europe, but absent from most of the south-west, and only as an introduction in most of the north.} Al Au *Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Su Tu [He No Rs (B)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. C. ramosissimus} Pancic,{\i  Elench. Pl. Vasc. Crna Gora} 51 (1875). Biennial up to 75 cm. Stem sparsely arachnoid-hairy; wings up to 10 mm wide, triangular-dentate, with an apical spine up to 7 mm. Leaves oblong-lanceolate to -oblanceolate, glabrous above, with very sparse multicellular hairs beneath, with 10-14 pairs of triangular-dentate lobes, each with an apical spine up to 8 mm. Capitula 15-25 × 10-20 mm, sessile, usually in terminal clusters of 3-5; outer and middle involucral bracts patent or recurved, 1-1·5 mm wide, linear-subulate, the mid-vein raised in the distal ¾, smooth, glabrous; inner bracts 1¼ times as long as the inner middle, 3-veined at apex. Corolla 15-17 mm. Achenes 3-4 mm; pappus 11-13 mm.{\i  Serpentine rocks. • Mountains of S.W. Jugoslavia and N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 14-16}). {\b C. tmoleus} group. Perennials up to 100 cm. Leaves lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, subpinnatisect with oblong-triangular to -linear, acuminate or caudate lobules. Capitula 15-25 × 15-25 mm, mostly sessile and in clusters; involucral bracts imbricate or the outer and middle slightly patent. Corolla 15-20 mm. Achenes 3-5 mm, swollen or compressed; apical prominence short, sessile, entire; pappus 13-16 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Three closely related species may be recognized in the S. half of the Balkan peninsula but they are in need of further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem arachnoid-hairy to tomentose ............................................. {\b 16. cronius} 
\par
1 Stem subglabrous
\par
2 Outer involucral bracts subulate, with mid-vein raised
\par
  throughout its length .................................................................... {\b 14. tmoleus}
\par
2 Outer involucral bracts lanceolate-triangular, sub-
\par
  obtuse, with mid-vein raised only in the distal ½ ...................... {\b 15. thessalus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 14. C. tmoleus} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 1}({\b 4}): 21 (1844). Stem-wings palmate. Leaves glabrescent above, glabrous except for multicellular hairs on the veins beneath (but the rhachis more densely arachnoid-hairy). Capitula subglobose to broadly campanulate; outer involucral bracts 1-1·5 mm wide, subulate, the middle 1·5-2 mm wide, lanceolate; outer and middle bracts contracted at the middle and 0·5-1 mm wide, with mid-vein raised throughout its length; inner bracts 3-veined, but 1-veined in the acuminate apical part. Corolla 15-17 mm. Achenes 4-5 mm, swollen, smooth.{\i  S. half of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tmoleus}: Wings up to 8 mm wide, with an apical spine up to 10 mm. Leaves with 8-12 pairs of lobes each with an apical spine up to 12 mm. All involucral bracts subequal, arachnoid-ciliate to glabrescent, smooth on the back.{\i  S. Albania and N. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b armatus} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Franco,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 48 (1975) ({\i C. armatus} Boiss. & Heldr.): Wings of stem up to 12 mm wide, with an apical spine up to 15 mm. Leaves with 6-8 pairs of lobes each with an apical spine up to 15 mm. Inner involucral bracts longer than the middle, glabrous, verruculose on the back. •{\i  Greece, S. Jugoslavia and Bulgaria.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. C. thessalus} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 46 (1856). Like {\b 14}({\b a}) but capitula-campanulate, solitary, sessile or with peduncles up to 2 cm and 1·2 mm in diameter, corymbosely arranged; involucral bracts densely imbricate, the inner larger, the outer lanceolate-triangular, subobtuse, 1 mm wide at base, the middle 1·5 mm wide at base, more strongly attenuate at apex, all glabrous, verruculose on the back and distinctly ciliate-serrulate on the margin, with mid-vein raised only in the distal 1/2; inner bracts minutely verruculose, ciliate-serrulate, with a more or less distinct mid-vein only in the purplish distal 1/3; achenes 3-4 mm, compressed, minutely verruculose on both surfaces.{\i  Rocky slopes or forest margins. • Mountains of N.W. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par
224}
\par