{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   Hybrids between {\b 26}({\b b}) and {\b 12}, {\b 17}({\b a}) and {\b 18}({\b b}) occur frequently in E. France and W. Switzerland. The hybrid between {\b 26}({\b b}) and {\b 5}({\b a}) is also found.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   C. lobulatus} Borbás,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  1}: 318 (1902), from woods in N.E. Czechoslovakia, looks similar to {\b 26}({\b b}). It differs mainly in its narrower (up to 5 mm wide), triangular stem-wings with a spine up to 1·5 mm, the cauline leaves lobed for 1/3-1/2(-2/3) way to the midrib into obtuse or subobtuse lobes with an apical spine up to 1 mm, the peduncle 6-15 cm, with a few small bractlike leaves below, the outer and middle involucral bracts with an obscure mid-vein only in the distal ½, the inner bracts about twice as long as inner middle, and corolla 14-16 mm. Further study is needed to determine its status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. C. carlinifolius} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 700 (1785). Stem up to 50 cm, usually corymbosely branched above; wings up to 8 mm wide, palmate, with an apical spine up to 10 mm. Leaves with 6-10 pairs of 3-lobulate lobes, each lobule with an apical spine up to 10 mm, the central lobule the largest. Capitula 18-25 mm in diameter; peduncle up to 15 cm and 1·5 mm in diameter; involucral bracts 1-1·5 mm wide, linear, subacute, more or less contracted into a spine up to 5 mm; inner bracts 1 1/3-1 1/2 times as long as and twice as wide as the inner middle. Corolla 16-20 mm. Achenes 4-5 mm, swollen, smooth; apical prominence small, sessile, 5-lobed; pappus 13-16 mm. 2n = 22. •{\i  Mountains of N.E. Spain, Pyrenees, Alps, Appennini.} Ga He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 27} seems to hybridize with {\b 12} in the W. and C. Alps, and with {\b 18}({\b b}) in the C. Alps and Appennini.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. C. candicans} Waldst. & Kit., {\i Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  1}: 85 (1801-1802). Biennial up to 110 cm. Stem arachnoid-hairy; wings up to 15 mm wide, triangular, lobulate on the upper margin, each lobule with an apical spine up to 3 mm. Leaves oblanceolate or lanceolate, glabrescent above, white-tomentose beneath with sinuate, unicellular hairs, with broadly triangular lobes which are usually lobulate on the upper margin,.each lobe with an apical spine up to 3 mm. Capitula 20-30 × 15-20 mm, subglobose; peduncle up to 15 cm and 2 mm.in diameter, involucral bracts 1-1·5 mm wide, imbricate, but the outer usually patent, linear subulate, the outer gradually tapering into a spine c. 1 mm, the middle usually contracted into a spine c. 0·5 mm, more or less arachnoid-hairy, the mid-vein raised for only its distal 1/2-2/3; inner bracts slightly longer than the middle bracts, obscurely 1-veined, abruptly narrowed above the middle, minutely verruculose, acuminate, with an apical spine 0·5 mm. Corolla 17-20 mm. Achenes 3-4 mm, swollen, nearly smooth; apical prominence sessile, subglobose, 5-lobed; pappus 13-16 mm.{\i  Meadows and rocky slopes. • Balkan peninsula; C. & W. Romania.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b candicans}: Outer and middle involucral bracts in 3-5 rows, the mid-vein raised in its distal ½ inner bracts scabrid on margins.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, except parts of the south-east.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b globifer} (Velen.) Kazmi, {\i Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}) {\b 5}: 411 (1964) ({\i C. globifer} Velen.): Outer and middle involucral bracts in 2 rows, the mid-vein raised in its distal 2/3; inner bracts distinctly ciliate.{\i  Bulgaria and Turkey-in-Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. C. collinus} Waldst. & Kit., {\i Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  3}: 251(1807). Biennial up to 100 cm. Stem arachnoid-hairy; wings up to 10 mm wide, crispate or sinuate, triangular with an apical spine up to 1·5 mm. Leaves oblanceolate or oblong, glabrescent above, lanuginous beneath with straight, unicellular, slender hairs. Capitula 20-25 × 15-20 mm, subglobose; peduncle up to 8 cm and 2 mm in diameter; involucral bracts 1-1·5 mm wide, closely imbricate or the outer patent, linear-subulate, glabrous or almost so, the mid-vein raised throughout its length; inner bracts slightly longer than the middle bracts, 1-veined in the distal ½, not contracted above the middle. Corolla 15-18 mm. Achenes 3-4 mm; pappus 13-15 mm. 2n = 16, 32.{\i  Grassy or stony hillsides. • From the Carpathians to S. Italy and C. Jugoslavia.} ?.Au Cz Hu It Ju Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lower leaves with petiole c. 1/5 as long as lamina .... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b glabrescens} 
\par
1 Lower leaves with petiole about as long as lamina
\par
2 Cauline leaves white-lanuginous beneath, the lobes with
\par
  an apical spine 2-5 mm .................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b cylindricus}
\par
2 Cauline leaves grey-lanuginous beneath, the lobes with
\par
  an apical spine not more than 1 mm .................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b collinus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b collinus}: Lower leaves c. 20 × 3 cm, with petiole about as long as lamina; cauline leaves deeply lobed with 6-8 pairs of long, distant lobes each with an apical spine up to 1 mm, grey-lanuginous beneath. Inner bracts slightly contracted at apex into a short spine. Mainly in the S. & W. parts of the range of the species.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cylindricus} (Borbás) Soó,  {\i Feddes Repert.} {\b 85}: 453 (1974) ({\i C. cylindricus} Borbás, {\i C. candicans} subsp.{\i  cylindricus} (Borbás) Hayek): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but cauline leaves pinnatisect, white-lanuginous beneath, each lobe with an apical spine 2-5 mm. Inner bracts tapering at apex.{\i  N.E. Italy, Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b glabrescens} (Sagorski) Kazmi,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}) {\b 5}: 412 (1964): Lower leaves up to 30 × 9 cm, with petiole c. 1/5 as long as lamina; cauline leaves lobed for up to way to midrib, with 2-5 pairs of ovate, lobulate lobes each with an apical spine up to 2 mm, glaucescent and with a sparse indumentum beneath. Inner bracts tapering at apex. {\i Carpathians}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. C. carduelis} (L.) Gren., {\i Billotia}{\b  1}: 14 (1864) ({\i C. defloratus} subsp.{\i  carduelis }(L.) Gugler). Perennial up to 80 cm. Stem subglabrous or very sparsely hairy; wings up to 6 mm wide, triangular-ovate, with an apical spine up to 1 mm. Leaves oblanceolate or lanceolate, glabrous above, sparsely arachnoid-hairy with fine unicellular sinuate hairs beneath, with 6-8 pairs of lobes each with an apical spine up to 1·5 mm. Capitula 15-30 mm in diameter, subglobose; peduncle up to 25 cm and 1·5 mm in diameter, tomentulose; involucral bracts 1-1·5 mm wide, imbricate, but the outer usually deflexed and curled in an S-shape, linear-subulate, glabrous, with the mid-vein obscure; inner bracts 1¼-1½ times as long as and twice as wide as the middle bracts, subulate, veinless. Corolla 13-15 mm. Achenes 3-4 mm, compressed, minutely verruculose; apical prominence sessile, cylindrical, 5-lobed; pappus 8-12 mm.{\i  Mountain meadows. • E. Alps and mountains of N.W. Jugoslavia.} ?Al Au It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. C. kerneri} Simonkai, {\i Term. Füz.}{\b  10}: 181 (1886). Perennial up to 100 cm. Stem subglabrous; wings up to 7 mm wide. Leaves oblanceolate or oblong, glabrous or glabrescent above, laxly arachnoid-hairy with sinuate multicellular and unicellular hairs beneath, with numerous deeply lobulate lobes. Capitula subglobose or ovoid; peduncle 1·5-2 mm in diameter; involucral bracts 1-1·5 mm wide, closely imbricate, linear-subulate, glabrous or almost so; inner bracts as wide as and twice as long as the middle bracts, veinless in the distal 1/3. Corolla 15-17 mm. Achenes 3-4 mm, compressed, smooth; apical prominence small, sessile, cylindrical, entire; pappus 13-15 mm.{\i  Mountain meadows and pastures. S.E. Carpathians; C. & N.E. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par
228}
\par