{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. G. concatenatum} Cosson,{\i  Not. Pl. Crit.} 38 (1849). Like {\b 20} but stems 20-65 cm, more or less erect, not much branched at the base; leaves 15-22 × 1-3 mm, linear to narrowly lanceolate, acute, glabrous or scabrid above, glabrous or papillose beneath, the margin usually not recurved as far as the midrib; corolla 1·5-2·5 mm, shallowly infundibuliform; tube 0·4-1 mm; lobes 1-1·2 mm, acute. {\i Open habitats. S.W. Spain, S.E. Portugal.} Hs Lu. ({\i Morocco, Algeria.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. G. humifusum} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 104 (1808) ({\i Asperula humifusa} (Bieb.) Besser). Stems 40-150 cm, decumbent to ascending, usually branched from the base, 4-angled, hairy especially below, rarely glabrescent. Leaves 10-22 × (1·2-)1·5-4 mm, in whorls of (5-)6-7(-9), lanceolate to linear, acute or shortly awned, sparsely hairy and shining above, lighter and often hairy on the midrib beneath; margin slightly recurved, scabrid with antrorsely directed teeth. Inflorescence ovoid-elongate; partial inflorescences dense-flowered, leafy; pedicels 1-4 mm, divaricate, usually glabrous or slightly hairy. Corolla 1·5-2 mm, infundibuliform, white to yellowish-white; corolla-lobes slightly longer than wide, acute. Fruit glabrous.{\i  Damp, bushy places. S.E. Europe, extending northwards to} c. 51° {\i N. in S.C. Russia.} Bu Gr Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) [Hu].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable; the correctness of the recognition of some variants as species, e.g.{\b  Asperula debilis} Ledeb.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Dorpat., Suppl.} 2 (1824), {\b A. besserana} Klokov in Kotov, {\i Fl. RSS Ucr. }{\b 10}: 456 (1961) and {\b A. cincinnata} Klokov, {\i loc. cit.} (1961) is very doubtful.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. G. maritimum} L.,{\i  Mantissa }38 (1767). Stems 30-80 cm, erect to ascending, often decumbent, 4-angled, much-branched, densely hairy. Leaves 9-20 × 1-4 mm, in whorls of 6-8(-9), narrowly elliptical to linear-lanceolate, shortly awned, more or less equally hairy above and beneath; margin recurved but not to the midrib. Inflorescence broadly ovoid, much-branched; partial inflorescences dense-flowered, leafy; pedicels slender, divaricate, hairy. Corolla 2-2·5 mm in diameter, rotate, reddish-brown, rarely yellowish, sparsely hairy externally; lobes apiculate. Fruit densely hairy.{\i  Dry places; calcifuge. • E. Spain, S. France.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Variable and connected by hybrids with {\b 26}. Records from N.W. Jugoslavia are erroneous.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 25-27}). {\b G. verum} group. Caespitose, without or with stolons. Stems more or less terete below, usually finely puberulent. Leaves in whorls of (6-)8-12, more or less linear, acute or awned, usually darkening on drying, much more densely hairy beneath than above. Inflorescence ovoid, with relatively short branches; partial inflorescences squarrose; pedicels slender. Corolla 2-3·5 mm in diameter, rotate, yellow. Fruit 1-1·5 mm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems ± 4-angled below; inflorescence rather lax and 
\par 
  not very hairy; corolla-lobes ± apiculate ................... {\b 27. G}. × {\b pomeranicum}
\par 
1 Stems ± rounded below; inflorescence dense and usually
\par 
  densely hairy
\par 
2 Leaves awned; corolla sparsely hairy outside; lobes 
\par 
  apiculate; fruit densely hairy .............................................. {\b 25. G. tunetanum}
\par 
2 Leaves not or rarely awned; corolla glabrous outside;
\par 
  lobes acute, scarcely apiculate; fruit usually glabrous .............. {\b 26. G. verum}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. G. tunetanum} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  2}: 583 (1788).Stems 30-80 cm, erect, not much branched. Leaves 20-25 × 1-1·5 mm, shortly awned, shining, shortly hairy and rough above, tomentose beneath; margin usually recurved to the midrib. Inflorescence ovoid-elongate. Corolla 3-3·5 mm in diameter, hairy externally; lobes apiculate. Fruit densely hairy, very rarely glabrous. {\i Dry places. S. Spain; Sicilia.} Hs Si. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. G. verum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 107 (1753). Stems (20-)50-120 cm, more or less terete with 4 raised lines, rarely glabrescent. Leaves 15-30(-40) × 0·5-2(-3) mm, acute, rarely awned, shining and usually hairy above, densely puberulent beneath; margin usually markedly recurved. Corolla almost always glabrous externally; lobes acute, scarcely apiculate. Fruit usually glabrous, rarely hairy.{\i  Grassland,sand-dunes and open woodland. Most of Europe.} All except Az Bl ?Co Cr Fa Sb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b verum}: stems erect to ascending; internodes longer or shorter than the leaves. Leaves 15-30(-35) × 0·5-1(-2) mm; margin recurved to midrib. Branches of inflorescence longer than the corresponding internodes; inflorescence not interrupted. Corolla golden-yellow; flowers fragrant. 2n = 22, 44.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b wirtgenii} (F. W. Schultz) Oborny, {\i Verh. Naturf. Ver. Brunn}{\b  23}({\b 2}): 735 (1885) ({\i G. praecox }(K. H. Lang) H. Braun): stem erect; internodes longer than the leaves. Leaves 25-40 × 1-3 mm; margin usually not recurved as far as the midrib. Inflorescence branches usually shorter than the corresponding internodes; inflorescence interrupted. Corolla lemon-yellow; flowers odourless. Flowering earlier than subsp. ({\b a}). 2n = 22. {\i Wet meadows. C. Europe}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  In the north, where subsp. ({\b a}) is tetraploid and subsp. ({\b b}) diploid, the distinction between them is obvious. In the south where diploid plants of subsp. ({\b a}) occur, the distinction is less clear.{\i  G. verum} hybridizes with several species of Sect.{\i  Leiogalium}, and includes numerous ecological and geographical races which have still to be classified. The rank of many taxa which have been described from the U.S.S.R., e.g.{\b  G. ruthenicum} Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  1}: 597 (1798) ({\i G. verum} subsp.{\i  ruthenicum }(Willd.) P. Fourn.), {\b G. tomentellum} Klokov in Kotov, {\i Fl. RSS Ucr.}{\b  10}: 470 (1961), {\b G. borysthenicum} Klokov,{\i  op. cit. }471 (1961), {\b G. tenderiense} Klokov, {\i loc. cit.} (1961), {\b G. densiflorum} Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Altaica }{\b 1}: 137 (1829), is doubtful.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. G}. ×{\b  pomeranicum} Retz.,{\i  Fl. Scand. Prodr.} ed. 2, 34 (1795) ({\i G. ochroleucum} Wolf ex Schweigger = {\i G. album} ×{\i  verum}). Like {\b 26} but stems more or less 4-angled below; leaves usually more than 1·5 mm wide, narrowly lanceolate, usually not darkening on drying, usually less hairy beneath; margin less markedly recurved; inflorescence with longer branches, often less hairy; pedicels rather stouter; corolla often more than 3 mm in diameter, bright yellow to whitish; corolla-lobes more or less apiculate. {\i Meadows and roadsides. Most of Europe.} All except Az Bl ?Co Cr Fa ?Sa Sb ?Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    Often forming large and variable populations which contain a series of intermediates connecting one parent with the other. It is usually found with the parents, but sometimes (e.g. in Finland and N. Russia) it may occur independently of them.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. G. thymifolium} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 6}): 67 (1846-1847). Stems 10-30 cm, ascending from a creeping stoloniferous base, slender, faintly 4-angled, shortly hairy. Leaves 2-6 × 0·5-1·5 mm, in whorls of 6-8, elliptical to broadly linear, acute, shortly awned, black when dry, glabrous margin flat or somewhat recurved. Inflorescence narrowly cylindrical, interrupted, with short, dense-flowered, squarrose, bracteate partial inflorescences; pedicels 0·5-2 mm. Corolla 3-4 mm in diameter, rotate, white, glabrous; lobes shortly apiculate. Fruit glabrous,finely granulate.{\i  Rocky and gravelly places. • Mountains of S. Greece. }Gr.
\par 

\par 
22}
\par