{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 base, solitary on a peduncle 1-3 cm and 2 mm in diameter; involucral bracts minutely but densely verruculose on the proximal 1/3, glabrous or nearly so, the middle 1·5-2 mm wide and distinctly narrowed from middle into a subulate apex. Corolla 21-23 mm. Pappus 16-18 mm.{\i  E. Greece} ({\i Evvoia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. C. vivariensis} Jordan, {\i Obs. Pl. Crit.} {\b 3}: 212 (1846). Biennial up to 100 cm. Stem sparsely arachnoid-hairy; wings up to 6 mm wide, flat, triangular-dentate or -lobed with an apical spine up to 8 mm. Leaves oblanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, glabrous, or with crispate, short multicellular hairs beneath, with 6-8 pairs of triangular-palmate lobes, the veins raised beneath in their distal ½. Capitula 25-35 mm in diameter, subglobose, pedunculate or sessile; involucral bracts usually free at apex and more or less recurved, glabrous or nearly so, the outer and middle linear-subulate, the mid-vein raised in the distal ½ only; inner bracts veinless. Corolla 18-20 mm. Achenes 3-4 mm, compressed, smooth; apical prominence lobed; pappus 13-15 mm.{\i  Dry, stony places and roadsides. • S., C. & E. Spain, S. & S.C. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Capitula sessile or on a glabrescent peduncle not more than  
\par
  3 cm; spines on wings of stem and leaf-lobes up to 8 mm ..... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b assoi}
\par
1 Capitula on greyish-tomentose peduncles more than 3 cm;
\par
  spines on wings of stem and leaf-lobes not more than 4 mm
\par
2 Leaves with abundant hairs beneath; outer involucral
\par
  bracts shorter than middle .............................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b vivariensis}
\par
2 Leaves sparsely hairy beneath; outer involucral bracts
\par
  almost as long as or slightly longer than middle ............... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b australis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b vivariensis} ({\i C. nigrescens} subsp.{\i  vivariensis} (Jordan) Bonnier & Layens): Leaves with abundant hairs beneath. Involucral bracts 1·5-2 mm wide, smooth, tapering into a spine 0·5-1·5 mm, the outer shorter than the middle; inner bracts twice as long as the inner middle bracts. Apical prominence of achene sessile.{\i  N.E. Spain, S. & S.C. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b australis} Nyman, {\i Consp.} 412 (1879): Leaves sparsely hairy beneath. Involucral bracts 1·5-2 mm wide, smooth, tapering into a spine 1 mm, the outer nearly as long as or slightly longer than the middle; inner bracts not more than 1 1/3 times as long as the middle bracts. Apical prominence of achene sessile.{\i  N.E. Spain, S. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b assoi} (Willk.) Kazmi, {\i Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}) {\b 5}: 400 (1964) ({\i C. acanthoides} auct. hisp., non L., {\i C. nigrescens} subsp.{\i  assoi} Willk.): Leaves glabrous or with a few scattered hairs on veins beneath. Involucral bracts 1-1·5 mm wide, minutely verruculose, tapering into a spine 2-3 mm, the outer 1 1/2-1 2/3 times as long as the middle bracts which are 2/3 as long as the inner. Apical prominence of achene stipitate.{\i  S., C. & E. Spain.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. C. nigrescens} Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 30 (1779). Biennial up to 65 cm. Stem arachnoid-hairy; wings up to 6 mm, triangular, with an apical spine up to 4 mm. Leaves oblanceolate to oblong, sparsely hairy above, with numerous multicellular and a few straight unicellular hairs beneath, with 8-10 pairs of ovate, subobtuse lobes, each with an apical spine up to 2 mm. Capitula 25-40 mm in diameter, subglobose, usually on naked peduncles up to 12 cm and 2 mm in diameter; outer and middle involucral bracts strongly recurved at the middle, 1·5-2 mm wide at the base, linear-subulate, glabrus or almost so, the mid-vein raised in the distal 2/3; inner bracts not more than 1¼ times as long as the inner middle bracts, 1-veined in the distal 1/3. Corolla 22-25 mm. Achenes 3-4 mm, compressed, nearly smooth; apical prominence sessile, wide, 5-lobed; pappus 15-18 mm. {\i Waste places and disturbed ground. • S. & S.C. France, N.W. Italy, N.E. Spain.} Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. C. hamulosus} Ehrh., {\i Beitr. Naturk.}{\b  7}: 166 (1792) ({\i C. seminudus} auct. eur., non Bieb. ex Willd.). Biennial up to 100 cm. Stem sparsely arachnoid-hairy; wings up to 5 mm, undulate, with wide, triangular lobes with an apical spine up to 2·5 mm. Leaves oblanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, sparsely hairy above, more densely hairy beneath, with 8-10 pairs of distant, oblong, sublobulate lobes, each with an apical spine up to 2 mm. Capitula 25-40 mm in diameter, subglobose, mostly on peduncles up to 10 cm and 2·5 mm in diameter, which terminate long simple branches; involucral bracts usually recurved in an S-shape, 1-1·5 mm wide, linear-subulate, smooth, with a raised mid-vein throughout their length; inner bracts 1 1/3 times as long as the inner middle bracts, deflexed at apex, purplish, veinless, puberulent. Corolla 18-25 mm. Achenes 3-4 mm, compressed, minutely verruculose; apical prominence sessile, truncate-globose, entire; pappus 13-15 mm.{\i  Dry grassland and waste places. S.E. & E.C. Europe}. Bu ?Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b hamulosus} ({\i C. pseudocollinus} (Schmalh.) Klokov): Leaves with numerous multicellular and a few unicellular hairs beneath. Involucral bracts glabrous or nearly so. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b hystrix} (C. A. Meyer) Kazmi, {\i Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}){\b  5}: 402 (1964) ({\i C. stenocephalus} Tamamsch.): Leaves with dense unicellular hairs beneath. Involucral bracts more or less densely arachnoid-hairy.{\i  S.E. Russia. }({\i Caucasian region.})
\par

\par
 {\b  C. thracicus} (Velen.) Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 705 (1931), from C. & E. Bulgaria, seems very close to {\b 23}({\b a}), from which it differs mainly in its smaller capitula (c. 10 mm in diameter) and subpruinose involucral bracts. Further investigation is needed to determine its true status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. C. uncinatus} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3}: 553 (1819). Biennial up to 50 cm. Stem white-tomentose; wings up to 7 mm, palmate, with an apical spine up to 5 mm. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, densely hairy above, greyish-tomentose beneath, with straight unicellular hairs, with 6-8 pairs of oblong lobes, each with an apical spine up to 3 mm. Capitula 30-40 mm in diameter, subglobose, mostly with peduncles up to 10 cm and 2 mm in diameter; outer and middle involucral bracts more or less recurved in distal ½, 1·5-2 mm wide at the base, linear-lanceolate, flat, arachnoid-hairy, the mid-vein raised throughout its length; inner bracts 1¼ times as long as the inner middle bracts, 1-veined. Corolla 21-23 mm. Achenes 3-4 mm, compressed, rugose; apical prominence sessile, entire; pappus 10-13 mm.{\i  Dry grassland. S. part of U.S.S.R., S.E. Romania.} ?Bu Rm Rs (W, K, E) ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C. uncinatus} subsp.{\i  davisii} Kazmi, {\i Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}){\b  5}: 404 (1964), was described from a single specimen collected on calcareous rocks in Krym (above Nikita). It is readily distinguished from {\b 24} by the glabrescent leaves, longer peduncles, outer and middle involucral bracts strongly deflexed at the middle and abruptly narrowed into a long subulate apex, corolla 26-28 mm and pappus 20-22 mm. It seems related to {\b 23} but further investigation is needed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 25-27}). {\b C. defloratus} group. Perennials up to 100 cm. Stem glabrous to more or less arachnoid-hairy; wings palmate or triangular, dentate. Leaves obovate to oblong-lanceolate, glabrous or with very sparse, crispate multicellular hairs. Capitula 20-30 mm in diameter, subglobose; peduncles up to 35 cm and
\par

\par
226}
\par