{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 2·5 mm in diameter; involucral bracts 1-2 mm wide at the base, imbricate but the outer and sometimes the middle patent to deflexed, glabrous or slightly arachnoid-hairy, the mid-vein more or less distinctly raised; inner bracts longer than the inner middle, mostly obscurely 3-veined in the distal 1/3, the mid-vein distinctly raised or obscure throughout. Corolla 13-20 mm. Achenes 3-5 mm, compressed and rugulose, or swollen and smooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  An extremely difficult group in need of further detailed study. Although some taxa are easily recognized, there is considerable variation in leaf-dissection, spine-length, peduncle-length, capitulum-diameter, prominence of the mid-veins and the shape of the apex of the involucral bracts. This variation is almost continuous in the centre of the range and intermediates between taxa can be found. The greatest difficulties are encountered in the Alps where hybrids seem to occur not only between members of this group but also with such taxa as {\b 12}, {\b 17}({\b a}) and {\b 18}({\b b}). Plants with scattered multicellular hairs on leaves and stem-wings, thicker, more spiny leaves and appressed, acute, spiny, subequal outer and middle involucral bracts are probably hybrids involving {\b 12}; plants with slightly lobed or dentate leaves with both unicellular and multicellular hairs beneath and slender, acute lax involucral bracts are probably hybrids involving {\b 17}({\b a}) while those with rather thin discolorous leaves with unicellular and multicellular hairs beneath and appressed, unequal involucral bracts slightly recurved at apex probably involve {\b 18}({\b b}). To some of these hybrids, found in the S.W. Alps, the chromosome numbers 2n = 20, 20+1-3B, 21 and 23+0-3B may be referred. The taxa described below, most having glabrous leaves, were selected as the most distinct and plants with other combinations of characters may be suspected to be of hybrid origin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves entire and spinulose-ciliate or dentate with 
\par
  numerous spinose teeth; achenes With ovoid-globose 
\par
  apical prominence ..................................................................... {\b 25. defloratus}
\par
1 Leaves lobed to pinnatisect; achenes with oblong apical
\par
  prominence
\par
2 Leaves thin; leaf-lobes and stem-wings with spine not 
\par
  more than 2(-3) mm; pappus 10-13 mm ................................... {\b 26. argemone}
\par
2 Leaves thick; leaf-lobes and stem-wings with spine not
\par
  more than 10 mm; pappus 13-16 mm .................................... {\b 27. carlinifolius}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. C. defloratus} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2}: 1200 (1759). Stem-wings palmate. Leaves thickish, glaucous beneath, entire and spinulose-ciliate or dentate with numerous spinose teeth the spines up to 5 mm; petiole up to 1/3 as long as lamina. Capitula 25-40 mm in diameter; outer involucral bracts sometimes patent and curled in an S-shape; inner bracts acuminate-subulate, slightly wider than the inner middle, minutely puberulent. Corolla 16-18 mm. Achenes 4-5 mm, compressed; apical prominence ovoid-globose; pappus 10-13 mm. {\i Open woods and stony ground; somewhat calcicole. • Mountains of C. Europe, from C. Germany southwards to the N. Appennini and S. Carpathians.} Au Cz Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b defloratus} ({\i C. crassifolius} Willd.,{\i  C. summanus} Pollini): Leaves entire and spinulose-ciliate or dentate with 12-25 pairs of spinose teeth up to 5 mm. Outer and middle involucral bracts 0·5-0·75 mm wide at the middle, linear-subulate, subacute, mucronate; inner 1 1/3 times as long as the inner middle. Achenes with a 5-lobed apical prominence. 2n = 18.{\i  N. Appennini, S. & E. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b glaucus} Nyman, {\i Consp.} 412 (1879) ({\i C. crassifolius} subsp. {\i glaucus} (Nyman) Kazmi, {\i C. glaucus} Baumg., non Cav.): Leaves entire but spinulose-ciliate with 25-50 pairs of main spines up to 2 mm. Outer and middle involucral bracts contracted at or below the middle into an oblong, obtuse apex; inner twice as long as the inner middle. Achenes with an entire apical prominence. 2n = 22.{\i  From C. Germany to the S. Carpathians}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Material from the western and southern parts of the range usually has more slender, acute outer and middle involucral bracts.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Plants from E. Switzerland, Austria and S. Bavaria, which are probably hybrids between {\b 25}({\b b}) and {\b 30} have been called{\b  C. viridis} A. Kerner,{\i  Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung.}{\b  1}: 74 (1881) ({\i C. defloratus} subsp.{\i  viridis} (A. Kerner) Nyman). They differ from {\b 25}({\b b}) principally in having the leaves with scattered multicellular hairs, the lower and sometimes a few cauline leaves more or less lobed, the outer and middle involucral bracts subulate and distinctly narrower than the inner and the compressed, verruculose achenes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  C. rhaeticus} (DC.) A. Kerner,{\i  Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung.}{\b  1}: 75 (1881) ({\i C. defloratus} subsp.{\i  rhaeticus} (DC.) Rothm., subsp. {\i tridentinus} (Evers) Lad.), which is common at high altitudes in the C. & E. Alps, is probably a hybrid between {\b 25}({\b a}) and {\b 27}. It is very spiny, with thick, oblong, more or less lobed leaves, peduncle up to 20 cm, rather obtuse to acute involucral bracts 1-1·5 mm wide and swollen, smooth achenes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. C. argemone} Pourret ex Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 700 (1785). Stem-wings up to 15 mm wide, semi-hastate or triangular, with an apical spine up to 2(-3) mm. Leaves rather thin, pale green beneath, deeply lobed to pinnatisect, with 8-10(-15) pairs of palmate, dentate or semi-hastate lobes with oblong, subobtuse, spinulose-ciliate lobules, the lobules with an apical spine up to 2(-3) mm; basal leaves cuneate, the petiole up to ¼ as long as the lamina. Capitula 20-40 mm in diameter; involucral bracts linear-subulate to linear-oblong and obtuse, with apical spine 0·2-1 mm; inner bracts acute, slightly wider than the inner middle, densely puberulent distally. Corolla 14-20 mm. Achenes 3-4 mm; apical prominence small, sessile, sinuately 5-lobed. {\i Meadows and shady rocks. • Pyrenees, Corbières, Cordillera Cantábrica; Jura and W. Alps.} Ga He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b argemone} ({\i C. arctioides} auct. pyren., non Vill., {\i C. medius} auct., non Gouan): Leaf-lobules with 5-7 pairs of main spinules; veins well-raised on lower leaf-surface. Outer and middle involucral bracts 1-1·5 mm wide at base, laxly imbricate, linear-subulate, gradually narrowing into a mucro. Corolla 14-16 mm. Achenes swollen, smooth. 2n = 22.{\i  From the Corbières westwards}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b obtusisquamus} Franco, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 49 (1975) ({\i C. defloratus} auct. gall., non L.): Leaf-lobules with 3-5 pairs of main spinules; veins slightly raised or indistinct on lower leaf-surface. Outer and middle involucral bracts 1·5-2 mm wide at base, appressed, linear, obtuse, mucronate. Corolla 16-18 mm. Achenes compressed, rugulose. 2n = 22.{\i  S.W. Alps and Jura.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    In the higher parts of the Pyrenees {\b 26}({\b a}) and{\b  27} are sympatric and their hybrid has been called {\b C. medius} Gouan,{\i  Obs. Bot.} 62 (1773) ({\i C. defloratus} subsp.{\i  medius} (Gouan) Bonnier). It differs from {\b 26}({\b a}) in the longer spines (3-7 mm) on stem-wings and leaf-lobes , shorter peduncle (not more than 20 cm) and the outer and middle involucral bracts with apical spine 1-3 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Plants similar to {\b 26}({\b a}) but with involucral bracts of similar shape to {\b 26}({\b b}) occur in parts of the Pyrenees and the Cordillera Cantábrica. They have been named {\i C. defloratus} prol. {\i medioformis} Rouy and require further study.
\par

\par
227}
\par