{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 pappus as long as achene. 2n = 36. • {\i From Bulgaria to E. Russia.} Bu Rm Rs (C, W, ?K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. J. consanguinea} DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 676 (1838). Stem 20-35 cm, leafy in basal half. Basal leaves c. ½ as long as stem, shallowly pinnatifid, green and subglabrous above, arachnoid-tomentose beneath, long-petiolate, the segments lanceolate; cauline leaves linear, linear-lanceolate or setaceous. Capitula 2-7 cm in diameter, hemispherical. Involucral bracts straight, the inner longer and long-acuminate, slightly scabrid on margin. Achenes with inconspicuous corona; pappus as long as achene.{\i  S.E. Europe, from Macedonia to W. Kazakhstan.} Bu ?Gr Ju Rm Rs (C, W, E) ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucral bracts subequal, linear to cuneate; leaf-
\par
  segments with strongly revolute margins ......................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b neicevii} 
\par
1 Involucral bracts unequal, lanceolate or elliptic-lanceolate; 
\par
  leaf-segments flat or with slightly revolute margins
\par
2 Involucral bracts glabrous, strongly appressed; achenes
\par
  obscurely tuberculate ............................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b consanguinea}
\par
2 Involucral bracts arachnoid-tomentose, lax; achenes 
\par
  acutely verrucose, or ribbed and tuberculate
\par
3 Capitula 3-7 cm in diameter; involucral bracts flat at
\par
  the base; achenes pale yellowish, slightly glandular-
\par
  hairy or glabrous ............................................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b bulgarica}
\par
3 Capitula 2-4 cm in diameter; involucral bracts convex 
\par
  at the base; achenes brown, glandular-hairy .............. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b arachnoidea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b consanguinea}: Leaf-segments with flat or slightly revolute margins. Capitula 2-4 cm in diameter. Involucral bracts unequal, the outer less than half as long as the inner, strongly appressed, convex at the base, coriaceous, glabrous, or hairy at the base only. Achenes tuberculate, glabrous when mature, brown.{\i  Mountains of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b neicevii} Kozuharov, {\i Izv. Bot. Inst. }({\i Sofia}) {\b 18}: 71 (1968): Leaf-segments strongly revolute. Capitula 2-4 cm in diameter. Involucral bracts subequal, cuneate or cuneate-linear, lax distally, flat at the base, herbaceous, with arachnoid indumentum. Achenes obscurely tuberculate and slightly ribbed, glabrous, brown. •{\i  Higher mountains of Bulgaria}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b arachnoidea} (Bunge) Kozuharov, {\i loc. cit.} (1968) ({\i J. arachnoidea} Bunge; incl. {\i J. gilliatii} Turrill, {\i J. kasakorum} Iljin, {\i J. bipinnata }Adamovic, {\i J. talijevii} Klokov): Leaf-segments with slightly revolute margins. Capitula 2-4 cm in diameter. Involucral bracts unequal, the outer more than ½ as long as the inner, lax distally, convex at the base, coriaceous, arachnoid. Achenes acutely verrucose, glandular-hairy, brown. 2n = 36. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b bulgarica} (Velen.) Kozuharov,{\i  loc. cit.} (1968) ({\i J. bulgarica} Velen.): Leaf-segments with slightly revolute margins. Capitula 3-7 cm in diameter. Involucral bracts flat at the base, with arachnoid indumentum, the outer herbaceous, less than ½ as long as the inner. Achenes tuberculate, ribbed, slightly glandular-hairy, pale yellowish.{\i  Calcicole. • C. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. J. glycacantha} (Sibth. & Sm.) DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 674 (1838) ({\i J. mollis} subsp. {\i glycacantha} (Sibth. & Sm.) Hayek). Stems 30-60 cm, usually with leaves only at base. Basal leaves shallowly pinnatifid; segments oblong-lanceolate or oblong, with undulate margin, arachnoid-tomentose above, densely tomentose beneath; cauline leaves linear, dentate at base. Capitula 4-5·5(-7·5) cm, hemispherical. Involucral bracts linear to linear-lanceolate, long-acuminate; outer strongly recurved and slightly hooked at apex, densely arachnoid-tomentose; inner cristate, glabrous. Achenes 4-5 mm, conical, tuberculate, indistinctly ribbed; corona inconspicuous; pappus slightly longer than achene. 2n = 30.{\i  Balkan peninsula and E.C. Europe}. Al Bu Gr Hu Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. J. humilis} (Desf.) DC.,{\i  op. cit.} 677 (1838)({\i J. monardii} (Dufour) DC.). Rhizome thick, often producing non-flowering leafy shoots. Acaulescent or stems up to 4 cm and bearing 2-7 pinnatifid leaves. Leaves (1·5-)2-3·5(-4) cm, entire and oblong-obovate, or pinnatifid, long-petiolate, with arachnoid pubescence, the segments short, linear-lanceolate or oblong, with revolute margin. Capitula 2-2·5 cm, obconical. Involucral bracts linear-lanceolate, straight and patent or recurved, subglabrous or arachnoid-tomentose, green, herbaceous. Achenes 3-7 mm, ribbed, hairy, brown; corona inconspicuous; pappus 5-7 times as long as achene. 2n = 34.{\i  Dry, rocky places in mountains. S.W. Europe, Sicilia.} Ga Hs Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. J. taygetea} Halácsy, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  11}: 163 (1912). Like {\b 15} but leaves always pinnatifid- capitula globose; involucral bracts oblong-lanceolate to broadly lanceolate, shortly acuminate, straight and appressed, strongly keeled at base, purple distally and green at base.{\i  Mountains of Greece and Bulgaria.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Perhaps a subspecies of {\b 15} or of {\b J. cadmea} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 4}): 22 (1844), from Asia, but the achene is unknown.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. J. fontqueri} Cuatrec.,{\i  Bol. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat.}{\b  27}({\b 2}): 223 (1927). Rhizome thickened distally, somewhat creeping, scaly. Acaulescent or stems up to 4 cm, leafless. Leaves ovate or ovate-oblong, petiolate, shortly pubescent or subglabrous above arachnoid-tomentose beneath. Capitula 3-4 cm, globose or ovoid-globose. Involucral bracts lanceolate, acuminate, unequal, straight and appressed, smooth or finely veined, shortly pubescent, green, herbaceous. Achenes 4-6 mm, finely and closely ribbed or almost smooth; corona absent; pappus up to twice as long as achene. {\i Limestone rocks,} c. 2000 {\i m. • S. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Magina}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 117.          Carduus}            L.
\par   

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. do Amaral Franco; key prepared by M.L. Rocha Afonso.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals to perennials with spiny-winged stems. Leaves spinose-dentate, subentire to pinnatisect. Capitula depressed-globose to cylindrical; involucral bracts usually in many rows, more or less densely imbricate, spine-tipped, glabrous to densely arachnoid-hairy; receptacle densely setose. Florets purple, rarely pink or white; corolla with slender tube and the limb with 1 lobe more or less longer than the others. Anthers sagittate, with slender, entire or lacerate basal appendages. Achenes 3-10 mm, glabrous, smooth or with 5-10 ribs; pappus of many rows of setae which are united at base into a ring, unequal, the inner the longest.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: J. Briquet & F. Cavillier in E. Burnat,{\i  Flore des Alpes Maritimes}{\b  7}: 69-83. Genève. 1931. C. Favarger & P. Küpfer, {\i Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges.}{\b  80}: 269-280 (1970). W. Gugler,{\i  Mitt. Bayer. Bot. Ges.}{\b  2}: 136-140; 145-156; 158-172 (1908). S.M.A. Kazmi, {\i Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}){\b  5}: 279-550 (1964). H. Niklefeld,{\i  Mitteilungsbl. Naturw. Ver. Steierm. Florist. Arbeitsgem.}{\b  14}: 1-6 (1969).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Descriptions of leaves, unless otherwise stated, refer to the middle cauline. The 1-2 outer rows of involucral bracts are termed{\i  outer bracts}, then follow 2-4 rows of {\i middle bracts} and inside these are 1-2 rows of{\i  inner bracts}, the latter always thinner and more intensely coloured than the remainder. Descriptions of bracts, unless otherwise stated, refer to the middle bracts.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla-tube widened above into an ellipsoid cup up to
\par
  2(-3) mm; involucre oblong or cylindrical
\par
2 Peduncle more than 3 cm
\par

\par
220}
\par