{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 52 Corolla 16-20 mm
\par
53 Involucral bracts at least 1·5 mm wide ........................... ({\b 1-8}). {\b nutans} group
\par
53 Involucral bracts not more than 1·5 mm wide
\par
54 Leaves with both multicellular and unicellular hairs
\par
   beneath; peduncle absent or not more than 2 cm ...................... {\b 19. litigiosus}
\par
54 Leaves with only unicellular hairs beneath;
\par
   peduncle 2-15 cm
\par
55 Inner bracts abruptly contracted above middle ...................... {\b 28. candicans}
\par
55 Inner bracts not contracted above middle ................................. {\b 29. collinus}
\par
52 Corolla 20-30 mm
\par
56 Leaves densely hairy above
\par
57 Stem only with multicellular hairs; leaves with at 
\par
   least 12 pairs of lobes ................................................................ {\b 20. euboicus}
\par
57 Stem with both multicellular and unicellular hairs;
\par
   leaves with not more than 12 pairs of lobes
\par
58 Leaves with only multicellular hairs beneath; inner 
\par
   bracts 5-veined .................................................................. ({\b 1-8}). {\b nutans} group
\par
58 Leaves with both multicellular and unicellular hairs
\par
   beneath; inner bracts 1-veined .................................................. {\b 24. uncinatus}
\par
56 Leaves subglabrous above
\par
59 Outer and middle involucral bracts strongly recurved 
\par
   at middle ................................................................................. {\b 22. nigrescens}
\par
59 Outer and middle involucral bracts imbricate or 
\par
   slightly recurved
\par
60 Leaves with crispate hairs beneath; capitula mostly
\par
   pedunculate ...................................................................... ({\b 1-8}). {\b nutans} group
\par
60 Leaves with straight hairs beneath; capitula mostly 
\par
   sessile ................................................................................ {\b 10. chrysacanthus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. CARDUUS. Capitula depressed-globose to campanulate, often large and pedunculate, persistent, corolla-tube widened above into an oblong cup (2-)2·5-5 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 1-8}). {\b C. nutans} group. Perennials or biennials up to 150 cm. Stem glabrous to densely arachnoid-hairy; wings triangular or palmate, with an apical spine up to 12 mm. Leaves pinnatifid or pinnatisect, glabrous to densely arachnoid-hairy on both surfaces. Capitula large or medium, subglobose or depressed globose. Peduncles up to 22 cm, stout or slender. Involucral bracts often distinctly constricted in the proximal part, deflexed to erect and imbricate; inner bracts 1- to 5-veined. Corolla (16-)20-30 mm. Achenes 3-5 mm; pappus 13-25 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A difficult group in need of further study. Though a few extreme taxa are easily recognized, there is considerable variation in hairiness, leaf-size, spine-length, peduncle-diameter, width and shape of bracts, and corolla-length. This variation is almost continuous and intermediates between taxa can be found.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Appendages of bracts 4-8 mm wide, distinctly wider than the claw, 
\par
  velvet-puberulent dorsally; peduncles up to 22 cm ..................... {\b 4. thoermeri}
\par
1 Appendages of bracts 1·5-5 mm wide, not wider than the claw, 
\par
  glabrous or very sparsely puberulent dorsally; peduncles up to 15 cm
\par
2 Pappus 13-18 mm
\par
3 Leaves with 8-12 pairs of lobes; involucral bracts with
\par
  midvein raised in the distal 5/6 ................................................ {\b 6. micropterus}
\par
3 Leaves with 6-8 pairs of lobes; involucral bracts with
\par
  midvein raised in the distal 1/2-2/3
\par
4 Capitula umbilicate at base; peduncle c. 3 mm in diameter ............ {\b 5. nutans}
\par
4 Capitula truncate at base; peduncle not more than 1·5 mm
\par
  in diameter .................................................................................. {\b 8. sandwithii}
\par
2 Pappus 18-24 mm
\par
5 Involucral bracts with an obscure mid-vein .................................... {\b 5. nutans}
\par
5 Involucral bracts with a raised mid-vein
\par
6 Corolla 20-25 mm; peduncle 1-2 mm in diameter ........................ {\b 7. broteroi}
\par
6 Corolla 25-30 mm; peduncle 2-4 mm in diameter
\par
7 Veins of leaf raised throughout their length ...................... {\b 1. macrocephalus} 
\par
7 Veins of leaf raised only in distal ½ of their length
\par
8 Outer and middle involucral bracts usually arcuate-recurved . {\b 2. granatensis} 
\par
8 Outer and middle involucral bracts strongly deflexed ............... {\b 3. taygeteus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. macrocephalus} Desf., {\i Fl. Atl.}{\b  2}: 245 (1799). Biennial. Stem greyish-arachnoid-hairy; wings up to 5 mm, triangular-acute. Leaves more or less densely arachnoid-hairy, with short, crispate multicellular hairs, with 6-10(-12) pairs of lobes, each with an apical spine up to 12 mm. Outer and middle involucral bracts recurved or patent in their distal 2/3, 3-5 mm wide at base, with a prominent mid-vein above the constriction, tapering to a rigid spine up to 7 mm; inner bracts as long as inner middle. Achenes compressed, rugulose; apical prominence shortly stipitate.{\i  Roadsides and waste places. C. & E. Mediterranean region}. Gr It Ju Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucral bracts 15-25 mm, distinctly shorter than 
\par
  florets; wings of stem entire, with apical spine not 
\par
  more than 5 mm ................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b siculus}
\par
1 Involucral bracts 25-45 mm, as long as or longer than
\par
  florets; wings of stem usually 3-partite, with apical
\par
  spine not more than 10 mm
\par
2 Involucral bracts recurved, conduplicate-canaliculate
\par
  in distal 2/3 .............................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b macrocephalus}
\par
2 Involucral bracts appressed-patent, flat .......................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b sporadum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b macrocephalus}: Plant up to 150 cm. Capitula 30-40 × 40-50 mm; peduncles with scattered clusters of spines; involucral bracts longer than florets, constricted 1/4 of way from base, ovate-lanceolate, long-subulate; inner bracts 3-veined.{\i  Sardegna, S. Italy, W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sporadum} (Halácsy) Franco, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 48 (1975) ({\i C. nutans} var. {\i sporadum} Halácsy): Like ({\b a}) but capitula 40-55 × 60-80 mm, with bracts not longer than florets. •{\i  N.W. Aegean region} ({\i Yioura}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b siculus} Franco, {\i loc. cit.} (1975): Plant up to 50 cm. Capitula 25-40 × 30-45 mm; peduncles smooth; involucral bracts shorter than florets, constricted 2/5 of way from base, lanceolate-acuminate, more or less patent; inner bracts 5-veined.{\i  Dolomitic soils. • Sicilia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. granatensis} Willk.,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  30}: 113 (1859). Perennial up to 70 cm. Stem arachnoid-hairy; wings up to 6 mm wide, palmate, with an apical spine up to 10 mm. Leaves with sinuate multicellular hairs beneath, with 8-10 pairs of triangular lobes, each ending in a spine up to 12 mm. Capitula 30-50 × 40-80 mm, distinctly umbilicate at base; peduncles smooth; outer and middle involucral bracts usually more or less imbricate downwards, slightly constricted 1/5 of way from base, 2-4 mm wide and orbicular-ovate at the base, lanceolate-subulate above, with the mid-vein raised in the distal 4/5 and tapering into a spine up to 4 mm; inner bracts longer than inner middle; middle bracts 12-20 mm. Achenes swollen, rugulose; apical prominence shortly stipitate. {\i Mountain slopes; calcicole. • S. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. taygeteus} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 3}): 42 (1856). Like {\b 2} but capitula 30-40 × 40-50 mm; peduncles with scattered clusters of spines; outer and middle involucral bracts strongly deflexed and imbricate downwards, long-attenuate-subulate, flattened or more or less conduplicate distally; middle bracts not constricted; corolla 23-30 mm.{\i  Rocky places. Greece and N. Aegean region.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b taygeteus} ({\i C. nutans} subsp. {\i taygeteus} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Hayek): Outer and middle involucral bracts deflexing at the top of their proximal 1/3, the appendage 10-18 mm and ending
\par

\par
222}
\par