{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Wings of stem with apical spines not more than 1 mm;
\par
  cauline, leaves with 8-12 pairs of obtuse or rounded 
\par
  lobes ......................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b lobulatiformis}
\par
1 Wings of stem with apical spines 1-2 mm; cauline leaves
\par
  with 10-20 pairs of acute lobes
\par
2 Wings of stem triangular or palmate, with an apical spine
\par
  1·5-2 mm; cauline leaves with 8-14 pairs of semi-hastate
\par
  lobes; capitula 20-40 mm in diameter; peduncles
\par
  more than 10 cm  ...............................................................  ({\b b}) subsp. {\b kerneri}
\par
2 Wings of stem semi-hastate, with an apical spine 1-1·5 mm;
\par
  cauline leaves with 14-20 pairs of 3-partite lobes; capitula
\par
 10-15 mm in diameter; peduncles less than 10 cm
\par
3 Lower leaves with 22-25 pairs of lobes; involucral bracts with
\par
   mid-vein raised only in the distal ½ inner bracts acute .. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b scardicus}
\par
3 Lower leaves with 18-22 pairs of lobes; involucral bracts
\par
    with mid-vein raised throughout its length; inner 
\par
  bracts subulate ...................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b austro-orientalis}
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b lobulatiformis} (Csürös & E. I. Nyárády) Soó, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  85}: 454 (1974) ({\i C. lobulatiformis} Csárös & E. I. Nyárády): Wings of stem narrow, confluent or slightly lobed, the spines up to 1 mm. Lower leaves up to 12 × 6·5 cm, with 8-12 pairs of obtuse or rounded lobes each with an apical spine 1·5-2·5 mm. Peduncle 10-25 cm, sparsely arachnoid-hairy; capitula 15-20 × 15-30 mm, subglobose; involucral bracts gradually tapered into a spine 0·3-0·5 mm, with the mid-vein raised throughout its length; inner bracts acute.{\i  S. Carpathians}.
\par
  
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b kerneri}: Wings of stem triangular or palmate, with an apical spine 1·5-2 mm. Lower leaves up to 14 × 3 cm, with c. 14 pairs of semi-hastate lobes each with an apical spine 1·5-2·5 mm. Peduncle 15-30 cm, sparsely arachnoid-hairy; capitula 20-25 × 20-40 mm, subglobose; involucral bracts subacute to subobtuse, with a spine 0·3-0·5 mm, with the mid-vein raised throughout its length; inner bracts acute. {\i Up to }1800{\i  m. S. & E.Carpathians}.
\par
  
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b scardicus} (Griseb.) Kazmi,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}) {\b 5}: 417 (1964) ({\i C. scardicus} (Griseb.) Wettst.): Wings of stem semi-hastate, with an apical spine 1-1·5 mm. Lower leaves up to 20 × 3·5 cm, with 22-25 pairs of 3-partite lobes; cauline with 15-20 pairs of 3-partite lobes each with an apical spine 1-1·5 mm. Peduncle 3-8 cm, densely arachnoid-hairy; capitula 15-25 × 10-15 mm, ovoid; involucral bracts slightly contracted at the middle and also at the subobtuse apex, with an apical spine 0·1-0·3 mm, with the mid-vein raised in the distal only; inner bracts acute. {\i Above} 2000{\i  m. S. W. Jugoslavia, N.E. Albania}.
\par
  
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b austro-orientalis} Franco, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 49 (1975): Wings of stem semi-hastate, with an apical spine 1-1·5 mm. Lower leaves up to 20 × 5·5 cm, with (8-)14-20 pairs of 3-partite lobes; cauline with 14-20 pairs of 3-partite lobes and with an apical spine 1-1·5 mm. Peduncle 1·5-5 cm, greyish-tomentose; capitula 15-25 × 10-15 mm, ovoid; involucral bracts contracted only at the subobtuse apex, with an apical spine 0·1-0·3 mm, with the mid-vein raised throughout its length; inner bracts subulate.{\i  N. & W. Bulgaria, Macedonia}.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. C. affinis} Guss.,{\i  Pl. Rar.} 334 (1826). Perennial up to 100 cm. Stem more or less hairy; wings small, triangular, with an apical spine up to 10 mm. Leaves oblanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, glabrous or glabrescent above, hairy with sinuate unicellular hairs beneath, with 8-10 pairs of lanceolate-acuminate lobes, each with an apical spine up to 7 mm. Capitula 10-25 × 10-20 mm, globose-ovoid, corymbosely arranged in the upper 1/5 of the stem; peduncles up to 18 cm and 3 mm in diameter; involucral bracts 0·75-1·5 mm wide, imbricate or the outer somewhat patent, linear-subulate, with the mid-vein raised throughout its length; inner bracts 1¼ times as long as the inner middle bracts. Corolla 18-20 mm. Achenes 3-4 mm, more or less swollen, nearly smooth; apical prominence distinct, sessile, subglobose cylindrical, 5-lobed; pappus 9-13 mm.{\i  Mountain woods and grassland. • C. & S. Appennini.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b affinis}: Stem arachnoid-hairy. Leaves white-tomentose beneath. Involucral bracts with apical spine 0·3-0·5 mm; inner bracts veinless. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b brutius} (Porta) Kazmi, {\i Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}){\b  5}: 423 (1964): Stem subglabrous. Leaves greyish-green and very sparsely arachnoid-hairy beneath. Involucral bracts with apical spine 0·5-1 mm; inner bracts 1-veined. Calabria.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 33. C. adpressus} C.A. Meyer, {\i Verz. Pfl. Cauc.} 71 (1831) ({\i C. rhodopaeus} Velen.). Perennial up to 100 cm. Stem glabrous or sparsely hairy; wings up to 10 mm wide, triangular, lobed, with an apical spine up to 2 mm. Leaves oblanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, glabrous or glabrescent above, with multicellular hairs along the mid-vein and sparsely arachnoid-hairy on the margins beneath, with 8-10 pairs of irregularly palmate-lobulate lobes, each with an apical spine 2-3 mm. Capitula 20-30 mm in diameter, globose-ovoid; peduncles up to 18 cm and 3 mm in diameter; involucral bracts 0·75-1·5 mm wide, imbricate, linear-subulate, subacute but slightly contracted into a spine 0·5-1 mm, with the mid-vein raised in the proximal ¾; inner bracts 1 1/3 times as long as the inner middle, with the mid-vein raised in the proximal ¾. Corolla 16-18 mm. Achenes 4-5 mm, swollen, rugose; apical prominence sessile, subglobose-cylindrical, 5-lobed; pappus 9-13 mm.{\i  Mountain rocks. S. Bulgaria }({\i C. Rodopi}). Bu. ({\i Anatolia, W. Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 34. C. argyroa} Biv.,{\i  Stirp. Rar. Sic. Descr. }{\b 1}: 7 (1813). Annual up to 75 cm. Stem sparsely arachnoid-hairy; wings up to 12 mm wide, triangular, lobed, with an apical spine up to 7 mm. Leaves oblanceolate to lanceolate, glabrescent above, arachnoid-hairy with sinuate unicellular hairs beneath, with 3-5 pairs of more or less triangular lobes, lobulate on the upper margin, each with an apical spine up to 7 mm. Capitula 10-20 × 10-15 mm, campanulate, subsessile or with peduncle up to 2·5 cm and 2 mm in diameter, mostly in clusters of 3; involucral bracts closely imbricate, the outer and middle 0·75-1·5 mm wide, linear-subulate, glabrous or subglabrous, the margin narrowly scarious, the mid-vein raised in the distal ½; inner bracts 1 1/3 times as long as the inner middle, 3-veined at the widened scarious, acuminate apex. Corolla 10-14 mm. Achenes 3-4 mm, swollen, rugulose; apical prominence shortly stipitate, 5-lobed; pappus 13-15 mm. 2n = 26. {\i Waste places. S. Italy, Sicilia, S. Sardegna.} It Sa Si
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 35. C. bourgeanus} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 62 (1852). Annual up to 40 cm. Stem arachnoid-hairy; wings up to 4 mm wide, triangular-dentate with an apical spine up to 5 mm. Leaves oblanceolate or lanceolate, sparsely hairy above, greyish arachnoid-hairy beneath, with straight unicellular hairs and a few multicellular hairs, with 6-8 pairs of broadly triangular, usually lobulate lobes, each with an apical spine up to 5 mm. Capitula 15-20 × 10-20 mm, campanulate, subsessile, or with peduncle up to 1 cm and 2 mm in diameter; involucral bracts closely imbricate, the outer and middle 0·5-1·25 mm wide, linear-subulate, with narrowly scarious margin, the mid-vein raised in the distal 2/3; inner bracts 3-veined. Corolla 12-15 mm. Achenes 3-4 mm, swollen, nearly smooth; apical prominence sessile, cylindrical, entire; pappus 11-13 mm. {\i Roadsides and waste places. • C., S. & S.E. Spain, S.E. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par
229}
\par