{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 in a spine 2-4 mm; inner bracts slightly exceeding the upper middle.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except the islands of the N. Aegean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b insularis} Franco,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 48 (1975): Outer and middle involucral bracts recurved at the top of their proximal ¼, the appendage 20-30 mm, ending in a spine 4-7 mm; inner bracts shorter than upper middle.{\i  N. Aegean region} ({\i Limnos and Samothraki}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. thoermeri} Weinm., {\i Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou} {\b 10}({\b 7}): 69 (1837) ({\i C. nutans} auct., non L., {\i C. leiophyllus} Petrovic). Up to 150 cm; stem glabrous to sparsely arachnoid-hairy; wings up to 12 mm, triangular-dentate, with an apical spine up to 10 mm. Leaves glabrous, or with sparse, short, crispate multicellular hairs beneath, with 4-8 pairs of broadly triangular lobes, each with an apical spine up to 8 mm. Capitula 35-50 × 60-80 mm, depressed globose; involucral bracts oblong below and distinctly widened into a flat, ovate-lanceolate to ovate appendage 10-22 × 4-8 mm, with apical spine 1·5-6 mm; inner bracts 1- to 3-veined, as long as or slightly longer than inner middle. Corolla 24-36 mm. Achenes 5-6 mm, compressed; pappus 18-26 mm.{\i  Dry pastures and waste places. E.C., E. & S.E. Europe; casual in N. Europe and perhaps becoming naturalized.} Al Bu Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, ?K, ?E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. nutans} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 821 (1753). Up to 150 cm; stem more or less arachnoid-hairy; wings up to 10 mm, triangular or palmate, with an apical spine up to 8 mm. Leaves more or less sparsely hairy to lanuginous beneath, with crispate multicellular hairs, with 6-10 pairs of usually palmate lobes. Capitula 20-45 × 20-65 mm, depressed-globose; inner involucral bracts slightly longer than the inner middle, obscurely 3-veined. Corolla 16-24(-28) mm. Achenes 4-5 mm, swollen; pappus 13-24 mm. 2n = 16. {\i W. & C. Europe, northwards to Scotland, and extending to Sicilia, C. Jugoslavia and Ukraine.} Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs It Ju Rs (W, ?K) Si [Da Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spines on wings of stem and leaf-lobes not more than
\par
  4 mm; pappus 18-24 mm ................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b platylepis}
\par
1 Spines on wings of stem and leaf-lobes not more than 8
\par
  mm pappus 13-18 mm
\par
2 Leaves deeply lobed, with distant and usually palmate 
\par
  lobes; capitula 20-40(-50) mm in diameter .......................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b nutans}
\par
2 Leaves lobed ½ (rarely o of way to midrib, with ovate,
\par
  obtuse, not palmate, contiguous lobes; capitula 
\par
  40-60 mm in diameter ....................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b alpicola}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nutans}: Leaves 6- to 8-lobed, with strongly raised veins beneath. Capitula 20-40(-50) mm in diameter; involucral bracts 1·5-3(-4) mm wide, with the mid-vein raised in the distal 2/3; outer and middle bracts suberect to deflexed. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b alpicola} (Gillot) Chassagne & J. Arènes, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  83}: 411 (1936): Leaves 6- to 8-lobed, the veins raised for only the distal half of their length beneath. Capitula 40-60 mm in diameter; involucral bracts 3-5 mm wide, the mid-vein raised on the lanceolate appendage; outer and middle bracts usually appressed. •{\i  S.W. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b platylepis} (Reichenb. & Sauter) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 411 (1879) ({\i C. platylepis} Reichenb. & Sauter): Leaves 8- to 10-lobed, the veins raised for only the distal half of their length beneath. Capitula 40-65 mm in diameter; involucral bracts 2-4 mm wide with an obscure mid-vein in the distal 1/3. •{\i  E., W. & S.C. Alps}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. micropterus} (Borbás) Teyber,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  60}: 308 (1910). Up to 80 cm; stem densely arachnoid-hairy; wings up to 5 mm wide, undulate, triangular, with an apical spine up to 4 mm. Leaves densely arachnoid-hairy beneath, with crispate multicellular and a few unicellular hairs, with 8-12 approximate pairs of lobes, each with an apical spine up to 5 mm. Capitula 25-35 × 30-55 mm,subglobose; involucral bracts lanceolate-subulate, smooth; inner bracts obscurely 3- to 5-veined. Corolla 20-25 (-30) mm. Achenes 3-4 mm, compressed; pappus 13-18 mm. {\i Dry places. • W. Jugoslavia and Albania; C. & S. Italy.} Al It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b micropterus} ({\i C. nutans} subsp. {\i micropterus} (Borbás) Hayek): Lower leaves up to 12 × 2·5 cm, with distant lobes; cauline with 8-10 patent, ovate-lanceolate, entire or slightly lobulate lobes. Outer involucral bracts 1·5-2 mm wide, usually with 4-8 pairs of setae; middle bracts 1¼ times as long as inner.{\i  W. Jugoslavia and Albania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b perspinosus} (Fiori) Kazmi, {\i Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}){\b  5}: 337 (1964): Lower leaves up to 14 × 4 cm, with approximate but not overlapping lobes; cauline with 10-12 oblique lobes deeply lobulate on the upper margin into narrow oblong-lanceolate lobules. Outer involucral bracts c. 1 mm wide, without setae; middle bracts ¾ as long as inner. {\i C. & S. Italy}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. broteroi} Welw. ex Coutinho, {\i Fl. Port.} 647 (1913). Like {\b 6} but stem less densely arachnoid-hairy, with flat, palmate wings, their lobes with apical spines up to 7 mm; leaves oblanceolate to lanceolate, sparsely arachnoid-hairy beneath, with 8-10 distant pairs of palmate lobes with acute lobules, each with an apical spine up to 10 mm; capitula 30-50 × 35-60 mm, deeply umbilicate at base; peduncles 1-2 mm in diameter; involucral bracts suberect to erect and recurved, not constricted, densely arachnoid hairy, without setae, the outer 1-1·5 mm wide, the middle 2-2·5 mm wide, with mid-vein throughout, minutely verruculose in the proximal 1/3-1/2; inner bracts 1 1/8 times as long as the inner middle; achenes 4-5 mm; pappus 18-22 mm. 2n = 20.{\i  Dry pastures and scrub; calcicole. • C.& S.Portugal,S.W.Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. sandwithii} Kazmi,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}) {\b 5}: 350 (1964). Like {\b 6} but stem less densely arachnoid-hairy; leaves arachnoid-hairy, with a few unicellular hairs beneath, with 5-8 pairs of semi-palmate short lobes, each with an apical spine up to 4 mm and lateral spinules set at 45°; capitula 25-30 × 40-45 mm, truncate at base; peduncles up to 1·5 mm in diameter; involucral bracts 1·5-2·5 mm wide, minutely verruculose in the proximal ½, the mid-vein raised in the distal ½; inner bracts 1¼ times as long as the inner middle; achenes 4-5 mm, minutely rugulose-punctulate.{\i  Dry waste places. • C. Spain, N.E. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. platypus} Lange,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horto Naun.}{\b  1857}: 26 (1857). Biennial up to 85 cm. Stem sparsely arachnoid-hairy; wings up to 8 mm wide, with wide triangular lobes with an apical spine up to 7 mm. Leaves oblong or oblong-lanceolate, glabrous or glabrescent above, with sparse, crispate multicellular hairs on the veins beneath, with 6-8 pairs of ovate, subobtuse lobes, each with an apical spine up to 7 mm. Capitula 30-40 × 30-60 mm, subglobose, not or scarcely umbilicate at base; peduncles up to 15 cm and 3 mm in diameter; outer and middle involucral bracts not constricted, the patent distal 2/3 usually curled in an S-shape, lanceolate, acute; middle bracts 2-3 mm wide, with the mid-vein raised in the upper 2/3; inner bracts 3-veined, slightly longer than inner middle; all bracts glabrescent. Corolla 18-25 mm. Achenes 5-6 mm, swollen, minutely rugulose-punctulate; apical prominence sessile, subentire; pappus 15-20 mm. {\i Cultivated ground, waste places and streamsides. • N.W. & C. Spain; E.C. & N.E. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Variable, even within the same population, in lobing and hairiness of leaves, size of plants etc. See R. Fernandes,{\i  Mem. Soc. Brot.}{\b  9}: 101(1953).
\par

\par
223}
\par