{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3 Corolla at least 15 mm; stem with both stout and 
\par
  slender ribs ............................................................................ {\b 40. corymbosus}
\par
3 Corolla not more than 15 mm; stem with stout ribs only
\par
4 Involucral bracts distinctly contracted at middle,
\par
  without thickened margin ......................................................... {\b 42. argentatus}
\par
4 Involucral bracts tapering from at least their basal 1/3,
\par
  with thickened margin
\par
5 Involucral bracts widened in basal ¾, not more than
\par
  0·5 mm wide above ................................................................... {\b 41. acicularis}
\par
5 Involucral bracts widened in basal 1/3, at least 1·5 mm
\par
  wide above ........................................................................ {\b 45. pycnocephalus} 
\par
2 Peduncle absent or not more than 3 cm
\par
6 Leaves glabrous or with very sparse unicellular hairs 
\par
  only beneath
\par
7 Leaf-veins raised beneath throughout their length;
\par
  involucral bracts not scarious .............................................. {\b 47. cephalanthus}
\par
7 Leaf-veins raised beneath only in their distal ½;
\par
  involucral bracts scarious at margin .................................. {\b 48. fasciculiflorus}
\par
6 Leaves arachnoid-hairy with both multicellular and
\par
  unicellular hairs beneath
\par
8 Leaves with 6-10 pairs of lobes
\par
9 Stem subglabrous; bracts not more than 1·25 mm wide ...... {\b 43. meonanthus}
\par
9 Stem arachnoid-hairy; bracts at least 1·5 mm wide ............... {\b 44. tenuiflorus}
\par
8 Leaves with 2-5 pairs of lobes
\par
10 Inner involucral bracts shorter than the inner middle ............ {\b 41. acicularis}
\par
10 Inner involucral bracts longer than the inner middle
\par
11 Apical spine of leaf-lobes up to 12 mm; involucral 
\par
   bracts with mid-vein raised at least in distal ½ ............... {\b 45. pycnocephalus}
\par
11 Apical spine of leaf-lobes up to 30 mm; involucral 
\par
   bracts with mid-vein raised only in the distal 1/3 ...................... {\b 46. australis}
\par
1.Corolla-tube widened above into an oblong cup at least 2 mm; 
\par
  involucre globose to campanulate, very rarely cylindrical
\par
12 Plant with most spines more than 5 mm
\par
13 Stem glabrous or subglabrous
\par
14 Outer and middle involucral bracts curled in an S-shape .......... {\b 9. platypus}
\par
14 Outer and middle involucral bracts not curled in an S-shape
\par
15 Corolla less than 15 mm ............................................................ {\b 34. argyroa}
\par
15 Corolla at least 15 mm
\par
16 Involucral bracts at least 2 mm wide ............................. ({\b 1-8}). {\b nutans} group
\par
16 Involucral bracts not more than 2 mm wide
\par
17 Peduncles absent or not more than 3 cm ................. ({\b 14-16}). {\b tmoleus} group
\par
17 Peduncles more than 3 cm .................................... ({\b 25-27}). {\b defloratus} group
\par
13 Stem arachnoid-hairy to tomentose
\par
18 Stem with unicellular hairs only
\par
19 Capitula cylindrical, not more than 10 mm in diameter ......... {\b 37. asturicus}
\par
19 Capitula campanulate, usually more than 10 mm in 
\par
   diameter
\par
20 Leaves with 6-8 pairs of lobes ............................................. {\b 38. carpetanus}
\par
20 Leaves with 10-20 pairs of lobes ......................................... {\b 39. carlinoides}
\par
18 Stem with multicellular and unicellular hairs, or only
\par
   with multicellular hairs
\par
21 Stem with multicellular hairs only ................................ ({\b 1-8}). {\b nutans} group
\par
21 Stem with multicellular and unicellular hairs
\par
22 Involucral bracts at least 2 mm wide
\par
23 Veins of leaf raised throughout their length
\par
24 Outer and middle involucral bracts not curled in an
\par
   S-shape ............................................................................ ({\b 1-8}). {\b nutans} group
\par
24 Outer and middle involucral bracts curled in an S-shape .......... {\b 9. platypus}
\par
23 Veins of leaf raised only in the distal ½ of their length 
\par
25 Pappus 20-25 mm .......................................................... ({\b 1-8}). {\b nutans} group 
\par
25 Pappus 12-18 mm ........................................................... {\b 10. chrysacanthus}
\par
22 Involucral bracts up to 2 mm wide
\par
26 Leaves with 8-14 pairs of lobes
\par
27 Capitula sessile, usually clustered ................................... {\b 13. ramosissimus}
\par
27 Capitula pedunculate, usually corymbosely arranged ................. {\b 32. affinis}
\par
26 Leaves with 6-8 pairs of lobes
\par
28 Leaves sparsely hairy to lanuginous beneath; involucral
\par
   bracts gradually acuminate .............................................. ({\b 1-8}). {\b nutans} group
\par
28 Leaves densely tomentose or lanate beneath; involucral
\par
   bracts acuminate-subulate
\par
29 Leaf-lobes caudate with oblong to oblong-linear lobules
\par
   .................................................................................... ({\b 14-16}).{\b  tmoleus} group
\par
29 Leaf-lobes with ovate-obtuse lobules ..................................... {\b 19. litigiosus} 
\par
12 Plant with most spines less than 5 mm 30 stem glabrous
\par
   or subglabrous
\par
31 Outer involucral bracts curled in an S-shape
\par
32 Middle involucral bracts at least 1·5 mm wide .......................... {\b 9. platypus}
\par
32 Middle involucral bracts not more than 1·5 mm wide
\par
33 Pappus 13-16 mm ................................................................ {\b 23. hamulosus}
\par
33 Pappus 8-13 mm
\par
34 Middle involucral bracts about as long as the inner;
\par
   capitula mostly sessile and clustered ........................................ {\b 17. personata}
\par
34 Middle involucral bracts shorter than the inner;
\par
   capitula solitary and mostly long-pedunculate
\par
35 Leaves with 6-8 distant pairs of lobes ..................................... {\b 30. carduelis}
\par
35 Leaves with 8-10(-15) approximate pairs of lobes, or 
\par
   entire to dentate ...................................................... ({\b 25-27}). {\b defloratus} group
\par
31 Outer involucral bracts not curled in an S-shape
\par
36 Outer and middle involucral bracts 2-8 mm wide
\par
37 Peduncle more than 3 cm .............................................. ({\b 1-8}). {\b nutans} group
\par
37 Peduncle absent ...................................................................... {\b 11. aurosicus}
\par
36 Outer and middle involucral bracts 0·2-2 mm wide
\par
38 Pappus 8-13 mm
\par
39 Capitula solitary, distinctly pedunculate ............. ({\b 25-27}). {\b defloratus }group
\par
39 Capitula clustered, usually sessile
\par
40 Leaves with 10-14 pairs of lobes ..................................... {\b 13. ramosissimus}
\par
40 Leaves with 6-8 pairs of lobes ................................................... {\b 18. crispus}
\par
38 Pappus 13-15 mm
\par
41 Leaves with both multicellular and unicellular hairs beneath .... {\b 31. kerneri}
\par
41 Leaves with only unicellular hairs beneath, or glabrous
\par
42 Involucral bracts with mid-vein raised only in the distal ½ . {\b 21. vivariensis}
\par
42 Involucral bracts with mid-vein raised throughout its 
\par
   length ...................................................................... ({\b 25-27}). {\b defloratus} group
\par
30 Stem arachnoid-hairy to tomentose
\par
43 Leaves glabrous to subglabrous beneath
\par
44 Pappus 9-13 mm
\par
45 Capitula sessile; leaves with 6-8 pairs of lobes .................. {\b 12. acanthoides}
\par
45 Capitula long-pedunculate; leaves with 8-10 pairs of
\par
   lobes ......................................................................................... {\b 33. adpressus}
\par
44 Pappus 13-16 mm
\par
46 Leaves with 2-5 pairs of lobes .................................................. {\b 29. collinus}
\par
46 Leaves with 8-12 pairs of lobes
\par
47 Capitula long-pedunculate .................................... ({\b 25-27}). {\b defloratus} group
\par
47 Capitula sessile ................................................................. {\b 36. myriacanthus}
\par
43 Leaves distinctly hairy beneath
\par
48 Corolla 12-16 mm
\par
49 Middle involucral bracts about as long as the inner;
\par
   cauline leaves serrate ................................................................ {\b 17. personata}
\par
49 Middle involucral bracts shorter than the inner;
\par
   cauline leaves lobed
\par
50 Stem with multicellular and unicellular hairs;
\par
   capitula at least 10 mm in diameter, campanulate ................ {\b 35. bourgeanus}
\par
50 Stem with unicellular hairs; capitula not more than 
\par
   10 mm in diameter, cylindrical .................................................. {\b 37. asturicus}
\par
48 Corolla 16-30 mm
\par
51 Involucral bracts with scarious margin ................................. {\b 38. carpetanus}
\par
51 Involucral bracts without scarious margin
\par

\par
221}
\par