{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 marginal spines 0·5-1·7 mm, the curved part minutely spinulose-scabrid on inner surface, the apex smooth; middle bracts slightly widened in apical part or with purple apical appendage 1-2 mm wide, with spinose-ciliate to subscarious-fimbriate margin and usually weak apical spine 1·5-4(-7) mm. Corolla 27-42 mm, purple. Achenes 5-7 mm; pappus 22-34 mm. •{\i  E.C. Europe and S. & W. parts of U.S.S.R.} Cz Po Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. C. boujartii} (Piller & Mitterp.) Schultz Bip.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Wochenbl.}{\b  6}: 205 (1856). Biennial. Leaves sparsely arachnoid-lanate to -tomentose beneath; lobes oblong- to triangular-lanceolate. Capitula few, with usually 1-4 subtending leaves shorter than to slightly exceeding capitulum. Involucre 25-35 × 30-40(-50) mm, sparsely arachnoid-hairy to -lanate; outer bracts recurved; middle patent, with dense marginal spines 0·5-2 mm, with distinct setose spinules up to 0·7 mm on inner surface of the curved part. Corolla 20-26 mm, purple. Achenes 5-5·5 mm; pappus 20-24 mm. •{\i  Romania; Crna Gora and N. Albania}. Al †Hu Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b boujartii}: Stem 80-150 cm. Leaf-lobes with slender apical spine 4-10 mm. Capitula usually solitary on long branches. Middle involucral bracts with marginal spines longer than the width of the bract, slightly widened distally, with weak apical spine 2-3·5 mm.{\i  Romania.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b wettsteinii} Petrak, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  60}: 351 (1910) ({\i C. intraspinulosum} Jáv.): Stem 40-100 cm. Leaf-lobes with stout apical spine 6-15 mm. Capitula solitary or in clusters of 2-3 on short branches. Middle involucral bracts with somewhat dense marginal spines about as long as the width of the bract, scarcely widened distally, with strong apical spine 3-5 mm.{\i  Mountains of Crna Gora and N. Albania}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. C. furiens} Griseb. & Schenk,{\i  Arch. Naturgesch.} ({\i Berlin}) {\b 18} ({\b 1}): 348 (1852). Biennial 80-150 cm. Leaves arachnoid-lanate to -tomentose beneath; lobes oblong to lanceolate or elliptical, with slender apical spine 4-10(-15) mm. Capitula in a rather dense corymb, with 1-5(-8) subtending leaves shorter than to exceeding capitulum. Involucre 20-32 × 25-35 mm, glabrous or sparsely arachnoid-hairy; outer bracts erecto-patent to recurved, the middle suberect to patent, with dense, soft marginal spines 1·5-3 mm, 3-5 times as long as width of bract, with setose spinules up to 1·8 mm on inner surface of the curved part, the apex not widened, with weak apical spine 2-4·5 mm. Corolla 19-26 mm, white or red. Achenes 4-5·5 mm; pappus 17-24 mm. •{\i  Romania and E. Hungary}. Hu Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. C. ciliatum} Moench,{\i  Meth., Suppl.} 221 (1802). Biennial or perennial (50-)100-150 cm. Middle leaves broadly auriculate-semiamplexicaul, decurrent for c. 1 cm, sparsely to densely arachnoid-lanate beneath; lobes narrowly oblong to linear-lanceolate, with slender apical spine 2-7(-10) mm. Capitula few, long-pedunculate to subsessile, with 1-3 subtending leaves shorter than capitulum. Involucre 30-35 × (20-)30-40 mm, glabrous or subglabrous; bracts gradually narrowed from base to apex, with densely pectinate, rigid marginal spines 1-1·5 mm and slender apical spine 2-7 mm; outer numerous, in many rows, sharply deflexed; middle patent to erecto-patent, without ventral spinules. Corolla 20-30 mm, purple. Achenes 4·5-5·5 mm; pappus 20-26 mm. {\i S. part of U.S.S.R.} Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b C. ukranicum} Besser ex DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 635 (1838), recorded from the S.W. part of U.S.S.R., is of doubtful status. It is intermediate between {\b 23} and {\b 24} in many characters and may be a hybrid between {\b 23} (or {\b 24}) and {\b 20}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. C. serrulatum} (Bieb.) Fischer, {\i Cat. Jard. Gorenki} ed. 2, 35 (1812). Like {\b 23} but leaves not decurrent or at most decurrent for 0·5 cm; lobes of middle leaves oblong-elliptical to lanceolate; capitula clustered on short branches, in a corymb; involucre 20-35 × 20-35 mm; bracts with less dense, soft marginal spinules 0·2-0·8 mm and slender apical spine 2-4·5 mm, the outer less numerous, erecto-patent or rarely patent-recurved.{\i  S. part of U.S.S.R., extending to E. Romania.} Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. C. laniflorum} (Bieb.) Fischer, {\i loc. cit.} (1812) (incl. {\i C. sublaniflorum} Soják, {\i C. tauricum} Soják). Perennial 30-80 cm. Leaves not decurrent, subcoriaceous, flat or slightly undulate, sparsely to densely arachnoid-lanate beneath; middle pinnatifid up to ¾ of way to midrib; segments with 1-3 unequal, ovate to oblong or broadly triangular lobes or teeth and slender apical spine 1-7(-10) mm. Capitula solitary or 2-4 clustered on rather short branches, usually with 1-3(-5) subtending leaves much shorter than capitulum. Involucre 20-30 × 20-30 mm, sparsely arachnoid-hairy to -lanate; bracts divided into a wide basal and a narrow acicular to subulate, usually patent apical part, smooth or with remote marginal spinules 0·2-0·8 mm, with rigid apical spine 2-3·5 mm, without spinules on inner surface. Corolla 20-30 mm, purple or pink. Achenes 5-5·5 mm; pappus 15-22 mm. •{\i  S. Krym; Turkey-in-Europe}. Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A variable species in which leaf-division, and the size of leaf-segments and involucral bracts have been used for delimiting several taxa of doubtful validity.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. C. scabrum} (Poiret) Bonnet & Barratte, {\i Cat. Rais. Pl. Vasc. Tunisie} 238 (1896). Perennial (60-)100-200(-400) cm. Leaves very large, decurrent for c. 1 cm, flat, sparsely arachnoid-lanate to -tomentose beneath, pinnatifid for up to ½-way to midrib; segments broadly triangular, with 2-3 shortly triangular lobes or teeth and strong apical spines 3-10 mm. Capitula 1-3 at apex of long branches, in a lax panicle, with 3-6 subtending leaves shorter than to equalling capitulum. Involucre 23-30(-35) × 18-26 mm, sparsely arachnoid-hairy to -lanate; bracts appressed, gradually narrowed into the erecto-patent apical spine 0·5-1(-2) mm. Corolla 22-28 mm, usually pink. Achenes 4·5-5 mm; pappus 17-22 mm.{\i  W. Mediterranean region}. Hs It Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. C. echinatum} (Desf.) DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  5}: 465 (1815). Perennial (15-)20-40 cm. Middle leaves decurrent for c. 1 cm, arachnoid-lanate beneath, pinnatisect; segments deeply divided into 2 slightly divaricate, narrowly to broadly triangular or oblong-triangular lobes with stout apical spines (4-)6-12(-15) mm. Capitula in a corymb, with 2-8 subtending leaves usually exceeding capitulum. Involucre 30-40 × 25-40(-45) mm, sparsely arachnoid-lanate to sparsely arachnoid-hairy; bracts with patent apex and strong apical spine 2-4 mm. Corolla (25-)32-40 mm, purple. Achenes 5-6·5 mm; pappus as long as corolla.{\i  W. Mediterranean region.} Bl Ga Hs Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. C. vulgare} (Savi) Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  5}: 209 (1835-1838) ({\i C. lanceolatum} (L.) Scop., non Hill; incl. {\i C. crinitum} Boiss. ex DC.). Biennial (20-)50-150(-300) cm; stem winged. Leaves decurrent for the whole internode, or the upper less so, sparsely arachnoid-hairy to -tomentose beneath; lobes narrowly lanceolate or narrowly triangular to elliptic-lanceolate, with weak to strong apical spine 2-10(-15) mm. Capitula shortly to long-pedunculate, in a panicle or corymb, usually without subtending leaves. Involucre (25-)30-40 × 20-40 mm, sparsely arachnoid-hairy to -lanate, rarely subglabrous; bracts gradually narrowed into the pungent apical spine 2-3·5 mm. Corolla 26-36 mm, purple. Achenes 3·5-5 mm; pappus 20-30 mm. 2n = 68, 102.{\i  Almost throughout Europe.} All except Cr Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Variable in size and texture of leaves, indumentum branching, and attitude of involucral bracts. On the basis of these
\par

\par
237}
\par