{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 characters several taxa have been described but there is insufficient morphological and chorological delimitation to give them subspecific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. C. italicum} (Savi) DC., {\i Cat. Pl. Horti Monsp.} 96 (1813). Biennial or annual (15-)20-45(-60) cm, usually much-branched; stem winged. Leaves decurrent for about half the length of the internode, sparsely arachnoid-lanate to -tomentose or rarely glabrescent beneath; lobes linear-triangular to narrowly triangular, with slender apical spine 4-12 mm. Capitula crowded at apex of stems and branches, with 3-8 subtending leaves much exceeding capitulum. Involucre 13-20 × 8-15 mm, sparsely arachnoid-hairy to subglabrous; bracts appressed, oblong, with conspicuous vittae, obtuse, with rigid, patent apical spine 2·5-7 mm, the inner with scarious, minutely setulose appendage. Corolla 12-14 mm, purple; tube half as long as limb. Achenes 2·5-3 mm; pappus 9-11 mm.{\i  C. & E. Mediterranean region.} Al Bu Co ?Ga Gr It Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   An isolated species, in appearance and distribution somewhat resembling {\b 59}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CIRSIUM (Sect. {\i Chamaeleon} DC.). Leaves without rigid setae on the upper surface. Florets hermaphrodite, or the outermost functionally male or sterile. Corolla-limb 5-fid to about halfway, about as long as tube. Pappus shorter than, rarely equalling, corolla.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b 30-32}). {\b C. tuberosum} group. Perennial (10-)30-80(-140) cm. Stem simple or sparingly branched, usually leafless above the middle, greyish. Leaves herbaceous, lanceolate or oblong to oblong-elliptical, patent-pubescent above and particularly on the veins beneath, also with arachnoid hairs; lobes with soft (rarely pungent) spines up to 2(-7) mm. Capitula usually solitary, long-pedunculate, rarely in clusters of 2-3, shortly pedunculate to subsessile. Involucre (14-)15-20(-25) × 11-25 mm; bracts with indistinct vittae and weak spinule. Corolla 15-25 mm, purple. Achenes 3-5 mm; pappus 13-21 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The 3 species are closely related and sometimes difficult to distinguish, especially in France and N. Spain, and could probably be treated as subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Roots without tubers; leaves usually lobed, with 
\par
  broadly triangular lobes ............................................................ {\b 30. dissectum}
\par
1 Roots with fusiform tubers; leaves usually pinnatifid 
\par
  to pinnatisect, with oblong, divaricate lobes
\par
2 Involucral bracts usually with patent apex, acute ............... {\b 31. filipendulum}
\par
2 Involucral bracts erect, the outer obtuse ................................. {\b 32. tuberosum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. C. dissectum} (L.) Hill,{\i  Hort. Kew.} 63 (1768) ({\i C. anglicum} (Lam.) DC.). Plant with short rhizome and short stolons; roots cylindrical (rarely somewhat fusiform). Stem usually simple. Leaves semiamplexicaul, lobed or entire (rarely pinnatifid), sparsely arachnoid-hairy above, sparsely to densely arachnoid-lanate-tomentose beneath; segments broadly triangular, dentate to lobed. Capitula 1(-3), pedunculate or subsessile. Involucral bracts appressed, acute. {\i Wet places, usually on peaty soils. W. Europe.} Be Br Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs ?It [Hu No].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. C. filipendulum} Lange,{\i  Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kjøbenhavn}{\b  1861}: 92 (1861). Plant with long subterranean stolons; some roots with fusiform tubers. Stem usually simple. Leaves auriculate-semiamplexicaul, pinnatifid to pinnatisect, rarely lobed, sparsely arachnoid-hairy above, sparsely arachnoid-hairy to -lanate beneath; segments with 3-5 triangular to oblong, dentate lobes, often with pungent spines. Capitula 1-3, pedunculate or rarely subsessile. Involucral bracts acute, usually with patent apex, rarely erect. 2n = 34.{\i  Grassland and heaths. • S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. C. tuberosum} (L.) All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem.}{\b  1}: 151 (1785). Plant with short rhizome; roots with fusiform tubers. Stem with 2-3(-6) long branches or simple. Leaves sessile to semiamplexicaul, deeply pinnatifid to pinnatisect, scarcely arachnoid-hairy above, sparsely arachnoid-hairy beneath; segments with 2-3(-5) oblong to elliptic-lanceolate, dentate lobes. Capitula solitary. Involucral bracts erect; outer obtuse; middle obtuse to acute. 2n = 34.{\i  Usually in rather damp grassland; calcicole. • W. & W.C. Europe, extending to N. Italy}. †Au Br Ga Ge He Hs It *Ju [Be Cz].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. C. rivulare} (Jacq.) All.,{\i  Auct. Fl. Pedem. }10 (1789) ({\i C. tricephalodes} (Lam.) DC.). Perennial (20-)40-100(-120) cm, with fibrous roots. Stem simple or sparingly branched, leafless above the middle or with few small bract-like leaves. Leaves herbaceous, elliptical to oblong-lanceolate, pinnatifid or rarely entire, flat, often incised only at the base, patent-puberulent; segments narrowly oblong to narrowly triangular, lobed or dentate, with weak spinules up to 2 mm. Capitula solitary or in apical clusters of 2-5, sometimes shortly pedunculate, erect. Involucre (13-)15-20(-23) × 15-20(-25) mm; bracts suberect, with distinct vittae; outer with weak spinule; middle usually unarmed. Corolla 14-21 mm, purple; limb divided to more than halfway. Achenes 3·5-5·5 mm; pappus 14-20 mm. 2n = 34. {\i Damp places; somewhat calcifuge. • C. Europe, extending to W. part of U.S.S.R., S. Romania, C. Jugoslavia, N. Italy and locally westwards to the Pyrenees.} Al Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) [Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. C. montanum} (Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd.) Sprengel, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  3}: 376 (1826) ({\i C. tricephalodes} auct., non (Lam.) DC.). Perennial (40-)80-180(-200) cm. Stem simple or sparingly branched above, usually leafless just below apex. Leaves herbaceous, elliptical, pinnatifid, flat, subglabrous; segments narrowly triangular to oblong, dentate to shortly lobed, with weak marginal spinules up to 2 mm. Capitula in apical clusters of 2-8, rarely solitary, usually erect, sometimes exceeded by 1-3 upper leaves. Involucre 15-20 × 14-18(-21) mm; bracts with patent to deflexed apex and conspicuous vittae, with pungent spinule. Corolla 16-25 mm, purple; limb divided to halfway. Achenes 4-5·5 mm; pappus 15-22 mm. {\i Damp woods and meadows. • S. Alps, N. & C. Appennini, mountains of N. Jugoslavia.} Ga It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. C. erisithales} (Jacq.) Scop., {\i Annus Hist.-Nat.}{\b  2}: 62 (1769). Perennial (30-)60-120(-150) cm. Stem usually sparingly branched, leafless above the middle or with few small, bract-like leaves. Leaves herbaceous, oblong-elliptical to elliptical, pinnatisect, flat, pubescent; segments oblong to elliptical, dentate to lobed, with weak spinules up to 2 mm. Capitula solitary or in apical clusters of 2-3(-5), nodding. Involucre (13-)15-20 × 16-22 mm; bracts with conspicuous vittae and a usually patent apex, spinulose. Corolla 14-20(-22) mm, usually yellow. Achenes 4-5 mm; pappus 15-20 mm. 2n = 34. {\i Damp grassland, stony slopes and open woodland; calcicole. • Mountain regions of Europe, from S.C. France and the Carpathians southwards to C. Appennini and E.C. Greece; also in the lowlands of W. margin of U.S.S.R.} Al Au Cz Ga Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. C. appendiculatum} Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 250 (1846). Perennial (50-)100-190 cm. Stem simple or rarely sparingly branched above, usually leafy up to the apex. Lower leaves
\par

\par
238}
\par