{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. morisianum} Reichenb. fil.,{\i  Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  15}: 59 (1852). Biennial (20-)60-100(-150) cm. Leaves narrowly auriculate-semiamplexicaul, sparsely arachnoid-lanate or glabrescent beneath; lobes linear- to lanceolate-triangular, with stout apical spine 5-15(-23) mm. Capitula in a sparingly to much-branched raceme, with 1-5 subtending leaves equalling or slightly exceeding capitulum. Involucre 35-50 × 35-50(-60) mm, sparsely, rarely densely, arachnoid-lanate to glabrescent; bracts narrowing gradually into the stout, patent to recurved, compressed-subulate apical spine 10-30 mm. Corolla 30-35 mm, purple. Achenes 5-6 mm; pappus 20-26 mm. •{\i  S.W. Alps, Appennini.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. richteranum} Gillot,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  27}: li (1880) ({\i C. turbinatum} Gillot). Like {\b 11} but plant 15-50(-60) cm; leaves broadly auriculate-semiamplexicaul; capitula crowded in a corymbose panicle, rarely solitary on few branches, with 5-10 pinnatifid, squarrose-spiny, subtending leaves 1½-3 times as long as capitulum; involucre arachnoid-lanate, the bracts with rather stout, erecto-patent to patent apical spine 4-8 mm; corolla 25-31 mm. •{\i  Pyrenees, Corbières.} Ga ?Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. C. costae} (Sennen & Pau) Petrak,{\i  Biblioth. Bot.} ({\i Stuttgart}){\b  78}: 41 (1912). Biennial 20-80 cm. Leaves broadly auriculate semiamplexicaul, very shortly setose above, sparsely arachnoid lanate to -tomentose beneath; lobes narrowly triangular to linear-triangular, with rather stout apical spine 3-12 mm. Capitula in a sparingly branched raceme, with 3-10 squarrose-spiny subtending leaves shorter to slightly longer than capitulum. Involucre 35-45 × (35-)40-50 mm, glabrous or sparsely arachnoid-hairy, rarely sparsely arachnoid-lanate; middle bracts slightly widened to the spinulose-denticulate apex, with apical spine 2-4 mm. Corolla 34-38 mm, purple. Achenes 5-6 mm; pappus 21-30 mm. •{\i  N.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. C. giraudiasii} Sennen & Pau, {\i Bull. Acad. Int. Géogr. Bot.} ({\i Le Mans}) {\b 18}: 475 (1908). Like {\b 13} but leaves attenuate-sessile or narrowly auriculate-semiamplexicaul, sparsely arachnoid-hairy to glabrous beneath; lobes oblong to lanceolate or narrowly triangular; capitula in a much-branched panicle, with 5-12 subtending leaves usually much longer than capitulum; involucre 25-40 × 25-40(-45) mm; middle bracts with ciliate apex; corolla 24-35 mm. •{\i  C. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. C. eriophorum} (L.) Scop.,{\i  Fl. Carn.} ed. 2,{\b  2}: 130 (1772) (incl. {\i C. chatenieri} Le Grand, {\i C. vandasii} Petrak). Biennial (40-)60-150(-250) cm. Leaves shortly setose above, sparsely arachnoid-lanate to -tomentose beneath; lobes lanceolate, with stout to slender, rigid apical spine (1-)5-12(-25) mm. Capitula usually few, more or less long-pedunculate, in a lax raceme or corymb, with few to numerous subtending leaves shorter than to twice as long as capitulum. Involucre 30-50 × (30-)40-70 mm, usually densely arachnoid-lanate, rarely subglabrous; bracts smooth or with short marginal spinules distally; outer patent to recurved; middle with or without a rhombic to lanceolate apical appendage and a usually weak apical spine (0·5-)1-4(-5) mm. Corolla 25-44 mm, purple. Achenes 4·5-6 mm; pappus 20-33 mm. 2n = 34. •{\i  W. & C. Europe, northwards to N. England, and extending to N. Italy and W. & S. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A very variable species in which many subordinate taxa have been described, particularly in the Balkan peninsula. Most of them refer to various intermediates between {\b 15} and {\b 18} and no subdivision seems advisable in the present stage of knowledge.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. C. odontolepis} Boiss. ex DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  7}: 305 (1838). Biennial (20-)40-100(-150) cm. Leaves with long, patent setae above, sparsely arachnoid-lanate to arachnoid-hairy beneath; lobes narrowly triangular to oblong, with stout apical spine 5-15 mm. Capitula several, shortly pedunculate, rarely solitary, with 5-16 erect, squarrose-spiny subtending leaves exceeding capitulum. Involucre 30-45 × (25-)30-50 mm, sparsely arachnoid-hairy to -lanate; bracts with smooth margin; outer suberect; middle with rhombic to lanceolate, scarious-fimbriate appendage and weak apical spine 1-4 mm; spines absent on inner surface. Corolla 33-42 mm, white or purple. Achenes 4·5-6 mm; pappus 25-31 mm.{\i  C., E. & S. Spain, S. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. C. spathulatum} (Moretti) Gaudin,{\i  Fl. Helv.}{\b  5}: 202 (1829). Biennial 50-100 cm. Leaves shortly setose above, sparsely arachnoid-hairy to -lanate beneath; lobes lanceolate, with rather stout apical spine 3-12 mm. Capitula few, shortly pedunculate, with 3-8 subtending leaves shorter than to equalling capitulum. Involucre 30-40 × 30-40 mm, glabrous or rarely sparsely arachnoid-hairy; bracts with smooth margin; outer recurved; middle patent, with rhombic, broadly scarious-margined, fimbriate appendage and weak apical spine 1-2 mm, the curved part spinulose on inner surface, the appendage with a narrow, spiny wing or a row of short spinules on inner surface. Corolla 29-33 mm, purple. Achenes 5-5·5 mm; pappus 24-27 mm. •{\i  S.W. & S. Alps, eastwards to} c. 11° 30' {\i E.} ?Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. C. ligulare} Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  3}: 529 (1875). Biennial 20-150 (-200) cm. Leaves sparsely to densely arachnoid-lanate, rarely tomentose or sparsely arachnoid-hairy beneath; lobes narrowly lanceolate to oblong-triangular, with apical spine 3-20 mm. Capitula usually few in a lax raceme or corymb, with short to long peduncles, usually with 1-10 subtending leaves. Involucre 25-45 × 25-50(-60) mm, glabrous to arachnoid-lanate; bracts sometimes with short marginal spinules, the curved part spinulose-scabrid on inner surface; outer recurved to patent; middle to inner patent, gradually widened towards the apex, with rather cochleariform or galeate, more or less scarious-fimbriate to -laciniate appendage 1·5-5·5 mm wide and apical spine 1-6(-10) mm, the appendage often with short spinules scattered or in rows or rarely forming a narrow wing on inner surface. Corolla 24-35(-39) mm, purple. Achenes 4·5-5·5(-6·5) mm; pappus 22-32 mm.{\i  Balkan peninsula, S. Romania.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A very variable species showing a series of altitudinal variants, differing in height, degree of spininess and size of involucral appendages, which are sometimes treated as infraspecific taxa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   C. sintenisii} Freyn,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  3}: 466 (1895), from Anatolia, has been recorded from S. Romania, probably in error for {\b 18}, from which it differs in the involucral bracts having flat, lanceolate, spinose-dentate to -fimbriate appendages 1-1·8 mm wide.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. C. grecescui} Rouy, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  37}: 164 (1890). Like {\b 18} but leaf-lobes oblong-elliptical to broadly lanceolate, more or less obtuse; involucre lanate-floccose (rarely subglabrous); middle bracts with patent marginal spines up to 1·2 mm and rhombic to elliptical appendage 1·5-3·5 mm wide, with apical spine 1-4 mm. •{\i  S. & E. Romania, N.E. Jugoslavia.} Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. C. decussatum} Janka,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  30}: 582 (1860) (incl.{\i  C. polonicum} (Petrak) Iljin). Biennial 60-150(-200) cm. Leaves sparsely arachnoid-lanate beneath; lobes linear-lanceolate to oblong, with strong apical spine 2-12 mm. Capitula solitary or few, long-pedunculate, with 5-16 subtending leaves equalling or exceeding capitulum. Involucre 30-50 × 40-60(-70) mm, densely arachnoid-lanate to sparsely arachnoid-hairy; bracts patent, divided into wide basal and narrow distal part, with remote
\par

\par
236}
\par