{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 bracts closely imbricate, the outer 0·5-1 mm wide and lanceolate, the middle 1·5-2 .mm wide and ovate-lanceolate, all more or less contracted into a spine 2-4 mm, with slightly scarious margin, the mid-vein glabrous near the apex; inner bracts about as long as the inner middle, veinless. Corolla 10-12 mm. Achenes 2-3 mm, compressed, rugulose; apical prominence small, shortly stipitate, clavate, slightly 5-lobed, mucronate; pappus 12-14 mm. 2n = 22.{\i  Scrub and waste places. Corse, Sardegna, Montecristo.} Co It Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 118.           Cirsium}             Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By K. Werner.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Spiny, biennial or perennial herbs, rarely annuals. Leaves alternate, entire to pinnatisect, with spinulose margin or upper surface and usually spiny teeth or lobes. Involucral bracts imbricate, often with a vitta, usually with a simple apical spine. Receptacular scales numerous, setaceous. Florets hermaphrodite, rarely unisexual, purple or yellowish, rarely white. Anthers with basal appendages 0·3-1·5 mm. Achenes oblong, gibbous, compressed, the truncate apex with a distinct, annular margin surrounding a subconical central projection; pappus of several rows of plumose setae, the inner somewhat longer than the outer and simple, often flattened, lanceolate and ciliate towards apex, the pappus of the outermost florets often with fewer, simple setae.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: F. Petrak, {\i Biblioth. Bot.} ({\i Stuttgart}) {\b 78}: 1-92 (1912).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Morphological intermediates, which are probably hybrids, are frequent in the genus. Sect.{\i  Cirsium} they occur as individual plants in the presence of the parents and there is much experimental information to confirm their hybrid status. In Sect.{\i  Eriolepis} the intermediates may occur as populations in the absence of either presumed parent. They may result from some form of introgression but no convincing data are available on this.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Measurements of the diameter of the involucre refer to the middle of the capitulum, excluding the patent apices of the bracts.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   In most of the species with purple florets, white variants are occasionally found.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves with rigid, rather pungent setae on upper surface
\par
2 Stem winged
\par
3 Lower and middle cauline leaves decurrent for the whole
\par
  internode;involucre(25-)30-40 × 20-40 mm ................................. {\b 28. vulgare}
\par
3 Cauline leaves decurrent for about half of the internode;
\par
  involucre 13-20 × 8-15 mm ......................................................... {\b 29. italicum} 
\par
2 Stem not winged; rarely leaves decurrent for not more 
\par
  than 1 cm
\par
4 Middle and inner involucral bracts with a concave, scarious,
\par
   fimbriate to laciniate apical appendage more than 1·5 mm wide
\par
5 Narrow distal part of involucral bracts with patent marginal
\par
   spines 0·5-2 mm and usually longer than width of bract
\par
6 Appendage of involucral bracts 1·5-3·5 mm wide, brown 
\par
   to blackish-purple, usually with some spinules on inner
\par
   surface ....................................................................................... {\b 19. grecescui}
\par
6 Appendage of involucral bracts 1-2 mm wide, purple, 
\par
   smooth on inner surface at apex ............................................ {\b 20. decussatum}
\par
5 Narrow distal part of involucral bracts with smooth margin,
\par
    or rarely with some marginal spinules shorter than width of bract
\par
7 Middle involucral bracts narrow above the wide basal 
\par
   part, gradually widened towards the apex ................................... {\b 18. ligulare}
\par
7 Narrow part of middle involucral bracts with parallel
\par
   margins, abruptly widened at apex into a spathulate or
\par
   rhombic appendage
\par
8 Outer involucral bracts suberect; leaves with long,
\par
   rigid setae on upper surface .................................................. {\b 16. odontolepis}
\par
8 Outer involucral bracts patent to recurved; leaves 
\par
   shortly setose on upper surface
\par
9 Involucre densely arachnoid-lanate, rarely sparsely 
\par
   arachnoid-lanate to subglabrous; appendage of bracts 
\par
   without spinules on inner surface ......................................... {\b 15. eriophorum}
\par
9 Involucre glabrous or scarcely arachnoid-hairy;
\par
   appendage of middle bracts with a narrow, spiny wing or
\par
   a row of short spinules on inner surface ............................... {\b 17. spathulatum}
\par
4 Middle involucral bracts less than 1·5 mm wide at apex,
\par
   the apical part flat, with margin not or indistinctly scarious-fimbriate
\par
10 Involucral bracts with marginal spines more than 0·5 mm,
\par
    usually as long as or longer than width of bract
\par
11 Involucral bracts gradually narrowed from base to apex,
\par
    the distal part with marginal spines which are longer 
\par
    towards the apex
\par
12 Outer and middle involucral bracts with pectinate,
\par
    rigid marginal spines 1-1·5 mm; outer bracts sharply
\par
    deflexed ..................................................................................... {\b 23. ciliatum}
\par
12 Outer and middle involucral bracts with soft marginal
\par
   spinules 0·2-0·8 mm; outer bracts erecto-patent or 
\par
   rarely patent-recurved ............................................................. {\b 24. serrulatum}
\par
11 Involucral bracts divided into a wide basal and a 
\par
   narrow apical part; marginal spines ± equal or becoming
\par
   shorter towards the apex
\par
13 Involucral bracts with dense marginal spines 0·5-3 mm,
\par
   and with dense, pale, spinulose bristles 0·3-1(-1·8)
\par
   mm on inner surface of curved part
\par
14 Involucre sparsely arachnoid-hairy to -lanate; bracts
\par
   with marginal spines 1-2(-3) times as long as width of
\par
   bract; corolla purple ................................................................... {\b 21. boujartii}
\par
14 Involucre glabrous or sparsely arachnoid-hairy; bracts
\par
   with marginal spines 3-5 times as long as width of 
\par
   bract; corolla white or red ............................................................. {\b 22. furiens}
\par
13 Involucral bracts with remote marginal spines up to
\par
   1(-1·7) mm; inner surface not setose, at most minutely scabrid
\par
15 Leaves pinnatisect; segments divided to the base into
\par
   2 narrow lobes; involucre 30-50 × 40-70 mm, the middle
\par
   bracts slightly widened towards apex ................................... {\b 20. decussatum}
\par
15 Leaves pinnatifid; segments broadly 2- to 3-lobed;
\par
   involucre 20-30 × 20-30 mm, the bracts with subulate
\par
   apex ........................................................................................ {\b 25. laniflorum}
\par
10 Involucral bracts without marginal spines in the narrow
\par
   distal part, or at most spinulose-denticulate to 
\par
   -ciliate or with some spinules at apex
\par
16 Apical part of middle involucral bracts more than 
\par
   0·5 mm wide, with a narrow appendage or ± abruptly
\par
   contracted into the apical spine
\par
17 Outer involucral bracts patent to recurved
\par
18 Corolla usually white
\par
19 Capitula with 10-20 linear, pectinate-spiny subtending
\par
   leaves, equalling or somewhat exceeding capitulum;
\par
   involucre 35-45 mm; middle bracts with apical spine
\par
   4-7 mm .............................................................................................. {\b 1. ferox}
\par
19 Capitula with 8-12 squarrose-spiny subtending leaves,
\par
   2-4 times as long as capitulum; involucre (15-) 20-25 mm;
\par
   middle bracts with apical spine 1-2 mm ............................... {\b 5. morinifolium}
\par
18 Corolla usually purple
\par
20 Involucre (17-)20-25(-30) × 12-30 mm; corolla-tube as
\par
   long as limb ............................................................................. {\b 9. tenoreanum}
\par
20 Involucre 30-50 × 30-70 mm; corolla-tube longer than limb
\par
21 Involucre ovoid to ovoid-cylindric, usually sparsely 
\par
   arachnoid-hairy; middle bracts suberect to erecto-patent .............. {\b 8. lacaitae}
\par
21 Involucre globose, densely, rarely sparsely, arachnoid
\par
   -lanate; middle bracts patent ................................................. {\b 15. eriophorum}
\par

\par
232}
\par