{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 51 Biennial; stem more than 150 cm, much-branched;
\par
   involucre 7-13 mm in diameter ........................................... {\b 43. candelabrum}
\par
51 Perennial; stem not more than 120 cm, simple or 
\par
   sparingly branched; involucre 15-30 mm in diameter
\par
52 Capitula in apical clusters of (1-)2-10; leaves 
\par
   auriculate-semiamplexicaul, shortly decurrent; apical part
\par
   of involucral bracts as long as or longer than basal part,
\par
   with apical spine 3-10 mm; pappus 12-18 mm ................ {\b 41. spinosissimum}
\par
52 Capitula usually solitary, pedunculate; leaves attenuate
\par
    at base and sessile; apical part of involucral bracts much
\par
    shorter than basal part, with apical spine 1·5-4 mm;
    pappus 18-23 mm ...................................................................... {\b 42. glabrum}
\par
48 Corolla purple, rarely white; capitula usually not subtended
\par
    by leaves
\par
53 Involucral bracts with patent apex
\par
54 Upper leaves oblong-lanceolate, somewhat coriaceous 
\par
   and undulate, with stout marginal spines (3-)5-13 mm . {\b 36. appendiculatum}
\par
54 Upper leaves elliptical to ovate-orbicular, herbaceous,
\par
   flat, with slender marginal spines up to 2 mm
\par
55 Leaves subglabrous, elliptical, pinnatifid, with 
\par
   narrowly triangular to oblong, lobed segments ...................... {\b 34. montanum}
\par
55 Leaves pubescent above, sparsely arachnoid-lanate 
\par
   beneath, broadly ovate to ovate-orbicular, lobed or 
\par
   doubly dentate ........................................................................ {\b 37. waldsteinii}
\par
53 Middle involucral bracts ± appressed
\par
56 Stem usually much-branched in upper half, with numerous
\par
   capitula; florets unisexual; corolla-limb 5-partite almost
\par
    to its base; mature pappus much longer than corolla ................. {\b 60. arvense}
\par
56 Stem not or sparingly branched, with one or few capitula;
\par
   florets hermaphrodite; corolla-limb 5-fid to about 
\par
   halfway; pappus not longer than corolla
\par
57 Leaves subglabrous or with patent hairs, without 
\par
   arachnoid hairs (or rarely on the veins beneath)
\par
58 Plant acaulescent or rarely with a stem 5-15(-35) cm;
\par
   involucral bracts without vittae ..................................................... {\b 44. acaule}
\par
58 Stem 20-70 cm; involucral bracts with conspicuous vittae . {\b 46. valentinum}
\par
57 Leaves sparsely arachnoid-lanate to -tomentose beneath
\par
59 Leaves herbaceous, flat, with marginal spinules less 
\par
   than 2 mm; capitula not subtended by leaves middle 
\par
   involucral bracts with obtuse to suborbicular apex ............... {\b 47. helenioides}
\par
59 Leaves ± coriaceous, undulate, with marginal spines 5-10 mm;
\par
    capitula subtended by spiny leaves; involucral bracts acute ........ {\b 45. mairei} 
\par
40 Stem without leaves towards the apex (except bracteoles)
\par
60 Lower leaves ± decurrent
\par
61 Leaves glabrous, or sparsely puberulent to arachnoid 
\par
   hairy on the veins
\par
62 Leaves somewhat coriaceous, rigid, undulate, lobed to 
\par
   pinnatifid ............................................................................... {\b 51. tymphaeum}
\par
62 Leaves herbaceous, flat, entire to dentate or rarely lobed
\par
63 Involucre 10-15 × 8-15 mm, the middle bracts obtuse {\b 52. monspessulanum}
\par
63 Involucre 15-20 × 20-25 mm, the middle bracts acute ....... {\b 53. welwitschii}
\par
61 Leaves pubescent to tomentose, especially beneath
\par
64 Leaves pinnatifid, with stout spines 4-8 mm; involucral
\par
   bracts with stout apical spine ................................................ {\b 46. valentinum}
\par
64 Leaves entire, dentate or lobed (very rarely pinnatifid),
\par
   with slender spines up to 5 mm; involucral bracts with 
\par
   slender apical spine
\par
65 Leaves sparsely to densely arachnoid-lanate beneath;
\par
   capitula subtended by 1-5 leaves; involucral bracts 
\par
   without or with indistinct vittae ........................................ {\b 49. heterotrichum}
\par
65 Leaves sparsely arachnoid-hairy beneath; capitula not
\par
   subtended by leaves; involucral bracts with conspicuous vittae
\par
66 Leaves entire or denticulate; involucral bracts appressed, 
\par
   acute; inner pappus-setae not expanded at apex .................. {\b 48. pannonicum}
\par
66 Leaves coarsely dentate to lobed (rarely pinnatifid);
\par
   involucral bracts patent at apex, the middle with an 
\par
   oblong-suborbicular, ciliate apex; inner pappus-setae
\par
   expanded at apex ........................................................................... {\b 50. canum} 
\par
60 Leaves not decurrent
\par
67 Leaves sparsely arachnoid-hairy to -tomentose 
\par
   especially beneath, and with patent hairs
\par
68 Involucre (18-)20-28(-32) × (17-)20-35(-40) mm; middle
\par
   involucral bracts with obtuse to suborbicular, fimbriate-
\par
   ciliate apex, the inner with lanceolate appendage ................. {\b 47. helenioides}
\par
68 Involucre 15-23(-25) × 11-22(-25) mm; middle and inner
\par
   involucral bracts acute, the apex neither fimbriate
\par
   ciliate nor appendiculate
\par
69 Lower cauline leaves more than 10 cm wide, broadly ovate
\par
    to ovate-orbicular; capitula in apical clusters of 3-8,
\par 
    ± nodding .............................................................................. {\b 37. waldsteinii}
\par
69 Leaves less than 10 cm wide, oblong-lanceolate to 
\par
    elliptical; capitula solitary on long peduncles, rarely
\par
    in clusters of 2-3, erect
\par
70 Stem usually more than 80 cm, ± purple; leaves with 
\par
    large auricles, amplexicaul, white-tomentose beneath ....... {\b 38. hypoleucum}
\par
70 Stem usually less than 80 cm, greyish; leaves sessile 
\par
   or narrowly auriculate-semiamplexicaul, sparsely 
\par
   arachnoid-hairy to greyish-lanate-tomentose beneath
\par
   ............................................................................... ({\b 30-32}). {\b tuberosum} group
\par
67 Leaves subglabrous to patent-pubescent, but at most 
\par
    scarcely arachnoid-hairy on the veins
\par
71 Leaves somewhat undulate, with stout spines (3-)5-13 mm
\par
72 Leaves subglabrous; involucral bracts with patent apex {\b 36. appendiculatum}
\par
72 Leaves with long crispate hairs on both surfaces;
\par
   involucral bracts ± appressed ................................................ {\b 46. valentinum}
\par
71 Leaves flat, with slender spinules up to 2 mm
\par
73 Corolla yellow, rarely purple; stem with crispate hairs
\par
   only; leaves pinnatisect; capitula nodding ............................... {\b 35. erisithales}
\par
73 Corolla purple, rarely white; stem arachnoid-tomentose
\par
   towards the apex; leaves pinnatifid or rarely entire;
\par
   capitula usually erect
\par
74 Cauline leaves not more than 9 cm wide; involucral 
\par
   bracts ± erect ............................................................................... {\b 33. rivulare}
\par
74 Cauline leaves more than 9 cm wide; involucral bracts
\par
   with patent to deflexed apex ................................................... {\b 34. montanum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. ERIOLEPIS (Cass.) Dumort. Leaves usually coriaceous, pinnatisect, with segments divided to base into 2 divaricate lobes, with rigid, rather pungent setae on the upper surface. Florets hermaphrodite or the outermost functionally male or sterile. Corolla-limb 5-fid to about halfway, about as long as tube. Pappus shorter than or equalling corolla.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  All species usually occur in dry, open habitats.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  An extremely difficult group in which most taxa are very variable and many of them are connected by intermediates. Most of the diagnostic characters are quantitative and appear in various taxa. It is not easy to establish correlations between characters and consequently the delimitation of taxa is difficult, and the assessment of their status is often doubtful. In the following treatment, which must be regarded as provisional, an attempt has been made in the key and descriptions to take into account the variability of the species, but intermediates have been excluded.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. ferox} (L.) DC. in Lam. & DC., {\i Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 4}: 120 (1805). Biennial 60-100(-120) cm. Leaves broadly auriculate semiamplexicaul, with patent setae 1-7 mm above, sparsely
\par

\par
234}
\par