{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. G. kerneri} Degen & Dörfler,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl. }({\i Wien}) {\b 64}: 723 (1897). Stems 5-15 cm, ascending to erect, slender, stiff, 4-angled, densely hairy. Leaves 3-5 × 0·5-1 mm, usually in whorls of 6, acicular, with a long awn, scarcely changing colour on drying, sparsely hairy above, densely puberulent beneath; margin recurved to the midrib. Inflorescence narrowly cylindrical, interrupted; partial inflorescences short, squarrose, more or less bracteate; pedicels 0·5-2 mm. Corolla 2-3 mm in diameter, rotate, yellowish, glabrous; lobes long-apiculate. Fruit glabrous, finely granulate. 2n = 22.{\i  Rock crevices. • W. Macedonia and S. Albania.} Al ?Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. G. degenii} Bald. ex Degen,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  45}: 131 (1895) (incl.{\i  G. ossaeum} Halácsy). Forming a flat and lax cushion. Stems 5-20 cm, arising from a slender stock, 4-angled, densely hairy. Leaves 3-8 × 0·8-1 mm, in whorls of up to 6, linear to narrowly lanceolate, shortly awned, densely hairy; margin revolute. Inflorescence ovoid, compact, with few-flowered cymes, leafy; pedicels somewhat shorter to more than twice as long as flowers, divaricate. Corolla 3-4 mm in diameter, rotate, yellowish, hairy externally; lobes shortly apiculate. Fruit densely hairy. Limestone rock-crevices. •{\i  Mountains of Balkan peninsula, from S. Albania to E.C. Greece.} Al Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. G. erythrorrhizon} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Pugillus }51 (1852) ({\i G. debeauxii} Degen & Hervier). Caespitose; rhizome woody, branched. Stems 2·5-6 cm, ascending, slender, 4-angled, shortly hairy. Leaves 5-6 × 1-2 mm, in whorls of 4-6, widely to narrowly linear, acute, not awned, shining, coriaceous, sparsely and shortly hairy; margin more or less recurved. Inflorescence few-flowered, squarrose, leafy; pedicels 1-3 mm, deflexed after flowering. Corolla 2·5-3·5 mm in diameter, rotate, yellowish, glabrous; lobes shortly apiculate. Fruit shining, glabrous.{\i  Mountain rocks and screes. • S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada, Sierra de Cazorla}). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. G. pulvinatum} Boiss., {\i Elenchus} 57 (1838). Like {\b 31} but forming a more definite cushion, glabrous; leaves 3-5 × 1-1·2 mm, in whorls of (4-)5-6, ovate to broadly lanceolate, more or less flat; pedicels up to 5 mm.{\i  Limestone rock-crevices. • S. Spain }({\i Prov. Malaga}). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. LEIOGALIUM Ledeb. Perennial herbs with woody stock, without or with robust stolons, and rather stout stem-bases. Stems 4-angled or terete, glabrous or hairy, but never retrorsely aculeolate. Leaves in whorls of up to 10, 1-veined, normally with antrorsely directed papilliform teeth along the more or less revolute margin, and with a hyaline apiculum. Inflorescence many-flowered, oblong, ovoid or corymbiform, the ultimate branches mostly ebracteate. Flowers on short or long pedicels. Corolla often white, infundibuliform, cup-shaped or rotate, the lobes often apiculate. Fruit ovoid, mostly dry and glabrous.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Ser.{\i  Erecta} Pobed. Plants green or glaucous-pruinose. Stems 4-angled. Leaves usually less than 25 mm, but sometimes up to 40 mm, elliptical to filiform, the two surfaces more or less concolorous. Inflorescence narrowly oblong to ovoid, with lower branches short or long; partial inflorescences usually pyramidal; pedicels sometimes stout, often somewhat divaricate after anthesis. Corolla often white, or greenish, yellowish and reddish, rotate (or slightly cup-shaped), with usually apiculate lobes. The three groups of species ({\b 36-40}), ({\b 41-49}) and ({\b 51-58}) included in this Series are each very polymorphic polyploid complexes with different ecological and geographical centres; there are also several close connections among these groups.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. G. litorale} Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 172 (1827). Stock strongly stoloniferous. Stems usually hairy above; middle inter nodes about as long as leaves. Leaves 10-18 × 2-5 mm, oblanceolate, abruptly narrowed towards apex, rather thick and shiny; margin slightly scabrid to smooth. Inflorescence narrowly ovoid, with short branches; pedicels stout, shorter than diameter of corolla, strongly divaricate. Corolla 3-4 mm in diameter, white, somewhat hairy outside; lobes shortly apiculate. Anthers dark when dry. Fruits 2-3 mm in diameter, globose, dark to blackish somewhat fleshy.{\i  Maritime sands. • W. Sicilia.} Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. G. arenarium} Loisel.,{\i  Fl. Gall.} 85 (1806). Stock with very long subterranean stolons. Stems glabrous or rarely with long hairs, procumbent, with numerous non-flowering branches; internodes 5-10(-20) mm. Leaves 3-8 × 1-3 mm, broadly lanceolate, with short, hyaline apiculum, fleshy, shining; midrib slender; margin flat, slightly scabrid. Inflorescence few-flowered, long and narrow, with very short branches; pedicels 1-3 mm divaricate. Corolla 3-4 mm in diameter, yellow; lobes acute but not apiculate. Fruit c. 3 mm in diameter, globose, somewhat fleshy, rugose when dry. 2n = 66.{\i  Maritime sands. • W. France, just extending into N. Spain}. Ga Hs. 
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Intermediates between {\i G. arenarium} and {\i G. album} occur near the coast; they may be of hybrid origin and have been called {\b G. neglectum} Le Gall ex Gren. in Gren. & Godron,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 22 (1851) ({\i G. mollugo} subsp.{\i  neglectum} (Le Gall ex Gren.) Nyman).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. G. firmum} Tausch,{\i  Flora }({\i Regensb}.) {\b 14}: 222 (1831). Stolons absent. Stems numerous, mostly erect, robust, nearly always shortly hairy up to the inflorescence, with many, rather long branches. Leaves 15-25 × 2-5 mm, elliptical to broadly oblanceolate, somewhat coriaceous; midrib slender, inconspicuous; margin slightly revolute. Inflorescence broadly ovoid, dense, the branches long; pedicels short. Corolla 1-1·5 mm in diameter, yellow; lobes with long and mostly incurved apices. Anthers light brownish. Fruit brownish. 2n = 22. {\i Dry places. • W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Ju. 
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   A rather isolated E. Adriatic endemic, formerly circumscribed to include {\b 39}({\b c}), and even {\b 52}, {\b 54} {\b 55} and {\b 57}. 
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 36-39}). {\b G. mollugo} group. Stolons present or absent. Stems 30-150 cm, often robust, erect to procumbent, glabrous or with hairs 0·5-1·5 mm. Middle internodes of flowering stems longer than leaves. Leaves 10-40 × 1·5-7 mm, oblong to oblanceolate-midrib slender, less than half as wide as leaf; margin not or slightly revolute. Inflorescence broadly ovoid to oblong, with branches up to 40 cm. Corolla white to yellowish (rarely reddish) glabrous. Fruit brown. 
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stolons present (sometimes short) 
\par 
2 Corolla usually 2-3 mm in diameter; pedicels usually longer
\par 
  than the diameter of the flowers; inflorescences lax, the
\par 
  branches strongly divaricate after anthesis ................................. {\b 38. mollugo}
\par 
2 Corolla usually 3-5 mm in diameter; pedicels usually shorter
\par 
  than the diameter of the flowers; inflorescences rather dense,
\par 
  the branches less divaricate after anthesis ...................................... {\b 39. album}
\par 
1 Stolons absent  
\par 
3 Corolla 2-3 mm in diameter; anthers dark brown to 
\par 
  purplish .................................................................................... {\b 36. heldreichii}
\par 
3 Corolla 3-5 mm in diameter; anthers yellowish to light 
\par 
  brown ......................................................................... {\b 37. protopycnotrichum}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. G. heldreichii} Halácsy, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  47}: 94 (1897). Stolons absent. Stems up to 150 cm, glabrous or often hairy, usually reddish at base, strongly branched, erect-ascending. Leaves 10-20(-30) × 1-5 mm, oblong to oblanceolate, rather coriaceous and sometimes reddish; midrib rather prominent. Inflorescence dense, narrowly ovoid, the primary branches long;
\par 

\par 
23}
\par