{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b bourgeanus}: Wings of stem and spines of leaves up to 5 mm. Capitula 3-7 together at the apex of branches. Outer and middle involucral bracts with an apical spine 1-2 mm, glabrous or almost so; inner bracts twice as long as the outer.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b valentinus} (Boiss. & Reuter) Franco, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 71}: 49 (1975) ({\i C. valentinus} Boiss. & Reuter). Wings of stem and spines of leaves up to 3 mm. Capitula solitary. Outer and middle involucral bracts with an apical spine 2-3 mm, distinctly but sparsely arachnoid-hairy; inner bracts 1 1/3 times as long as the outer.{\i  S.E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. C. myriacanthus} Salzm. ex DC., {\i Prodr.} {\b 6}: 624 (1838) ({\i C. baeticus} Boiss. & Reuter). Annual up to 30 cm. Stem arachnoid hairy, usually simple; wings up to 2 mm wide, narrow, with numerous slender spines up to 3 mm. Leaves oblanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, glabrescent above, greyish-arachnoid-hairy and with straight unicellular hairs beneath, with 10-12 pairs of ovate-oblong lobes, each with an apical spine up to 1·5 mm. Capitula 20-25 × 15-25 mm, campanulate, sessile, solitary on winged branches, or sometimes in clusters of 3; involucral bracts closely imbricate, the outer and middle 0·75-1 mm wide, narrowly and faintly scarious, more or less arachnoid-hairy, with the mid-vein raised in the distal ¾; inner bracts 1¼ times as long as the inner middle, veinless, scarious on the margin and irregularly serrulate. Corolla 14-17 mm. Achenes 4-5 mm, compressed smooth; apical prominence sessile, 5-lobed; pappus 14-16 mm.{\i  Maritime sands. S.W. Spain} ({\i near Cádiz}). Hs. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   This species closely resembles {\b 43} but is easily distinguished by the larger, campanulate and usually solitary capitulum with closely imbricate bracts and larger corolla.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. C. asturicus} Franco,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 49 (1975). Perennial up to 40 cm. Stem greyish-tomentose; wings up to 4 mm wide, triangular, with an apical spine up to 8 mm. Leaves oblanceolate or lanceolate, glabrous or glabrescent above, greyish-tomentose beneath, with sinuate unicellular hairs, with 3-5 pairs of palmate, triangular lobes, each with an apical spine up to 10 mm. Capitula 10-18 × 3·5-8 mm, cylindrical, subsessile, in clusters of 3-5; involucral bracts 0·5-1·5 mm wide, closely imbricate, linear-subulate, glabrous, with scarious margin, the mid-vein raised in the distal ¾; inner bracts 1 1/3 times as long as the inner middle, scarious in the distal 1/3. Corolla 14-16 mm. Achenes 4-5 mm, compressed, rugulose; apical prominence sessile, convex, small, unlobed; pappus 11-13 mm. {\i Mountain pastures,} 600-1600{\i  m. • N.W. Portugal, N.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. C. carpetanus} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Nov. Hisp.} 19 (1842) ({\i C. gayanus }Durieu ex Willk.). Perennial up to 50 cm. Stem white-tomentose; wings up to 6 mm wide, triangular, with an apical spine up to 6 mm. Leaves oblanceolate- or lanceolate-oblong, sparsely lanate above, white-tomentose beneath with sinuate unicellular hairs, with 6-8 pairs of palmate lobes, each with an apical spine up to 10 mm. Capitula 20-30 × 10-20 mm, campanulate, subsessile or on peduncles up to 4 cm and 1·5 mm in diameter, usually in clusters of 3-5; involucral bracts 1·2 mm wide, closely imbricate, linear-lanceolate, glabrous or almost so, with scarious margin, the mid-vein raised throughout its length in outer bracts but only in distal ½ in middle bracts; inner bracts 1 1/4-1 1/3 times as long as the adjacent middle bracts, usually constricted distally into a lanceolate, acuminate apex, faintly scarious at the margin. Corolla 16-20 mm. Achenes 5-6 mm, compressed, almost smooth; apical prominence sessile, slightly lobed; pappus 13-16 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Uncultivated fields and waste places. • N.E. Portugal, N.C. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. C. carlinoides} Gouan, {\i Obs. Bot.} 62 (1773) ({\i C. pyrenaicus} (L.) F. W. Schultz, non Gouan). Perennial up to 40 cm. Stem densely white-tomentose; wings up to 6 mm wide, triangular, with an apical spine up to 5 mm. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, with floccose-arachnoid hairs above, densely white-tomentose beneath with long, sinuate unicellular hairs, with palmate lobes. Capitula 18-25 × 12-15 mm, subsessile, in dense clusters of 5-15; involucral bracts closely imbricate, the outer and middle gradually tapering into a spiny apex, arachnoid-hairy, with entire and faintly scarious margin, the mid-vein raised throughout its length; inner bracts veinless, scarious at apex. Corolla 14-16 mm. Achenes 4-5 mm, swollen, smooth; apical prominence sessile, entire; pappus 13-16 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Screes and stony slopes. • Pyrenees and mountains of Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b carlinoides}: Leaves with 10-14 pairs of large lobes. Involucral bracts 1·5-2·5 mm wide, oblong-lanceolate, with an apical spine 1·5-2·5 mm, the inner 1 1/7 times as long as the inner middle bracts.{\i  Pyrenees, Cordillera Cantábrica.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b hispanicus} (Kazmi) Franco, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 50 (1975) ({\i C. pyrenaicus} subsp. {\i hispanicus} Kazmi): Leaves with 14-20 pairs of small lobes. Involucral bracts 1-2 mm wide, linear-lanceolate, with an apical spine 2·5-5 mm, the inner 1 1/8 times as long as the inner middle bracts. {\i Sierra Nevada}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. LEPTOCEPHALI Reichenb. fil. Capitula oblong or cylindrical, deciduous when ripe. Corolla-tube widened above into an ellipsoid cup 1-1·5(-2) mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. C. corymbosus} Ten., {\i Fl. Nap.}{\b  1}, {\i Prodr.}: 48 (1811). Annual up to 60 cm. Stem arachnoid-hairy; wings up to 4 mm wide, palmate, with an apical spine up to 2 mm. Leaves oblanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, glabrescent above, densely lanate beneath with sinuate, mostly unicellular hairs, with 6-8 pairs of palmate lobes with triangular-acute lobules, each with an apical spine up to 3 mm. Capitula 15-25 × 10-15 mm, oblong; peduncles up to 15 cm and 1 mm in diameter; involucral bracts 0·5-1 mm wide, imbricate though distally slightly squarrose, linear-lanceolate, nearly glabrous, with ciliate margins, the mid-vein raised in the distal 2/3; inner bracts 1 1/3 times as long as the inner middle, contracted at the scarious apex, faintly 1-veined in the distal 1/3. Corolla 15-20 mm. Achenes 4-5 mm, compressed, smooth; apical prominence small, shortly stipitate, 5-lobed; pappus 13-17 mm. {\i Cultivated fields and roadsides. C. & S. Italy, Sicilia, Sardegna.} It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. C. acicularis} Bertol.,{\i  Ann. Stor. Nat.} ({\i Bologna}) {\b 1}: 274 (1829) ({\i C. bicolor} Vis.). Annual up to 70 cm. Stem arachnoid hairy; wings very narrow, dentate with teeth up to 4 mm wide, with an apical spine up to 2 mm. Leaves obovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, sparsely arachnoid-hairy above, arachnoid-tomentose beneath with straight unicellular and very few multicellular hairs, with 2-5 pairs of triangular-acute lobes, each with an apical spine 1-3 mm. Capitula 15-20 × 10-15 mm, oblong; peduncles up to 15 cm and 1 mm in diameter; involucral bracts imbricate but becoming erecto-patent, the outer subulate, the middle oblong-lanceolate and 0·5-1 mm wide in the proximal 1/3, contracted above into an apex 0·5 mm wide at its base, linear-subulate, with the mid-vein raised in the distal ¾; inner bracts ¾ as long as the inner middle, 3-veined above. Corolla 10-12 mm. Achenes 3·5-4·5 mm, compressed, rugulose; apical prominence slender, sessile, entire; pappus 10-13 mm.{\i  Waste places. C. & E. Mediterranean region, S. Bulgaria.} Bu Ga Gr It Ju Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. C. argentatus} L., {\i Mantissa Alt.} 280 (1771). Annual up to 100 cm. Stem arachnoid-hairy; wings very narrow, sinuate to
\par

\par
230}
\par