{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 arachnoid-lanate to -tomentose beneath; lobes linear-oblong to triangular-oblong, with rigid apical spine (4-)6-10(-15) mm. Capitula in a corymb, with 10-20 linear, pectinate-spiny subtending leaves equalling or somewhat exceeding capitulum. Involucre 35-45 × 25-40 mm, sparsely arachnoid-hairy to subglabrous; middle bracts gradually narrowed or slightly widened to the spinulose-denticulate or minutely ciliate apex, with weak, patent to erecto-patent apical spine 4-7 mm. Corolla 30-38 mm, usually white. Achenes 4·5-6 mm; pappus 24-29 mm. • {\i C. & S. France, just extending into N. W. Italy.} Ga ?Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. heldreichii} Halácsy, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  40}: 114 (1890). Biennial 15-100 cm. Stem sparsely arachnoid-lanate to lanate-floccose. Leaf-lobes linear-lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, with strong apical spine 6-25 mm. Capitula solitary or in a sparingly branched corymb, with 2-6 narrow subtending leaves equalling or somewhat exceeding capitulum. Involucre 25-35 × 20-40(-60) mm; middle bracts gradually narrowed to the cartilaginous, densely spinose-serrulate apex, with slender apical spine 2-6 mm. Corolla 27-30 mm, usually white. Achenes 5-6 mm; pappus 19-25 mm. •{\i  Mountains of Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A rather variable species; the following subspecies seem doubtfully distinct.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b heldreichii}: Leaves attenuate at the base and sessile to narrowly auriculate-semiamplexicaul, not decurrent, arachnoid-lanate to -tomentose beneath. Involucre glabrous to sparsely arachnoid-hairy. Corolla white or pink. {\i C. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b euboicum} Petrak, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  80}: 420 (1961): Leaves broadly auriculate-semiamplexicaul, the middle often decurrent for up to 1 cm, sparsely arachnoid-lanate beneath. Involucre arachnoid-lanate. Corolla purplish. {\i Evvoia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. bulgaricum} DC., {\i Prodr.} {\b 6}: 639 (1838). Biennial 60-100 cm. Leaves arachnoid-lanate beneath; lobes lanceolate to narrowly triangular, with rigid apical spine 3-10(-16) mm. Capitula 3-10 in a lax to dense raceme or corymb, with 2-6(-9) subtending leaves shorter than to equalling capitulum. Involucre 24-35 × 22-35 mm, ovoid-globose, sparsely arachnoid-hairy to subglabrous; outer bracts suberect; middle erecto-patent, slightly widened to the spinose-serrulate apex, with rigid apical spine 1-3·5 mm. Corolla 23-30 mm, purple. Achenes 5-6 mm; pappus 19-22 mm. {\i Woods. Near S.W. coast of Black Sea}. Bu Tu. ({\i Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  C. baytopae} P. H. Davis & Parris, {\i Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  33}: 415 (1975), described from a single gathering from the southern margin of the range of {\b 3} (near Saray), is related to {\b 3} and {\b 4} but has the numerous capitula in a corymb, 1-3 subtending leaves shorter than the capitulum, the involucre 15-20 × 17-23 mm and with patent bracts gradually narrowed to a smooth apex, the corolla 17-18 mm and the pappus 9-14 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. polycephalum} DC., {\i Prod.}{\b  6}: 639 (1838). Like {\b 3} but capitula more than 10, in a dense panicle or corymb, with 6-12 subtending leaves equalling or exceeding capitulum; involucre 15-23 × 10-15 mm, subcylindrical; bracts erect, gradually narrowed to the subpatent apex; corolla 13-16 mm, usually white; achenes 3·5-4·5 mm; pappus 13-14 mm.{\i  Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i near Istanbul}). Tu. ({\i Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. morinifolium} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  3}: 530 (1875). Biennial 30-100 cm. Stem much-branched, crispate pubescent. Leaves glabrous or sparsely arachnoid-hairy beneath; lobes narrowly triangular to linear-triangular, with stout apical spine 7-11(-15) mm. Capitula numerous, in a much-branched panicle or corymb, with 8-12 squarrose-spiny subtending leaves 2-4 times as long as capitulum. Involucre (15-)20-25 × 17-30 (-35) mm, sparsely arachnoid-hairy to -lanate, rarely subglabrous; bracts patent, the middle ones gradually narrowed to the nearly smooth apex, with apical spine 1-2 mm. Corolla 20-26 mm, white. Pappus 16-20 mm. •{\i  Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. hypopsilum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 6}): 101 (1846) ({\i C. cylleneum} Halácsy). Biennial 40-100 cm. Stem much-branched, with crispate hairs, arachnoid-lanate towards the apex. Leaves glabrous to arachnoid-lanate beneath; lobes linear-triangular to linear-lanceolate, with rigid apical spine (5-)10-20 mm. Capitula numerous, in a much-branched, narrow, distally dense panicle, with 3-5(-8) pinnatifid, squarrose-spiny subtending leaves 1½-3 times as long as capitulum. Involucre 20-27 × 11-30 mm, sparsely arachnoid-hairy to -lanate or rarely subglabrous; bracts with spinulose-denticulate margin, the outer erect, the middle erecto-patent, distinctly widened into a lanceolate spinescent-ciliate appendage with apical spine 1·5-4 mm. Corolla 18-25 mm, whitish; limb divided to halfway. Achenes 4·5-5·5 mm; pappus 16-20 mm. •{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. vallis-demonis} Lojac.,{\i  Nat. Sicil.}{\b  3}: 267 (1884). Like {\b 6} but stem scarcely arachnoid-hairy; capitula fewer, in a terminal corymb, subtended by more than 10 linear, pectinate-spiny leaves; involucre 25-40 × 20-40 mm; middle bracts with fimbriate and spinulose-ciliate apex; corolla 23-31 mm, white or purple, the limb divided for ¾ of its length; achenes 5·5-6·5 mm; pappus 20-29 mm. •{\i  Sicilia, S.W. Italy.} It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. lacaitae} Petrak, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  64}: 456 (1914). Biennial (60-)100-150 cm. Leaves sparsely arachnoid-hairy to -lanate or rarely glabrescent beneath; lobes linear to linear-lanceolate, with strong apical spine 4-13 mm. Capitula few, in a lax corymb, with 1-4 subtending leaves shorter than capitulum. Involucre 30-40 × 30-45(-50) mm, sparsely arachnoid-hairy to subglabrous (rarely villous); bracts erecto-patent to suberect; middle somewhat widened to the purple, sparsely denticulate-ciliate or weakly spinescent apex, with apical spine 2-5 mm. Corolla 29-35 mm, purple; tube longer than limb. Achenes 5-6 mm; pappus 25-30 mm. •{\i  S. Italy} ({\i hills N. of Amalfi}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. tenoreanum} Petrak,{\i  Cirsiotheca Universa}{\b  17}: n. 168 (1921). Biennial 15-60(-100) cm. Leaves arachnoid-lanate to -tomentose beneath; lobes linear-triangular to linear-lanceolate, with rigid apical spine 3-10(-15) mm. Capitula usually numerous, in a dense corymb, with 2-8 subtending leaves equalling or somewhat exceeding capitulum. Involucre (17-)20-25(-30) × 12-30 mm, densely, rarely sparsely, arachnoid-lanate; bracts patent; middle with a rhombic, purple, fimbriate-ciliate appendage and weak apical spine 1·5-3·5 mm. Corolla 17-28 mm, purple; tube as long as limb. Achenes 5-6 mm; pappus 16-22 mm. •{\i  C. & S. Italy.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. lobelii} Ten.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Neap.}{\b  1830}: 16 (1830). Biennial (20-)30-50 cm. Leaves arachnoid-lanate beneath; lobes linear-triangular to -lanceolate, with stout apical spine 4-12(-20) mm. Capitula solitary or few, crowded at apex of stem, with 3-6 subtending leaves equalling or exceeding capitulum and numerous others shorter than capitulum. Involucre 30-50 × 30-50 mm, arachnoid-lanate; outer bracts suberect; middle erecto-patent, widened into a somewhat lanceolate, pale, irregularly denticulate fimbriate appendage with slender apical spine 2·5-5 mm. Corolla 25-35 mm, purple; tube longer than limb. Achenes c. 5 mm; pappus 21-31 mm. •{\i  C. Italy}. It.
\par

\par
235}
\par