{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 elliptical; upper somewhat coriaceous, oblong-lanceolate, undulate, deeply pinnatifid, subglabrous; segments 3- to 5-lobed; lobes narrowly triangular to oblong, with stout spines (3-)5-13 mm. Capitula in apical clusters of (3-)6-8(-10), usually erect. Involucre 15-20 × (12-)15-20 mm; bracts with patent apex and conspicuous vittae, with pungent spine 1-3 mm. Corolla 18-30 mm, purple. Achenes 4-6 mm; pappus 15-20 mm. 2n = 68.{\i  Damp, shady places. • Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. C. waldsteinii} Rouy,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  9}: 84 (1905) ({\i C. pauciflorum }(Waldst. & Kit.) Sprengel, non Lam.). Perennial 50-150(-200) cm. Stem simple or rarely sparingly branched, usually leafy up to the apex. Leaves herbaceous, flat, more than 10 cm wide, broadly ovate to ovate-orbicular, lobed or doubly dentate, with weak spinules up to 2 mm, pubescent above, sparsely arachnoid-lanate beneath. Capitula in apical clusters of 3-8, more or less nodding. Involucre (15-)17-23 × 15-22 mm; bracts with patent apex and distinct vittae; outer often with a slender spinule; middle spineless. Corolla 18-27(-30) mm, purple. Achenes 5-6 mm; pappus 15-20 mm. 2n = 68. {\i Damp or shady places; calcifuge. • E. Alps, E. & S. Carpathians, mountains of N. & C. Jugoslavia.} Au Cz Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. C. hypoleucum} DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 645 (1838). Perennial (70-)80-150 cm. Stem with long branches above the middle, purplish, usually leafless towards the apex. Leaves herbaceous, flat, elliptical to lanceolate, pinnatifid, sometimes incised only at the base and lobed towards the apex, amplexicaul, crispate-pubescent above, white-tomentose beneath; segments broadly triangular, lobed or dentate, with soft to pungent spines 2-4 mm. Capitula 1-4 on short to long peduncles or in apical clusters of 2-3, erect. Involucre 17-21 × (12-)15-22 mm; bracts with shortly patent or rarely deflexed apex and more or less distinct vittae; outer with weak spinule; middle acute, unarmed. Corolla 16-20 mm, purple. Achenes c. 4 mm; pappus 13-16 mm. {\i Woods. Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i Belgrad forest, near Istanbul}). Tu. ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. C. carniolicum} Scop.,{\i  Fl. Carn.} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 128 (1772). Perennial (30-)60-100(-120) cm, villous, with long reddish-brown, flexuous hairs. Stem usually sparingly branched towards the apex. Leaves herbaceous, flat, often shortly decurrent, broadly ovate to elliptical, lobed (rarely lobed only at the base); lobes broadly triangular, dentate, with weak spines 2-8 mm. Capitula in apical clusters of 2-7 or solitary and shortly pedunculate, subtended by narrowly lanceolate leaves with reddish-brown long-spinose fimbriae. Involucral bracts with patent, weakly spiny apex, the vittae absent or very indistinct. Corolla 17-21 mm, pale yellow. Achenes 5-7 mm; pappus 14-21 mm.{\i  Grassland and scrub; calcicole. • E. Alps; W. & C. Pyrenees.} Au Ga Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b carniolicum}: Capitula with 2-5(-8) subtending leaves about as long as capitulum. Involucre 16-20 × (15-)18-28(-30) mm; outer bracts shorter than middle and inner, with short, erecto-patent apex; inner with fimbriate-ciliate, scarious apex. 2n = 16. •{\i  E. Alps.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b rufescens} (Ramond ex DC.) P. Fourn., {\i Quatre Fl. Fr.} 1006 (1940): Capitula with at least 10 subtending leaves much longer than capitulum. Involucre 20-24 × 18-26 mm; bracts subequal, with long, patent apex; inner not or scarcely scarious-ciliate, spinescent.{\i  W. & C. Pyrenees}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. C. oleraceum} (L.) Scop., {\i Annus Hist.-Nat.}{\b  2}: 61 (1769). Perennial (20-)50-150(-170) cm. Stem simple or sparingly branched, sparsely greyish-arachnoid-hairy above. Leaves herbaceous, flat, sessile, elliptic-lanceolate to ovate-elliptical, pinnatifid to dentate, subglabrous; segments oblong-lanceolate, dentate, weakly spinulose-ciliate. Capitula in apical clusters of 2-6 or solitary, pedunculate, with 2-10 large, ovate, pale, weakly spinulose-ciliate subtending leaves exceeding capitulum. Involucre 18-23(-26) × (13-)15-24 mm; bracts appressed, with indistinct vittae and weak spinule 1-3 mm. Corolla (14-)18-25 mm, usually pale yellow. Achenes 4-5·5 mm; pappus (12-)15-21 mm. 2n = 34. {\i Damp meadows and woods. Throughout a large part of Europe, but absent from the islands, most of the Mediterranean region and much of the north.} Au Be Bu Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho *Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su [Fe Hb].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. C. spinosissimum} (L.) Scop.,{\i  op. cit.} 62 (1769). Perennial (15-)20-50(-120) cm. Stem simple or sparingly branched, patent-pubescent to -villous. Leaves subcoriaceous, undulate, auriculate-semiamplexicaul, shortly decurrent, broadly oblong to oblong-lanceolate or elliptical, pinnatifid, patent-pubescent to subglabrous; segments suborbicular to broadly triangular, lobed, with rather strong spines 3-10(-15) mm. Capitula in apical clusters of (1-)2-10, with lanceolate, spinose-pinnatifid, undulate subtending leaves. Involucre 18-25(-28) × 15-26 mm; bracts with apical part as long as or longer than basal part, with apical spine (3-)5-10 mm, without vittae. Corolla 13-19 mm, pale yellow. Achenes 3-5 mm; pappus 12-18 mm.{\i  Wet mountain pastures and screes. • Alps, N. & C. Appennini, Alpi Apuane.} Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b spinosissimum}: Capitula with at least 8 herbaceous subtending leaves much longer than capitulum. Outer involucral bracts much shorter than the middle and inner, suberect; middle with erecto-patent apex; inner erect, not ciliate. 2n = 34.{\i  Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b bertolonii} (Sprengel) Werner,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 70}: 18 (1975) ({\i C. bertolonii} Sprengel): Capitula with 2-5 coriaceous subtending leaves scarcely longer than capitulum. Outer and middle involucral bracts subequal, with patent apex; inner suberect, with fimbriate-ciliate apex. 2n = 34.{\i  Appennini, Alpi Apuane}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C. obvallatum} (Bieb.) Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3}: 559 (1819), from S.W. Asia, has been recorded from the mountains of E. Jugoslavia, probably in error. It is like {\b 41} but has the stem 40-100(-150) cm, leaves pinnatifid to pinnatisect, glabrous above, crispate-villous to glabrescent beneath, the capitula subtended and exceeded by numerous narrow, pectinate leaves which are nearly reduced to long spines, the involucre 15-20 × 15-20 mm, with appressed bracts having an apical spine 1-2·5 mm and distinct vittae.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. C. glabrum} DC. in Lam. & DC., {\i Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 5}: 463 (1815). Perennial (10-)20-40(-60) cm. Stem simple or sparingly branched, patent-puberulent. Leaves coriaceous, undulate, attenuate-sessile, not decurrent, oblong, pinnatifid, subglabrous; segments suborbicular to broadly triangular, lobed, with stout spines (7-)9-13(-16) mm. Capitula usually solitary, pedunculate, with 5 or more, linear-lanceolate, long-spiny, undulate subtending leaves exceeding capitulum. Involucre 17-25 × (18-)20-25(-30) mm; bracts with erecto-patent to suberect apical part much shorter than the basal part and a spine 1·5-4 mm, the vittae absent or indistinct. Corolla 18-22 mm, pale yellow. Achenes 5-7 mm; pappus 18-23 mm. 2n = 34.{\i  Damp screes and streamsides. • Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   C. albicans} Willk., {\i Linnaea}{\b  30}: 109 (1859), described from S. Spain (prov. Granada), is a little-known species or possibly a hybrid, which is like {\b 42} but has the stem 30-100 cm, subglabrous, leaves with spines 3-5 mm, capitula smaller, 1-3 in a dense corymb or cluster, the uppermost leaves shorter than the capitulum, involucral bracts with a weak spine up to 2 mm and distinct vittae and whitish corolla.
\par

\par
239}
\par