{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 17 Outer involucral bracts suberect
\par
22 Capitula numerous, in a much-branched, narrow,
\par
   distally dense panicle; involucre not more than 27 mm;
\par
   corolla not more than 25 mm; pappus not more than 20 mm . {\b 6. hypopsilum}
\par
22 Capitula usually few in a lax corymb or a raceme;
\par
   involucre usually more than 30 mm; corolla usually
\par
    more than 25 mm; pappus usually more than 20 mm
\par
23 Stem up to 50 cm; capitula with 3-6 outer subtending 
\par
   leaves equalling or exceeding capitulum and numerous 
\par
   inner subtending leaves shorter than capitulum;
\par
   involucre densely, rarely sparsely, arachnoid-lanate .................... {\b 10. lobelii}
\par
23 Stem usually more than 50 cm; capitula either with 
\par
    5-20 subtending leaves equalling to exceeding capitulum  or
\par
    with 1-7 subtending leaves shorter than to equalling capitulum;
\par
    involucre usually subglabrous to sparsely arachnoid-lanate
\par
24 Leaves shortly setose above; capitula with up to 7(-9)
\par
    subtending leaves, shorter than to equalling capitulum
\par
25 Narrow distal part of involucral bracts with spinulose
\par
    margin; pappus 19-22 mm ...................................................... {\b 3. bulgaricum}
\par
25 Narrow distal part of involucral bracts with smooth
\par
    margin; pappus 25-30 mm ............................................................ {\b 8. lacaitae}
\par
24 Leaves with long, patent bristles above; capitula with usually
\par
    more than 8 subtending leaves, equalling or exceeding capitulum
\par
26 Middle involucral bracts distinctly widened into a
\par
    lanceolate to rhombic appendage with slightly scarious-
\par
    fimbriate to ciliate, not spinulose margin ............................. {\b 16. odontolepis}
\par
26 Middle involucral bracts slightly widened into a narrow
\par
    appendage with spinulose-ciliate to spinose-denticulate margin
\par
27 Leaves broadly auriculate-semiamplexicaul; middle 
\par
    involucral bracts with apical spine 4-7 mm; corolla 30-38 mm ...... {\b 1. ferox}
\par
27 Leaves narrowly auriculate-semiamplexicaul; middle
\par
    involucral bracts with apical spine 1·5-3·5 mm;
\par
    corolla 23-31 mm .............................................................. {\b 7. vallis-demonis}
\par
16 Apex of involucral bracts usually less than 0·5 mm
\par
    wide, gradually narrowed into the apical spine
\par
28 Apex of involucral bracts with spinulose-denticulate 
\par
    or -ciliate margin
\par
29 Involucral bracts gradually narrowed from base to apex
\par
30 Capitula with 6-12 subtending leaves equalling or 
\par
    exceeding capitulum; involucre 10-15 mm wide ............... {\b 4. polycephalum}
\par
30 Capitula with 1-3 subtending leaves shorter than 
\par
    capitulum; involucre 20-35 mm wide .................................... {\b 24. serrulatum}
\par
29 Involucral bracts obviously divided into a wide basal
\par
    part and a narrow apical part
\par
31 Leaves ± herbaceous, pinnatifid, the segments with 
\par
    2-3 wide lobes; involucral bracts not spinulose-setose
\par
    on inner surface ...................................................................... {\b 25. laniflorum}
\par
31 Leaves coriaceous, pinnatisect, the segments divided 
\par
    to the base into 2 narrow lobes; involucral bracts minutely
\par
     spinulose-setose on inner surface of the curved part
\par
32 Involucre 35-42 × 35-45(-50) mm; corolla 34-38 mm,
\par
    purple ............................................................................................ {\b 13. costae}
\par
32 Involucre 25-35 × 20-40(-60) mm; corolla 27-30 mm,
\par
    white, rarely pink or purplish .................................................. {\b 2. heldreichii}
\par
28 Apex of involucral bracts with glabrous, or rarely 
\par
    softly ciliate margin
\par
33 Involucral bracts with apical spine more than 4 mm
\par
34 Involucral bracts with rigidly squarrose-patent to 
\par
    recurved apical spine 10-30 mm; leaves narrowly
\par
    auriculate-semiamplexicaul ................................................. {\b 11. morisianum}
\par
34 Involucral bracts with erecto-patent to patent apical
\par
    spine 4-8 mm; leaves broadly auriculate-semiamplexicaul
\par
35 Capitula subtended by 10-20 linear, pectinate-spiny 
\par
    leaves equalling or somewhat exceeding capitulum;
\par
    involucre sparsely arachnoid-hairy to subglabrous;
\par
    corolla usually white ........................................................................ {\b 1. ferox}
\par
35 Capitula subtended by 5-10 pinnatifid, squarrose spiny
\par
    leaves usually much longer than capitulum; involucre
\par
    arachnoid-lanate; corolla usually purple ............................. {\b 12. richteranum}
\par
33 Involucral bracts with apical spine less than 4 mm
\par
36 Plant (60-)10-200(-400) cm; involucral bracts appressed,
\par
    with erecto-patent apical spine, gradually narrowed 
\par
    towards the apex ....................................................................... {\b 26. scabrum}
\par
36 Plant not more than 100 cm; involucral bracts erecto-
\par
    patent to recurved, obviously divided into a wide basal
\par
    and a narrow apical part
\par
37 Involucre (15-)20-30 × 15-30 mm; mature pappus 15-20 mm
\par
38 Leaves strongly undulate; capitula with 8-12 squarrose
\par
    -spiny subtending leaves 2-4 times as long as capitulum;
\par
    corolla white ........................................................................ {\b 5. morinifolium}
\par
38 Leaves almost flat; capitula not subtended by leaves, or 
\par
    subtended by 1-2 very small leaves; corolla purple or pink .. {\b 25. laniflorum}
\par
37 Involucre 25-40 × 25-40(-45) mm; mature pappus 21-40 mm
\par
39 Cauline leaves not decurrent, sparsely arachnoid-hairy
\par
    to glabrous beneath; corolla longer than the pappus;
\par
    pappus 21-30 mm .................................................................. {\b 14. giraudiasii}
\par
39 Middle cauline leaves decurrent for c. 1 cm, sparsely
\par
   to densely arachnoid-lanate beneath; corolla as long 
\par
   as the mature pappus; pappus (25-)32-40 mm ....................... {\b 27. echinatum}
\par
1 Leaves without rigid setae on upper surface
\par
40 Stem leafy up to the apex
\par
41 Stem with spiny wings, at least in the basal half
\par
42 Leaves pubescent to villous above, sparsely arachnoid
\par
   lanate to -tomentose beneath
\par
43 Perennial; involucral bracts without vittae .............................. {\b 59. creticum}
\par
43 Biennial; involucral bracts with conspicuous vittae
\par
44 Stem winged up to the apex; leaves herbaceous ....................... {\b 57. palustre}
\par
44 Stem not winged towards the apex; leaves coriaceous .......... {\b 58. flavispina}
\par
42 Leaves glabrous or subglabrous
\par
45 Biennial; leaves with spines 2-4 mm; involucre 7-12 mm
\par
46 Leaves elliptic-lanceolate to elliptical; involucral
\par
    bracts glabrous, with weak apical spinule 0·3-0·5 mm ..... {\b 56. bourgaeanum}
\par
46 Leaves narrowly oblong- to linear-lanceolate; invo-
\par
    lucral bracts sparsely arachnoid-hairy, with pungent
\par
    apical spine 1-3 mm ..................................................... {\b 55. brachycephalum}
\par
45 Perennial; leaves with spines 4-15 mm; involucre 10-17 mm
\par
47 Roots without tubers; stem-wings flat, with slender,
\par
    flexuous spines ............................................................ {\b 52. monspessulanum}
\par
47 Roots with fusiform tubers; stem-wings undulate, with 
\par
    stout, rigid spines ......................................................................... {\b 54. alatum}
\par
41 Stem without wings or leaves decurrent for not more than 2 cm
\par
48 Corolla yellowish or white; capitula subtended by leaves
\par
49 Leaves herbaceous, flat, with slender marginal spinules usually
\par
     less than 6 mm; involucral bracts with slender apical spine
\par
50 Plant villous with reddish-brown flexuous hairs;
\par
    capitula subtended by narrowly lanceolate leaves with 
\par
    long, reddish-brown, subspinose fimbriae .......................... {\b 39. carniolicum}
\par
50 Stem sparsely greyish-arachnoid-hairy near apex;
\par
   leaves subglabrous; capitula subtended by ovate, pale,
\par
   weakly spinulose-ciliate leaves .............................................. {\b 40. oleraceum}
\par
49 Leaves ± coriaceous, undulate, with stout marginal spines
\par
    usually more than 6 mm; involucral bracts with stout apical spine
\par

\par
233}
\par