{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 lobed with rounded lobes each with an apical spine up to 2 mm. Leaves glabrous or sparsely hairy above, greyish-tomentose beneath, with straight unicellular hairs and very few multicellular hairs on the veins, with rounded dentate lobes, each with an apical spine up to 1 mm. Capitula 15-18 × 10-13 mm, oblong; peduncles up to 12 cm and 1 mm in diameter; involucral bracts closely imbricate or slightly squarrose, the middle with an oblong-ovate, veinless, verruculose proximal part 1*5-2 mm wide and contracted in the distal 1/3 of the bract into a smooth, obtuse, shortly spinose apex with the mid-vein raised in the distal 1/3, slightly arachnoid-hairy; inner bracts 2-3 mm wide, 1 1/6 times as long as the inner middle, broadly lanceolate, with scarious margins, 3-veined in the distal 1/2. Corolla 9-11 mm. Achenes 2·5-3 mm, compressed, rugulose; apical prominence shortly stipitate, cylindrical, 5-lobed; pappus 7-9 mm.{\i  Rocky ground. Kriti, Karpathos.} Cr. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. C. meonanthus} Hoffmanns. & Link,{\i  Fl. Port.}{\b  2}: 186 (1820-1828). Annual to biennial up to 65 cm. Stem arachnoid-hairy and glabrescent; wings up to 7 mm wide, palmate, with a slender apical spine up to 5 mm. Leaves oblanceolate to oblong, glabrescent above, arachnoid-hairy beneath with multicellular and sinuate unicellular hairs, with 8-10 pairs of palmate, acutely lobulate lobes, each with an apical spine up to 4 mm. Capitula 15-20 × 8-12 mm, subsessile, usually in clusters of 2-8; involucral bracts 0*75-1*25 mm wide, imbricate but usually squarrose, linear-lanceolate, smooth on the back, glabrous or nearly so, with scarious margin, the mid-vein raised in the distal 1/2; inner bracts 1 1/3 times as long as the inner middle, with scarious margins, 3-veined in the distal 1/3. Corolla 11-16 mm. Achenes 3-4 mm, compressed, smooth; apical prominence small, sessile or shortly stipitate, entire; pappus 10-13 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Sandy ground, usually near the sea. • C. & S. Portugal, S.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Closely resembling {\b 36} in vegetative characters but easily distinguished by the smaller, cylindrical, usually congested capitula with more or less recurved free apices to the involucral bracts and smaller florets.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. C. tenuiflorus} Curtis,{\i  Fl. Lond.}{\b  2}({\b 6}): t. 55 (1793). Annual or biennial up to 75 cm. Stem more or less arachnoid-hairy; wings up to 10 mm wide, triangular, with an apical spine up to 5 mm. Leaves oblanceolate to lanceolate, sparsely hairy above, arachnoid-hairy beneath, with mostly unicellular hairs, with 6-8 pairs of broadly triangular, acute lobes, each with an apical spine up to 5 mm. Capitula 15-20 × 5-10 mm, cylindrical, sessile, in compact clusters of 3-8(-12); involucral bracts imbricate but with suberect or patent apices 1·5-2 mm wide, ovate-lanceolate, more or less contracted at the apex, glabrous, smooth, with scarious entire margin, the mid-vein raised in the distal 1/3; inner bracts 11/4 times as long as the middle bracts, veinless, subulate, with scarious, entire margin and apex. Corolla 10-14 mm. Achenes 4-5 mm, swollen, smooth; apical prominence shortly stipitate, clavate, entire; pappus 11-13 mm. 2n = 54.{\i  Dry, open habitats. W. Europe. }Az. Be Bl Br Co Ga Hb He Ho Hs It Lu Sa [No Su].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. C. pycnocephalus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1151 (1763). Annual up to 80 cm. Stem arachnoid-hairy but greyish-tomentulose above; wings up to 5 mm wide, triangular, with an apical spine up to 5 mm. Leaves oblanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, sparsely hairy above, arachnoid-lanuginous beneath with mostly unicellular hairs, with 2-5 pairs of palmate lobes, each with an apical spine up to 12 mm. Capitula 15-20 × 7-13 mm, cylindrical, subsessile or on peduncles up to 10 cm and 2 mm in diameter, solitary or in clusters of 2-3; involucral bracts imbricate, arachnoid hairy; inner bracts up to 11/4 times as long as the middle, faintly 3-veined in the distal 1/2, not scarious at margin distally. Corolla 10-14 mm. Achenes 4-5 mm, compressed, smooth; apical prominence small, shortly stipitate, clavate, entire; pappus 10-14 mm. 2n = 62-64. {\i Waste places. S. & S.E. Europe; casual further north.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rs (K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    Throughout the range of this species there is much variation in the wings of the peduncles but none of this variation is correlated with other characters or with distribution. The following subspecies, based on other characters, may, however, be recognized.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pycnocephalus}: Apices of involucral bracts 2-3 mm wide, erecto-patent, ovate-lanceolate, more or less contracted into a spine, with the mid-vein raised in the distal 3/4.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except S. Greece and U.S.S.R.}
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b albidus} (Bieb.) Kazmi, {\i Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}){\b  5}: 446 (1964) ({\i C. albidus} Bieb., {\i C. argentatus} auct., non L., {\i C. arabicus} auct. ross., non Jacq. ex Murray, {\i C. cinereus} sensu Tamamsch., ? an Bieb.): Apices of involucral bracts 1*5-2 mm wide, oblong-lanceolate, suberect, gradually tapering at apex, with the mid-vein raised only in the distal 1/2. {\i S. half of Balkan peninsula; Krym to W. Kazakhstan}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. C. australis} L. fil., {\i Suppl.} 348 (1781) ({\i C. marmoratus }Boiss. & Heldr.). Annual up to 60 cm. Stem more or less arachnoid-hairy; wings up to 8 mm wide, triangular, with a stout apical spine up to 12 mm. Leaves glabrescent above, arachnoid-hairy beneath with multicellular and unicellular hairs, lyrate-pinnatipartite with 2-5 pairs of triangular lobes, each with a stout apical spine up to 30 mm. Capitula 15-20 × 5-10 mm, cylindrical, subsessile and mostly in clusters of 2-5; involucral bracts imbricate, usually suberect at apex, 1·5-3 mm wide, ovate lanceolate, more or less contracted into a spiny apex, glabrous or almost so, minutely serrulate but not scarious at the margin, with the mid-vein raised only in the distal 1/3; inner bracts 11/4 times as long as the inner middle bracts, veinless, with scarious margin. Corolla 10-12 mm. Achenes 4-5 mm, compressed, smooth; apical prominence absent; pappus 10-13 mm.{\i  Waste places. C. & E. Mediterranean region.} Al Co Gr It Ju Si Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. C. cephalanthus} Viv., {\i Fl. Cors. }14 (1824). Annual or biennial up to 100 cm. Stem arachnoid-hairy; branches greyish tomentose; wings very narrow, with triangular projections up to 5 mm, each with an apical spine up to 7 mm. Leaves oblanceolate or lanceolate, subglabrous above, very sparsely arachnoid-hairy beneath, with unicellular hairs, with 6-8 pairs of palmate lobes, each with 1-3 pairs of triangular-acute lobules. Capitula 13-20 × 7-10 mm, subsessile, in dense clusters of 5-20; involucral bracts 2-2·5 mm wide, closely imbricate, more or less contracted into a spine 1-2 mm, the mid-vein raised only in the distal 1/3, arachnoid, smooth, the outer bracts ovate, the middle ovate-lanceolate; inner bracts 1 1/5 times as long as the inner middle, veinless. Corolla 13-16 mm. Achenes 2·5-3·5 mm, swollen, rugulose; apical prominence shortly stipitate, 5-lobed; pappus 8-12 mm. 2n = 22. {\i Rocky places, usually near the sea. W. Mediterranean region.} Co Hs It Sa Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. C. fasciculiflorus} Viv., {\i Fl. Cors., App.}{\b  1}: 6 (1825). Annual or biennial. Stem glabrous or sparsely hairy; wings palmate-triangular, divided into oblong-lanceolate lobes, each with an apical spine up to 7 mm. Leaves lanceolate or oblong, glabrous, with 8-10 pairs of palmate lobes divided into triangular-acute lobules, each with an apical spine up to 7 mm. Capitula 12-20 × 6-12 mm, subsessile, in dense clusters of (3-)5-15; involucral
\par
\par 231}
\par