{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b atticum} Franco, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 45 (1975): Stem-wings up to 6 mm wide. Leaf-lobes narrowly triangular, with 2-4 pairs of spiny teeth. Capitula subglobose; involucral bracts rather abruptly contracted into a spiny process 15-20 mm, the bracts glabrous.{\i  S. & C. Greece; Turkey-in-Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. O. messeniacum} Halácsy, {\i Consp. Fl. Graec.}{\b  2}: 122 (1902). Plant up to 100 cm, with unicellular hairs, not viscid. Stem yellowish, usually sparsely arachnoid-hairy to glabrous; wings up to 10 mm wide, palmatifid, with linear or oblong lobes with a spine up to 3 mm. Leaves up to 20 × 6 cm, oblong-lanceolate, sessile, pinnatisect, with 6-8 pairs of distant lobes, glabrous above, greyish-arachnoid-hairy beneath; segments oblong-linear, with apical spine up to 3 mm. Capitula 40-50 mm in diameter, subglobose, sparsely arachnoid-hairy at base when young; involucral bracts 3-5 mm wide near base, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, flat below, triquetrous above, glabrous, appressed in basal 1/5, the outer and middle gradually narrowing into a spiny patent or deflexed process 24-32 mm with an apical spine 4-6 mm. Corolla 25-30 mm, purple. Achenes 4-5 mm, brown; pappus 8-10 mm. •{\i  S. Greece} ({\i near Kalamai}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. O. macracanthum} Schousboe, {\i Vextr. Marokko} 198 (1800). Plant up to 150 cm, with unicellular hairs, not viscid. Stem white-lanate; wings up to 10 mm wide, not reticulate-veined, with apical spine up to 5 mm. Leaves up to 40 × 20 cm, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, sessile, pinnatifid, with 5-7 pairs of lobes, densely tomentose, greyish above, white beneath; lobes triangular-acute, with an apical spine up to 6 mm. Capitula 30-60 mm in diameter, subglobose, arachnoid-hairy at base; involucral bracts imbricate near base, the outer and lower middle patent or deflexed, the basal part 5-6 mm wide, cochleariform, glabrous, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, with a rigid apex 15-30 mm having involute margin and spine 6-7 mm. Corolla c. 30 mm, purple. Achenes 4-5 mm, greyish-brown; pappus 7-9 mm, reddish. {\i S.E. Portugal, S. & S.E. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. RECURVATA Franco. Plant with unicellular hairs. Leaves not reticulately veined beneath. Involucral bracts wide, flat, acuminate, shorter than florets, the outer and lower middle usually strongly deflexed in the apical 1/2-2/3. Corolla-lobes glandular. Pappus-hairs scabrid or shortly plumose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. O. bracteatum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 10}): 91 (1849). Plant up to 180 cm. Stem yellowish or white, hairy; wings palmately spiny. Leaves up to 30 × 8 cm, oblong-lanceolate, sessile, pinnatisect or almost pinnate, with 10-12 pairs of lobes; lobes palmate to dentate. Capitula 50-70 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose, glabrous; involucral bracts broadly lanceolate, long-acuminate, with a stout pungent apex. Corolla 30-40 mm, purple. Achenes 5-6 mm, brown; pappus 8-10 mm. {\i Calcicole. S. part of Balkan peninsula and Aegean region, mainly in the mountains.} Bu Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant white at first, lanate; capitula surrounded by 
\par
  upper leaves ..................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b bracteatum}
\par
1 Plant greyish-green, not lanate; capitula not surrounded
\par
  by upper leaves
\par
2 Stem-wings up to 5 mm wide; involucral bracts with 
\par
  apical spine up to 5 mm ............................................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b myriacanthum}
\par
2 Stem-wings up to 15 mm wide; involucral bracts with 
\par
  apical spine up to 12 mm
\par
3 Leaves greyish-green and glabrescent beneath; involucral
\par
  bracts 5-8 mm wide ................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b illex}
\par
3 Leaves densely whitish-tomentose beneath; involucral 
\par
  bracts 8-10 mm wide .......................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b creticum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b bracteatum}: Stem white-lanate, becoming brownish, glabrescent and sparsely glandular below; wings up to 8 mm wide, with a spine up to 10 mm. Leaves white, lanate; lobes with apical spine up to 12 mm. Involucral bracts 5-8 mm wide, with apical spine up to 10 mm.{\i  Karpathos.} ({\i Anatolia}.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ilex} (Janka) Franco, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 46 (1975) ({\i O. ilex} Janka,{\i  O. dirphyum} Halácsy): Stem sparsely arachnoid-hairy, eglandular; wings up to 15 mm wide, with a spine up to 15 mm. Leaves glabrescent, bright green above, greyish-green beneath; lobes with apical spine up to 10 mm. Involucral bracts 5-8 mm wide, with apical spine up to 10 mm.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b creticum} Franco,{\i  loc. cit.} (1975): Stem with sparse multicellular hairs; wings up to 12 mm wide, with a spine up to 13 mm. Leaves greyish-green above, densely whitish-tomentose beneath; lobes with apical spine up to 20 mm. Involucral bracts 8-10 mm wide, with apical spine up to 12 mm.{\i  Kriti}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b myriacanthum} (Boiss.) Franco, {\i loc. cit.} (1975) ({\i O. myriacanthum} Boiss.): Stem with sparse multicellular hairs; wings up to 5 mm wide, with spines up to 10 mm. Leaves greyish-green and densely whitish-tomentose beneath; lobes with apical spine up to 4 mm. Involucral bracts 5-8 mm wide, with apical spine up to 5 mm. •{\i  S.E. Peloponnisos }({\i Parnon Oros}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. O. illyricum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 821 (1753). Plant up to 130 cm. Stem yellowish, hairy; wings not reticulate-veined. Leaves up to 55 × 15 cm, oblong-lanceolate, sessile, pinnatifid or pinnatisect with 8-10 pairs of remote lobes; lobes triangular-cuneate, entire or lobulate. Capitula 30-50 × 40 60 mm, globose-ovoid, arachnoid-hairy below; involucral bracts 5-7 mm wide, imbricate, subappressed, or the outer and middle recurved in apical half, flat, slightly convex distally, the outer bracts shorter than the others. Corolla 25-35 mm, purplish. Achenes 4-5 mm; pappus 10-12 mm, the hairs plumose. 2n = 34.{\i  Mediterranean region, Portugal, S. Bulgaria.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem glabrescent; leaves sparsely hairy, with prominent
\par
  veins beneath ..................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b horridum} 
\par
1 Stem white- or grey-tomentose; leaves densely greyish-
\par
  tomentose, with indistinct veins beneath
\par
2 Lower middle and outer involucral bracts recurved or 
\par
  patent; corolla not more than 30 mm ................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b illyricum}
\par
2 Involucral bracts appressed and erect or the outermost
\par
  slightly erecto-patent at apex; corolla more than 30 mm
\par
  ....................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b cardunculus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b illyricum}: Stem white- or grey-tomentose; wings up to 10 mm wide, with a spine up to 5 mm. Leaves white- or greyish-tomentose, with indistinct veins beneath. Involucral bracts narrowed into spine up to 3 mm, the lower middle and the outer recurved or patent. Corolla 25-30 mm. {\i From E. Italy westwards}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cardunculus} (Boiss.) Franco,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 46 (1957)({\i O. cardunculus }Boiss.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but involucral bracts contracted into a spine up to 2 mm, appressed and erect or sometimes the outermost with an erecto-patent apex; corolla 30-35 mm. {\i E. Mediterranean region, S. Bulgaria}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b horridum} (Viv.) Franco,{\i  loc. cit.} (1975) ({\i O. horridum} Viv.): Stem glabrescent; wings up to 15 mm wide, with a spine up to 8 mm. Leaves green, very sparsely arachnoid-hairy and with prominent veins beneath. Involucral bracts narrowing into a spine up to 3 mm, usually appressed, though recurved in apical 1/3. Corolla 25-30 mm. •{\i  C. Mediterranean region.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. PSEUDOCARLINA Franco. Plant with long, appressed unicellular hairs. Leaves not reticulately veined beneath. Involucral bracts flat, shorter than florets, the outer and middle widening into
\par

\par
247}
\par