{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. C. candelabrum} Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 251 (1846). Glabrous biennial 150-200(-300) cm. Stem much-branched. Leaves coriaceous, undulate, lanceolate to oblong, pinnatifid; segments triangular, lobed; lobes dentate, with stout spines (6-)10-15(-25) mm. Capitula in clusters of 4-12, subsessile at apex of short branches, forming a long panicle, with 2-8 narrow, rigid, undulate, spiny subtending leaves about as long as capitulum. Involucre 14-19 × 7-13 mm; bracts appressed, with distinct vittae; outer with rather stout, erecto-patent spine 1-3 mm; middle to inner somewhat expanded and spinescent-ciliate at apex. Corolla 13-17 mm, white or whitish-yellow. Achenes 3·5-5 mm; pappus 13-16 mm.{\i  Grassland, scrub, stony places. • Balkan peninsula, S.W. Romania.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  C. echinus} (Bieb.) Hand.-Mazz.,{\i  Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}){\b  23}: 197 (1909) ({\i C. scleranthum} Bieb.), from Anatolia, has been recorded from Turkey-in-Europe and Czechoslovakia, but probably only as a casual. It is like {\b 43} but differs in the pubescent stem 40-60(-130) cm, leaves whitish-arachnoid-tomentose beneath, the capitula solitary or in clusters of 2-3 on short branches, the outer involucral bracts with an ovate, whitish-fimbriate appendage and an apical spine 4-6 mm, and the corolla 17-20 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. C. acaule} Scop., {\i Annus Hist.-Nat.}{\b  2}: 62 (1769). Perennial, acaulescent or rarely with stem 5-15(-35) cm. Leaves herbaceous, undulate, oblong to oblong-lanceolate, pinnatisect; segments ovate to suborbicular, with 2-5 spinose-dentate lobes. Involucre 20-32 × (10-)16-25(-30) mm; bracts appressed, the vittae absent or indistinct. Corolla 23-35 mm, purple. Achenes 3-5 mm.{\i  From N. England and Estonia southwards to S. Spain, C. Jugoslavia and S.E. Russia.} Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho Hs It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaf-lobes with slender, pungent spines 2-5(-7) mm;
\par
  middle involucral bracts obtuse, not spiny ........................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b acaule}
\par
1 Leaf-lobes with stout, yellowish spines (3-)6-12 mm;
\par
  middle involucral bracts usually acute, with pungent 
\par
  spinules
\par
2 Capitula 1-5; pappus 18-22 mm, much shorter than the 
\par
  corolla ............................................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b gregarium}
\par
2 Capitula usually (3-)5-12; pappus 24-30 mm, about 
\par
  equalling the corolla ..................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b esculentum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b acaule}: Acaulescent, rarely with stem up to 15(-35) cm. Leaves patent-pubescent beneath especially on the veins; lobes with slender, pungent spines 2-5(-7) mm. Capitula usually solitary, rarely 2-3(-8), shortly pedunculate, with 1-3 subtending leaves about as long as capitulum. Involucral bracts obtuse; outer with spinule up to 1 mm. Pappus 21-27 mm, slightly shorter than the corolla. 2n = 34.{\i  Dry grassland; calcicole. • Throughout the range of the species except S. Spain and most of U.S.S.R.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b gregarium} (Boiss. ex DC.) Werner,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  70}: 19 (1975) ({\i C. acaule} var.{\i  gregarium} Boiss. ex DC.): Stem 0-11(-15) cm. Leaves patent-pubescent beneath, especially on the veins; lobes with stout spines 6-12 mm. Capitula usually solitary, rarely 2-5, crowded or shortly pedunculate, with 1-3 subtending leaves equalling or exceeding capitulum. Outer involucral bracts usually obtuse, with spine 1-2 mm; middle usually acute, with pungent spinule. Pappus 18-22 mm, much shorter than the corolla. 2n = 34+2B. {\i Damp pastures and screes. • Mountains of S. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b esculentum} (Sievers) Werner, {\i loc. cit.} (1975) ({\i Cnicus esculentus} Sievers, {\i Cirsium esculentum} (Sievers) C.A. Meyer): Stem (0-)5-10(-35) cm. Leaves patent-pubescent beneath, sparsely arachnoid-hairy especially on the veins; lobes with stout spines 3-10 mm. Capitula usually (3-)5-12 crowded at apex or rarely shortly pedunculate, with 2-8 subtending leaves about as long as capitulum. Involucral bracts long; outer rather obtuse, with spine 2-4 mm; middle acute, with spines up to 1 mm. Pappus 24-30 mm, about equalling corolla.{\i  Steppes and saline soils. U.S.S.R., northwards to} c. 56°{\i  N. and westwards to} c. 34° {\i E}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. C. mairei} Halácsy, {\i Consp. Fl. Graec., Suppl.} 59 (1908). Perennial 20-40 cm. Stem simple, leafy up to the apex. Leaves coriaceous, undulate, oblong, pinnatisect, pubescent above, sparsely arachnoid-lanate beneath; segments triangular, lobed, with strong spines 5-10 mm. Capitulum solitary, with 2-7 narrow, undulate-spiny subtending leaves shorter or rarely slightly longer than capitulum. Involucre 20-22 × 20-23 mm; bracts acute, erect, with pungent spine 1-5 mm; vittae absent. Corolla purple.{\i  Damp meadows. • S.C. Greece} ({\i Giona Oros}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    A little-known species of doubtful affinity.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  C. epiroticum} Petrak, {\i Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ges.} {\b 2}({\b 1}): 13 (1960), described from a single specimen from N.W. Greece (Pindhos Oros), is perhaps related to {\b 45} but has the stem c. 70 cm, with c. 5 capitula crowded at the apex, the lower leaves shortly decurrent, lanceolate, pinnatifid, with 2-lobed segments and involucral bracts with a weak spinule 1-2 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. C. valentinum} Porta & Rigo, {\i Atti Accad. Agiati}{\b  9}: 38 (1892). Perennial 20-70 cm. Stem usually branched, leafless just below the apex. Leaves herbaceous, somewhat undulate, semiamplexicaul, sometimes shortly decurrent, oblong to oblong lanceolate, pinnatifid, with long flexuous hairs on both sides especially on the veins; segments triangular, lobed, with strong spines 4-8 mm. Capitula solitary, usually long-pedunculate, usually not subtended by leaves. Involucre 15-21(-24) × 13-20 mm; bracts acute, with conspicuous vittae and pungent spine 1-2 mm; outer erect; middle with erecto-patent apex. Corolla 23-26 mm, purple. Pappus 16-20 mm. •{\i  E. Spain} ({\i S.W. of Valencia}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    A species of doubtful affinity.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. C. helenioides} (L.) Hill,{\i  Hort. Kew.} 64 (1768) ({\i C. heterophyllum }(L.) Hill). Perennial (30-)44-100(-150) cm, with subterranean stolons. Stem simple or sparingly branched above, usually leafless towards the apex. Leaves herbaceous, flat, auriculate-semiamplexicaul, not decurrent, lanceolate to broadly oblong, entire or lobed to pinnatifid, glabrous or subglabrous above, white-arachnoid-tomentose beneath; segments narrowly triangular to oblong-lanceolate, entire to dentate, with soft spinules up to 2 mm. Capitula solitary, pedunculate, rarely in apical clusters of 2-4(-6), subsessile. Involucre (18-)20-28(-32) × (17-)20-35(-40) mm; bracts erect, with weak spinule up to 1 mm and distinct vittae; outermost acute; middle with obtuse to suborbicular, appendiculate, scarious-margined apex; inner with lanceolate, membranous appendage. Corolla (20-)25-30 mm, purple. Achenes 3-5 mm; pappus (18-)22-26(-32) mm, inner setae expanded at apex. 2n = c. 34.{\i  Damp grassland and scrub; somewhat calcifuge. At low altitudes in N. Europe and E. part of U.S.S.R.; mountain ranges of Europe southwards to the Pyrenees and Transylvania.} Au Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He ?Hs It ?Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su [Is].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. C. pannonicum} (L. fil.) Link, {\i Enum. Horti Berol. Alt.}{\b  2}: 229 (1822). Perennial (25-)40-80(-120) cm, with short rhizome and cylindrical roots. Stem simple or with 1-3 branches, leafless above. Leaves herbaceous, flat, shortly decurrent, lanceolate, entire or denticulate, usually contracted above the base, patent-pubescent to -villous and sparsely arachnoid-hairy especially on
\par

\par
240}
\par