{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 tipped, glabrous to puberulent, sometimes glandular. Receptacle glabrous, with deep pits having dentate margins. Florets reddish-purple, rarely pink or white; corolla-tube slender; limb actinomorphic or saccate. Anthers with subulate apical appendages. Achenes 4-6 mm, subtetragonal, 4- to 5-ribbed, glabrous, dull; pappus-hairs scabrid or plumose, united into a ring at base, deciduous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Unless otherwise stated, all species grow in rocky or stony ground, roadsides, waste places and similar dry, open habitats.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Unless otherwise indicated, descriptions apply to middle cauline leaves. The 2 outermost rows of bracts are referred to as {\i outer bracts}, the next 2-4 rows as {\i middle bracts}, followed by 1-2 rows of {\i inner bracts}, which are always erect, thinner and more obviously serrulate. The descriptions apply to the middle bracts, unless otherwise indicated.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: G. Rouy,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  43}: 577-599 (1896). W. J. Drees, {\i Baileya }{\b 14}: 75-86 (1966).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Acaulescent; pappus at least 20 mm ............................................. {\b 1. acaulon}
\par
1 Stems present; pappus not more than 15 mm
\par
2 Outer and middle involucral bracts expanded into a wide
\par
  fimbriate-spiny apex ..................................................................... {\b 13. majorii}
\par
2 Involucral bracts without a fimbriate-spiny apex
\par
3 Stem and mature leaves not tomentose or lanate, usually
\par
  ± green, with multicellular hairs
\par
4 Involucral bracts erect and closely imbricate
\par
5 Stem-wings up to 7 mm wide; capitula ovoid-globose ............ {\b 3. laconicum}
\par
5 Stem-wings up to 20 mm wide; capitula conical-ovoid ............ {\b 4. nervosum}
\par
4 Involucral bracts with long, ± divergent spiny processes
\par
6 Leaves with at least 10 pairs of lobes; capitula with ± 
\par
  dense arachnoid indumentum ..................................................... {\b 7. argolicum}
\par
6 Leaves with not more than 8 pairs of lobes; capitula 
\par
  glabrous or with very sparse arachnoid indumentum
\par
7 Capitula 35-50 mm in diameter; stem-wings with spines 
\par
  up to 15 mm ........................................................................... {\b 5. corymbosum}
\par
7 Capitula 55-70 mm in diameter; stem-wings with spines 
\par
  up to 5 mm ................................................................................... {\b 6. tauricum}
\par
3 Stem and leaves ± densely white- or greyish-tomentose 
\par
  or lanate, with unicellular hairs
\par
8 Involucral bracts linear-subulate; corolla-lobes eglandular ...... {\b 2. acanthium}
\par
8 Involucral bracts lanceolate to ovate, often with a 
\par
  rigid spiny apical process; corolla-lobes glandular
\par
9 Longest involucral bracts exceeding florets ............................. {\b 8. caulescens}
\par
9 Involucral bracts not exceeding florets
\par
10 Leaves pinnatisect, with oblong-linear lobes ..................... {\b 9. messeniacum}
\par
10 Leaves pinnatifid, with triangular to palmate lobes
\par
11 Stem sparsely spiny; leaves with fewer than 8 pairs of
\par
   lobes ................................................................................. {\b 10. macracanthum}
\par
11 Stem densely spiny; leaves with at least 8 pairs of lobes 
\par
12 Capitula 50-70 mm in diameter; corolla 30-40 mm ............ {\b 11. bracteatum}
\par
12 Capitula 40-60 mm in diameter; corolla 25-35 mm ............... {\b 12. illyricum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Acaulon} Franco. Acaulescent. Capitula sessile or shortly pedunculate in the centre of the basal rosette of leaves. Pappus-hairs scabrid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. acaulon} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1159 (1763). Stock sometimes divided and with several rosettes. Leaves up to 40 × 12 cm, oblong-oblanceolate to elliptic-lanceolate, shallowly lobed to pinnatisect, whitish- or grey-lanate with sparse unicellular hairs above, densely whitish-tomentose beneath; lobes with apical spine up to 10 mm; petiole flat. Capitula rounded at base, solitary or in clusters of 2-6; peduncles up to 30 mm, white-tomentose. Involucral bracts 3-4 mm wide at base, ovate-lanceolate with an acuminate spiny apex 6-12 mm, glabrous, smooth dorsally. Corolla 22-25 mm, white. Achenes 4-5 mm; pappus 20-30 mm, whitish. {\i Mountains of S. & E. Spain, Pyrenees, Corbières.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b acaulon}: Leaves more than 3 times as long as capitula, pinnatisect, with 4-6 pairs of distant, broadly triangular lobes; lobes with 2-3 pairs of palmately arranged rigid, yellowish spines. Capitula 40-60 × 50-70 mm, globose-campanulate; involucral bracts curved or patent in distal half. 600-1300{\i  m. Throughout the range of the species except E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b uniflorum} (Cav.) Franco,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 45 (1975) ({\i O. uniflorum} Cav.): Leaves not more than 3 times as long as capitula, elliptic-lanceolate, shallowly lobed or pinnatifid, with 6-8 pairs of approximate lobes; lobes dentate. Capitula 30-50 mm in diameter, ovoid-campanulate; involucral bracts closely appressed or the outer and middle slightly recurved at apex. 1300-1800 {\i m. • S. & E. Spain, C. Pyrenees}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen.{\b  Onopordum}. Stem present, erect. Leaves alternate. Capitula sessile on stem or lateral branches. Pappus-hairs scabrid or plumose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ONOPORDUM. Plant lanate or tomentose, with unicellular hairs. Leaves not reticulately veined beneath. Involucral bracts linear-subulate, erecto-patent, shorter than florets. Corolla-lobes eglandular. Pappus-hairs scabrid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. O. acanthium} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 827 (1753). Plant up to 300 cm. Stem yellowish, more or less hairy, the wings not reticulate-veined, with spines up to 5 mm. Leaves up to 35 × 20 cm oblong-ovate to broadly lanceolate or ovate, sessile, sinuate-dentate or with 6-8 pairs of broadly triangular teeth with an apical spine 5-10 mm, greyish-green and sparsely lanate above. Capitula subglobose, solitary or in terminal clusters of 2-5; involucral bracts gradually tapering into a spine up to 5 mm, not keeled, puberulent outside. Corolla 14-25 mm, purplish or white. Achenes 4-5 mm, marbled greyish-black; pappus 7-9 mm, pale reddish.{\i  Europe northwards to N. France and C. Russia, but local in the extreme south; naturalized or casual in the north.} Al Au *Be Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He *Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) [Br Da Rs (B) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The boundaries between native, naturalized and casual occurrence are hard to define.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Capitula in clusters of 3-5; corolla up to 20 mm .............. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b gautieri}
\par
1 Capitula solitary or in clusters of 2-3; corolla more 
\par
  than 20 mm
\par
2 Stem-wings up to 15 mm wide; capitula with sparse arachnoid 
\par
  indumentum ................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b acanthium}
\par
2 Stem-wings up to 7 mm wide; capitula with dense arachnoid 
\par
  indumentum ................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b parnassicum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b acanthium}: Stem appressed-hairy; wings up to 15 mm wide. Leaves densely tomentose or lanate beneath. Capitula 35-50 mm in diameter, sparsely arachnoid-hairy; involucral bracts 2-2·5 mm wide at base, glabrous inside. Corolla 22-25 mm. Achenes transversely rugose. 2n = 34. {\i Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Dwarf plants up to 50 cm, with more tomentose and undulate, crispate leaves up to 10 × 4 cm, have been called var.{\i  schultesii} Koch.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b gautieri} (Rouy) Franco,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 45 (1975) ({\i O. gautieri} Rouy): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but capitula 25-40 mm in diameter, in clusters of 3-5 in dense terminal corymbs;
\par

\par
245}
\par