{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 the veins, with rigid spinules 1-5 mm. Capitula solitary, long-pedunculate. Involucre 12-16(-18) × 13-17(-19) mm; bracts appressed, acute, without scarious margins, with pungent spinule up to 2 mm and conspicuous vittae. Corolla 14-20 mm, purple. Achenes 3-4·5 mm; pappus 13-16(-20) mm, inner setae not expanded at apex. 2n = 34.{\i  Grassland and scrub. • E.C. & S.E. Europe, extending to N. Italy and northwards to} 55°{\i  N. in C. Russia.} Au Bu Cz Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. C. heterotrichum} Pancic,{\i  Elem. Fl. Bulg.} 42 (1883). Like {\b 48} but roots with fusiform tubers; leaves linear to narrowly oblong-lanceolate, dentate, sparsely to densely arachnoid-lanate beneath, with weak spinules c. 5 mm; capitula (1-)2-5, shortly pedunculate or crowded at apex, with 1-5 narrow subtending leaves shorter than capitulum; involucre 15-18 × 15-18 mm; bracts with weak spinule 1-2 mm, the vittae absent or indistinct.{\i  Damp mountain meadows. • C. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Ju ?Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. C. canum} (L.) All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem.}{\b  1}: 151 (1785). Perennial (30-)50-150(-250) cm; roots with fusiform tubers. Stem simple or sparingly branched, leafless or with few, small bract-like leaves in upper half, spinulose-winged below. Leaves herbaceous, flat, the lower decurrent for at least half the internode, all lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate or lanceolate-elliptical, usually coarsely dentate to lobed (rarely pinnatifid), patent-pubescent and scarcely arachnoid-hairy, often glabrescent, with soft spinules 1-5 mm. Capitula solitary, long-pedunculate. Involucre (12-)17-21 × (12-)20-25 mm; bracts with conspicuous vittae, obtuse (only the outermost acute); outer with patent spinule up to 1·5 mm; middle with patent, oblong-suborbicular, scarious-margined appendage, spinulose; inner with lanceolate, membranous, ciliate appendage. Corolla 15-22 mm, purple. Achenes 3-4·5 mm; pappus 14-17 mm, the inner setae expanded at apex. 2n = 34. {\i Damp meadows and river-banks. C. & S.E. Europe, extending to C. Italy and northwards to} 55°{\i  N. in C. Russia.} Al Au Bu Cz Ge Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. C. tymphaeum} Hausskn., {\i Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver. } nov. ser., {\b 7}: 38 (1895). Like {\b 50} but leaves somewhat coriaceous, rigid, undulate, usually only shortly decurrent, lobed to pinnatifid, glabrous, usually sparsely arachnoid-hairy only on the veins; segments ovate-triangular, lobed or dentate, with strong spines (6-)8-16(-20) mm; capitula solitary or rarely in apical clusters of 2-3, shortly pedunculate; involucre (19-)22-25 × (21-)25-30 mm; corolla 23-24 mm; achenes c. 4 mm; pappus (15-)18-19 mm. {\i By springs and other damp places. • N. & C. Greece, S. Albania.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. C. monspessulanum} (L.) Hill,{\i  Hort. Kew.} 63 (1768). Perennial (20-)30-150 cm, with short stolons; tubers absent. Stem usually much-branched and leafless above, with flat wings having slender, flexible spines below. Leaves herbaceous, flat, decurrent, lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, usually glabrous, shiny, entire to dentate (rarely lobed), with slender, soft to strong spines 4-10(-15) mm. Capitula solitary or 2-5(-10), shortly pedunculate or clustered at apex of stems and branches. Involucre 10-15 × 8-15 mm; bracts with distinct vittae and patent apex; outer acute, with weak spinule 0·5-2 mm; middle with oblong-suborbicular, scarious-ciliate apex, spinulose; inner with lanceolate, membranous appendage. Corolla 13-20 mm, purple. Achenes 2·5-4 mm; pappus 9-14 mm, the inner setae slightly expanded at apex.{\i  Damp places. S.W. Europe, extending to C. Italy.} Ga Hs It ?Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. C. welwitschii} Cosson,{\i  Not. Pl. Crit.} 118 (1851). Like {\b 52} but stem simple or sparingly branched; capitula solitary or rarely 2-3, shortly pedunculate; leaves only shortly decurrent, with soft spines up to 8 mm; involucre 15-20 × 20-25 mm; bracts acute, the outer erect, the middle with erecto-patent apex; corolla 18-20 mm; pappus 13-17 mm. 2n = 34. {\i Damp places. • W.C. Portugal; S.E. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. C. alatum} (S. G. Gmelin) Bobrov, {\i Bot. Zur.}{\b  43}: 1547 (1958) ({\i C. desertorum} Fischer ex Link). Perennial 30-100 cm; roots with fusiform tubers. Stem usually branched above, with undulate wings bearing stout, rigid spines up to the apex. Leaves coriaceous, somewhat undulate, decurrent, narrowly lanceolate to elliptical, coarsely dentate to pinnatifid, subglabrous; segments broadly triangular, dentate, with stout, rigid spines 4-9 mm. Capitula 1-5, shortly pedunculate to subsessile. Involucre 12-17 × 9-13 mm; bracts erect, with patent, pungent spine 1-2·5 mm and usually distinct vittae; outer acute; middle subobtuse; inner with narrowly lanceolate, membranous appendage. Corolla 12-16(-20) mm, purple. Achenes 3-3·5 mm; pappus 10-13 mm.{\i  Dry, saline steppes and maritime sands. S. & S.E. parts of U.S.S.R., and coasts of Romania and Bulgaria.} Bu Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The degree of branching and the size and division of the leaves have been used to delimit several species and subspecies. However, no satisfactory subdivision of the species seems possible on present information.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. C. brachycephalum} Juratzka,{\i  Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  7}: 99 (1851). Biennial (30-)80-110(-200) cm, with fibrous roots. Stem usually branched above, spiny-winged up to above the middle. Leaves herbaceous, undulate, glabrous; lower and middle long-decurrent, narrowly oblong- to linear-lanceolate, lobed to pinnatifid; upper shortly decurrent, linear, lobed only at the base; segments triangular, dentate to lobed, with weak to pungent spines 2-4 mm. Capitula usually numerous, crowded at apex, sessile or shortly pedunculate. Involucre 7-10 × 6-10 mm; bracts erect, sparsely arachnoid-hairy, with indistinct vittae; outer and middle with pungent, erecto-patent apical spine 1-3 mm; outer rather obtuse; middle acute; inner with suborbicular to lanceolate, membranous appendage. Corolla 7-10(-15) mm, purple. Achenes 2·5-3 mm; pappus 5-8 mm. 2n = 68.{\i  Fens. • E.C. Europe, from E. Austria to C. Romania.} Au Cz Hu Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. C. bourgaeanum} Willk. in Willk. & Lange, {\i Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  2}: 191 (1865). Like {\b 55} but leaves nearly flat, elliptic-lanceolate to elliptical, pinnatifid; segments 2- to 3-lobed, with soft spines 2-3 mm; capitula 2-8, crowded at apex of stems and branches; involucre 10-12 × 7-9 mm; bracts erect, glabrous, with conspicuous vittae, the outer obtuse, with weak spinule 0·3-0·5 mm, the middle with suborbicular, membranous-ciliate appendage; achenes c. 4 mm; pappus c. 10 mm.{\i  Marshes. • C. Spain} ({\i near Ávila}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A little-known species closely related to {\b 57}. It requires further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. C. palustre} (L.) Scop.,{\i  Fl. Carn.} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 128 (1772). Biennial (30-)50-120(-250) cm, with fibrous roots. Stem usually branched above the middle, spiny-winged up to the apex. Leaves herbaceous, undulate, long-decurrent, patent-pubescent above, patent-pubescent and sparsely arachnoid-lanate beneath, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, pinnatifid, the upper lobed; segments triangular to oblong, lobed, with pungent spines 2-6(-13) mm. Capitula (1-)2-8, crowded at apex, sessile or shortly pedunculate. Involucre 9-14(-17) × 7-10(-13) mm; bracts erect, with conspicuous vittae and patent, weak spine 1-2 mm; outer and middle obtuse; inner with suborbicular to lanceolate, membranous-ciliate appendage. Corolla 10-15 mm, purple. Achenes 3-4 mm;
\par

\par
241}
\par