{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 pedicels up to as long as the diameter of the corolla. Corolla 2-3(-3·5) mm in diameter, whitish to greenish or sometimes reddish. Anthers dark brown to purplish. 2n = 22.{\i  Dry scrub. Aegean region.} Cr Gr. ({\i W. Anatolia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   In the mountains of the Aegean region plants are found with shorter stems and internodes, narrower and laxer inflorescences, longer pedicels and larger flowers. They have been called {\b G. samothracicum} Rech. fil.,{\i  Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih.}){\b  100}: 134 (1938) and are possibly related to {\b 36}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. G. protopycnotrichum} Ehrend. & Krendl, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  68}: 270 (1974). Stolons absent. Stems usually 60-80 cm, glabrous or often hairy, erect, with few weak branches. Leaves (15-)20-30 × 3-5 mm, broadly lanceolate, rather thin. Inflorescence relatively lax, oblong, the branches rather short and ascending; pedicels slender, shorter than the diameter of the corolla. Corolla 3-5 mm in diameter. Anthers yellowish to light brown. 2n = 22.{\i  Open and dry scrub and woods. • S.E.part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. G. mollugo} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 107 (1753) ({\i G. mollugo} subsp.{\i  tyrolense} (Willd.) Hayek). Stock usually reddish, with long subterranean stolons. Stems 30-150 cm, usually glabrous, ascending to weakly procumbent, with numerous branches. Leaves 10-25 × 2-7 mm, oblong to broadly oblanceolate, abruptly narrowed towards apex, thin, light green. Inflorescence lax, broadly ovoid, much branched; pedicels 2-3(4) mm, slender, strongly divaricate after anthesis. Corolla 2-3 mm in diameter, white. 2n = 22. {\i Open woods, hedges and meadows. • Throughout Europe, except some of the islands and parts of the north.} Al Au ?Be Br ?Bu Co Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W) Sa Si ?Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 38} and {\b 39} have often been combined under {\i G. mollugo}; their distribution-data are still provisional.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. G. album} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 7 (1768) ({\i G. erectum} Hudson 1778, non 1762). Stock with short or long subterranean stolons. Stems 50-150 cm, erect to procumbent, the branches ascending or patent, glabrous or with hairs 0·5-1·5 mm; internodes long. Leaves 10-40 × 1-7 mm, oblong to oblanceolate, thin to somewhat coriaceous. Inflorescence rather dense, broadly ovoid to oblong, mostly with rather long branches; pedicels mostly 1·5-3 mm but variable in length, less divaricate after anthesis than in {\b 38}. Corolla (2·5-)3-5 mm in diameter, white or yellowish.{\i  Open habitats. Much of Europe, but local in parts of the south and east, and only as an introduction in much of the north and north-east.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si ?Tu [Fe Hb Is No Rs(N) Su].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla yellowish; inflorescence oblong and narrow;
\par 
  plants up to 80 cm ............................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b prusense}
\par 
1 Corolla whitish; inflorescence often broadly ovoid,
\par 
  with long branches; plants often more than 80 cm
\par 
2 Leaves oblong to broadly oblanceolate, abruptly narrowed 
\par 
  towards apex; plant robust, usually hairy ................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b pycnotrichum}
\par 
2 Leaves oblanceolate, gradually narrowed towards apex;
\par 
  plant often slender, predominantly glabrous ........................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b album}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b album} ({\i G. erectum} Hudson 1778, non 1762, {\i G. mollugo} subsp.{\i  erectum} Syme): Stems up to 150 cm, often slender, predominantly glabrous, procumbent to erect, the non-flowering branches long or short. Leaves 10-30 × 1·5-5 mm, oblanceolate, gradually narrowed towards apex. Inflorescence broadly ovoid or oblong. Corolla whitish. 2n = 44. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pycnotrichum} (H. Braun) Krendl, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  114}: 539 (1967): Stems up to 150 cm, robust, usually hairy, erect, the branches short. Leaves 10-40 × 2-7 mm, oblong to broadly oblanceolate, abruptly narrowed towards apex. Inflorescence usually broadly ovoid. Corolla whitish. 2n = 44.{\i  E.C. & S.E. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b prusense} (C. Koch) Ehrend. & Krendl, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  68}: 270 (1974) ({\i G. prusense} C. Koch): Stems up to 80 cm, glabrous or hairy, erect, the non-flowering branches short. Leaves 10-25 × 2-5 mm, oblanceolate to lanceolate, gradually narrowed towards apex, usually coriaceous. Inflorescence oblong, narrow, dense. Corolla yellowish. 2n = 44. {\i S.E. Europe}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\i G. album} is very polymorphic in S.E. Europe, and many taxa have been described from Ukraine; it seems doubtful at present whether any of these can be maintained as species or even subspecies.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    For hybrids with {\b 26}, cf. {\b 27}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. G. reiseri} Halácsy,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  45}: 338 (1895). Glaucous, pruinose, glabrous; stolons absent. Stems 15-60 cm, ascending to erect; middle internodes about as long as leaves. Leaves 10-20 × 5-9 mm, obovate to broadly elliptical, coriaceous to somewhat fleshy; midrib wide; margin revolute. Inflorescence narrowly pyramidal, dense, with short erect branches; pedicels short and thick, scarcely divaricate. Corolla 2-3 mm in diameter, yellowish; lobes strongly apiculate. Anthers dark when dry. 2n = 22.{\i  Rocky places. • N. Sporades.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 41-49}). {\b G. lucidum} group. Green or glaucous and pruinose; stock with or without stolons. Stems 15-70 cm, ascending or erect, glabrous or with short papillae or somewhat long hairs. Leaves 5-30 × 0·5-2 mm, mostly remaining green when dry, linear-oblanceolate to acicular, straight, with revolute or flat, scabrid or smooth margin. Inflorescence usually oblong to ovoid, with numerous internodes. Corolla often white, sometimes yellowish, rarely greenish or reddish, rotate and flat; lobes patent. Anthers usually light brownish when dry.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant glaucous, pruinose
\par 
2 Partial inflorescences ± corymbose .......................................... {\b 49. cinereum}
\par 
2 Partial inflorescences ovoid ...................................................... {\b 48. aetnicum}
\par 
1 Plant green
\par 
3 Leaf-margin smooth, without antrorsely-directed 
\par 
  scabridity; stems smooth
\par 
4 Leaves usually less than 10 mm ........................................ {\b 44. montis-arerae}
\par 
4 Leaves more than 10 mm
\par 
5 Leaves thin; stems erect; without stolons ............................... {\b 43. truniacum}
\par 
5 Leaves somewhat fleshy; stems ascending; usually with
\par 
  stolons ................................................................................... {\b 45. meliodorum}
\par 
3 Leaf-margin with antrorsely-directed scabridity; stems
\par 
  often ± hairy or papillose
\par 
6 Inflorescence with branches from near the base of the
\par 
  stem ....................................................................................... {\b 41. fruticescens}
\par 
6 Inflorescence with branches only in upper half of stem
\par 
7 Midrib prominent, more than half as wide as leaf; stems
\par 
  mostly with papilliform hairs c. 0·1 mm ............................ {\b 42. corrudifolium}
\par 
7 Midrib slender, less than half as wide as leaf; stems
\par 
  glabrous or with hairs 0·5-1·5 mm
\par 
8 Corolla white, yellowish or greenish ......................................... {\b 46. lucidum}
\par 
8 Corolla reddish .......................................................................... {\b 47. bernardii}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. G. fruticescens} Cav., {\i Icon. Descr. }{\b 3}: 3 (1795). Stolons absent. Stems 15-60 cm, usually numerous, rigid, erect, with short hairs at the base; internodes short, with prominent angles. Leaves 3-10(-15) × 0·5-2 mm, linear, coriaceous, with hyaline apiculum; midrib rather prominent; margin strongly scabrid and revolute. Inflorescence narrow, oblong, with rigid branches from
\par 

\par 
24}
\par