{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 pappus 8-12 mm. 2n = 34.{\i  Marshes, wet meadows and woods. Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Br Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. C. flavispina} Boiss. ex DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  7}: 305 (1838). Biennial 30-100 cm, with fibrous roots. Stems much-branched above the middle, spiny-winged up to about the middle. Leaves coriaceous, undulate, oblong-lanceolate to broadly oblong, lobed to pinnatifid, sparsely arachnoid-lanate above, arachnoid-lanate to -tomentose beneath, the lower long-decurrent, the upper shortly decurrent; segments triangular to linear-triangular, dentate, with very stout spines (6-)8-12(-20) mm. Capitula 3-8(-12), crowded at apex, sessile or shortly pedunculate, rarely solitary and long-pedunculate. Involucre 10-16 × 7-16 mm; bracts erect, with conspicuous vittae and patent, pungent spine 1-2(-4) mm; outer obtuse; middle acute; inner without appendage. Corolla 14-18 mm, purple. Achenes 3-4 mm; pappus 11-14 mm.{\i  Wet places. C., E. & S. Spain, N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. C. creticum} (Lam.) D'Urv., {\i Mém. Soc. Linn. Paris}{\b  1}: 363 (1822) ({\i C. polyanthemum} auct., non (L.) Sprengel). Perennial 50-100(-120) cm, with some fusiform roots. Stem much-branched above the middle, spiny-winged up to the apex. Leaves coriaceous, strongly undulate, long-decurrent, with revolute margin, patent-hirsute and sparsely arachnoid-hairy above, patent-pubescent and sparsely to densely arachnoid-lanate beneath; lobes with very stout spines (2-)5-15(-20) mm. Involucre 12-17 × 7-10 mm; bracts erect, with patent spine, without vittae; outer obtuse; middle rounded or with suborbicular appendage. Corolla (10-)14-17 mm, purple. Achenes 2·5-3·5 mm; pappus 10-13 mm. {\i Wet meadows and marshes. C. & E. Mediterranean region.} Al Bu Co Cr Gr It Ju Rm Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b creticum}: Leaves narrowly oblong to linear-lanceolate, pinnatifid to pinnatisect (rarely entire, dentate); segments linear-triangular, divaricately lobed. Capitula solitary, shortly pedunculate to subsessile or 2-4, crowded at apex of stems and branches. Outer involucral bracts with pungent spine 0·5-2 mm; middle with weak spine 0-1(-2) mm. {\i Balkan peninsula, S. Italy, Sicilia.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b triumfetti} (Lacaita) Werner, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  70}: 19 (1975) ({\i C. creticum} var. {\i triumfetti} Lacaita): Leaves oblong-lanceolate to elliptic-lanceolate, lobed to pinnatifid (rarely entire or dentate), with broadly to narrowly triangular, lobed segments; upper pinnatisect, with linear-triangular divaricately lobed segments. Capitula 3-12, crowded at apex of stems and branches. Outer involucral bracts with strong spine 1-3(-5) mm; middle with stout, flattened spine (2·5-)4-7(-11) mm, almost as long as bract. •{\i  From Corse and Sicilia eastwards to S.W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CEPHALONOPLOS DC. (Sect. Breea (Less.) Koch). Leaves without rigid setae on the upper surface. Florets unisexual; plant incompletely dioecious. Corolla-limb 5-partite almost to the base, less than ½ as long as tube. Mature pappus much longer than corolla.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. C. arvense} (L.) Scop., {\i Fl. Carn.} ed. 2,{\b  2}: 126 (1772) (incl. {\i C. setosum} (Willd.) Bieb., {\i C. incanum} (S.G. Gmelin) Fischer). Perennial (30-)50-120(-150) cm, with far-creeping roots bearing adventitious shoots. Stem usually paniculately much-branched, leafy up to the apex. Leaves with attenuate base, sessile to semiamplexicaul, rarely shortly decurrent, lanceolate to oblong, entire to pinnatifid, glabrous to sparsely arachnoid-hairy above, glabrous to arachnoid-tomentose beneath; segments broadly to narrowly triangular, entire to lobed, rounded to acute, with weak to stout spines 1-10 mm. Capitula 1-5, shortly pedunculate at apex of branches. Involucre (9-)12-17(-20) × (6-)8-12(-15) mm; bracts appressed, with distinct vittae and short spinule; outer obtuse; middle acute. Corolla (10-)13-18 mm, pale purple. Achenes 3-4 mm; pappus (15-)20-30 mm. 2n = 34.{\i  Cultivated ground, waste places, pastures and open woodland. Almost throughout Europe.} All except Az Cr Sb, but not native in Fa Is.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  An extremely variable species in which leaf-division, size of segments and indumentum have been used for delimiting several specific or infraspecific taxa of widely differing status. Because there are gradual transitions and no evident eco-geographical differences between them they are best treated as varieties.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 119.           Picnomon}             Adanson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By K. Werner.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Cirsium} but involucral bracts without vittae and with a recurved, pinnate, spinose apical appendage; florets purple; achenes obovoid-oblong, compressed, the truncate apex indistinctly marginate and with a rounded central projection; pappus-setae subequal, the inner not expanded at the apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. acarna} (L.) Cass.,{\i  Dict. Sci. Nat.}{\b  40}: 188 (1826). Annual (10-)20-50(-70) cm, with greyish-arachnoid-lanate indumentum. Stem much-branched, with spinulose wings. Leaves decurrent, narrowly oblong to lanceolate, remotely pinnatifid, with slender marginal spines 4-15 mm. Inflorescence corymbose; capitula numerous, in dense terminal clusters or solitary, surrounded and exceeded by upper leaves. Involucre 22-30 × 8-15 mm, cylindrical. Achenes 5-6 mm, pale brown, shiny; pappus 14-19 mm. 2n = 32, 34.{\i  Cultivated ground and dry waste places. S. Europe}. Al Bl Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 120.               Notobasis}              Cass.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By K. Werner.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Spiny annuals. Leaves alternate, white-veined above, sparsely grey-arachnoid-hairy beneath, with spinulose margin and spiniform segments. Involucral bracts imbricate, with a vitta and a very short apical spine. Florets hermaphrodite, purple, rarely white. Anthers with basal appendages c. 0·3 mm. Achenes obliquely obovoid-globose, compressed, smooth, woody, with indistinctly marginate, truncate apex; pappus of numerous plumose outer setae and an inner ring of short hairs connate at base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. syriaca} (L.) Cass.,{\i  Dict. Sci. Nat.}{\b  35}: 171 (1825). Stem 20-60(-150) cm, usually branched and bluish above. Basal leaves herbaceous, elliptical, dentate to lobed, petiolate; cauline leaves coriaceous, lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, pinnatifid, broadly auriculate-amplexicaul, the uppermost rigid, pinnatisect, nearly reduced to strong spines, surrounding and exceeding the capitula. Capitula in racemose clusters or solitary. Involucre 17-23 × 15-25 mm, globose-campanulate. Achenes 5-6 mm, brown; outer pappus-setae 13-15 mm, the inner hairs 1-2 mm. 2n = 34.{\i  Cultivated ground and dry waste places. Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 121.         Ptilostemon}            Cass.   
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  (incl.{\i  Lamyra} (Cass.) Cass.,{\i  Chamaepeuce} DC.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By K. Werner.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Unarmed dwarf shrubs or spiny herbs. Leaves alternate, entire to pinnatifid, usually coriaceous, subglabrous above, unarmed or with stout marginal spines. Involucral bracts imbricate, rarely
\par

\par
242}
\par