{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 involucral bracts 1·5-2 mm wide at base; corolla 14-20 mm; achenes transversely foveolate. •{\i  C. & E. Pyrenees.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b parnassicum} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 403 (1879): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but stem glabrescent; wings not more than 7 mm wide; leaves subglabrous beneath; capitula densely arachnoid-hairy; involucral bracts with arachnoid indumentum inside. •{\i  S.C. Greece} ({\i Parnassos}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ERECTA Rouy. Plant with numerous small glands and short multicellular hairs. Leaves strongly reticulately veined beneath. Involucral bracts flat, ovate to lanceolate, closely appressed, shorter than florets. Corolla-lobes glandular. Pappus-hairs plumose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. O. laconicum} Heldr. & Sart. ex Rouy,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  43}: 585 (1896). Plant up to 70 cm. Stem whitish, sparsely whitish-flocculose-tomentose; wings up to 7 mm wide, not reticulate-veined, with spines up to 5 mm. Leaves up to 20 × 5 cm, oblong-lanceolate, sessile, deeply pinnatifid, with 8-10 pairs of lobes, greyish-green, laxly arachnoid-hairy, with numerous minute glands; lobes triangular, longer than wide, palmate or 3-lobulate, the lobules with apical spine up to 4 mm. Capitula 40-50 × 40-70 mm, ovoid-globose; involucral bracts 4-7 mm wide in basal 1/3, usually narrowing to the apical 2/3, somewhat triquetrous with an acute keel. Corolla 30-35 mm. Achenes 4-5 mm, brownish pappus 8-10 mm. •{\i  S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. O. nervosum} Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 357 (1841). Plant up to 270 cm. Stem yellowish, with rather dense short hairs; wings up to 20 mm wide, densely reticulate-veined, with spines up to 10 mm. Leaves up to 50 × 20 cm, oblong-lanceolate, sessile, green, with whitish veins, subglabrous above, sparsely arachnoid-hairy beneath, pinnatifid, with 6-8 pairs of lobes; lobes triangular, longer than wide, with apical spine up to 10 mm. Capitula 35-50 × 30-50 mm, conical-ovoid, subglabrous; involucral bracts 4-6 mm wide, acuminate, with a rigid apical spine up to 4 mm. Corolla 32-35 mm, pink. Achenes 4-5 mm, greyish-brown; pappus 8-10 mm. 2n = 34. •{\i  S. & C. Portugal, S. & C. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   O. glomeratum} Costa, {\i Introd. Fl. Cataluña} 135 (1864), from E. Spain, appears to be a hybrid between {\b 2} and {\b 4}. It has the indumentum, narrower bracts and smaller corolla of {\b 2}, but resembles{\b  4} in the reticulate venation of wings and leaf and in the shape of the capitulum and involucral bracts.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ECHINATA Franco. Plant with multicellular or unicellular hairs. Leaves not reticulately veined beneath. Involucral bracts cochleariform or ovate-lanceolate, abruptly or gradually narrowing into long, rigid, more or less radiate, pungent processes longer or shorter than florets. Corolla-lobes glandular. Pappus-hairs scabrid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. O. corymbosum} Willk.,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  30}: 108 (1859). Plant up to 120 cm, with multicellular hairs, more or less viscid. Stem yellowish; wings up to 6 mm wide, not reticulate-veined, with spines up to 15 mm. Leaves up to 40 × 10 cm, oblong-lanceolate, sessile, pinnatifid or sinuately lobed, with 6-8 pairs of lobes or teeth, with an apical spine 5-10 mm, dark green, sparsely hairy above, with numerous minute hairs on the raised veins beneath. Capitula 30-40 × 35-50 mm, subglobose, slightly arachnoid-hairy; involucral bracts 3-4 mm wide in basal ½, acuminate-triquetrous with an apical spine up to 5 mm, puberulent in the distal ½ along the keel. Corolla 20-25 mm, purple. Achenes 4-5 mm, dark greyish-brown; pappus 8-10 mm. •{\i  E. Spain; C. Jugoslavia.} Hs Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b corymbosum}: Leaves pinnatifid; segments lanceolate-triangular or lobulate. Involucral bracts usually contracted and recurved in apical 2/3.{\i  E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b visegradense} Franco,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 45 (1975): Leaves sinuate-lobed or -dentate. Involucral bracts tapering into the spine, usually erect, appressed, but the outermost deflexed.{\i  Meadows. E. Bosna }({\i near Visegrad}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   O. humile} Loscos,{\i  Trat. Pl. Arag.}{\b  3}: 77 (1883-1886) ({\i O. tauricum} var.{\i  canescens} Pau, {\i O. corymbosum} var.{\i  humile} (Loscos) Willk.), from E.C. and S.E. Spain, is probably the hybrid {\b 2} × {\b 5}({\b a}). It has wide stem-wings and a dense whitish-grey leaf indumentum which suggests relationship with{\b  2}, while it resembles {\b 5}({\b a}) in the short multicellular hairs, leaf-spines up to 12 mm and the capitula.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. O. tauricum} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 1687 (1803). Plant up to 200 cm, with multicellular hairs, more or less viscid. Stem yellowish-brown; wings up to 15 mm wide, not reticulate-veined, with spines up to 5 mm. Leaves up to 25 × 10 cm, oblong-lanceolate, sessile, pinnatifid, with 6-8 pairs of remote lobes, dark green, very sparsely hairy above, more densely so beneath especially on veins; lobes triangular, longer than wide, with an apical spine up to 8 mm. Capitula 35-45 × 55-70 mm, subglobose; involucral bracts 4-7 mm wide at base, tapering into a rigid spine up to 4 mm, smooth, with the midrib slightly raised in the apical 2/3; middle bracts usually erecto-patent, the outer usually deflexed. Corolla 25-30 mm, purplish-pink. Achenes 5-6 mm, shiny- or greyish-brown; pappus 8-10 mm. {\i S.E. Europe.} Bu Cr Gr Rm Rs (K) Tu [Ga It].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. O. argolicum} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov}.{\b  2}({\b 10}): 91 (1849). Plant up to 150 cm, with multicellular hairs, more or less viscid. Stem brownish, sparsely hairy, densely and minutely glandular in the grooves; wings up to 8 mm wide, subpalmate, with spines up to 6 mm. Leaves up to 25 × 6 cm, oblong-lanceolate, sessile pinnatisect, with 10-12 pairs of lobes, dark green, sparsely hairy and densely glandular above, greyish-arachnoid-hairy beneath; lobes triangular or palmate, with raised, somewhat reticulate yellowish veins beneath, tapering into a spine up to 5 mm. Capitula 40-60 × 60-80 mm, subglobose, densely arachnoid-hairy; involucral bracts 35-45 mm, 5-7 mm wide near base, tapering to a coriaceous, semicylindrical, patent or deflexed process. Corolla 25-30 mm. Achenes 4-5 mm, brownish-grey; pappus 8-10 mm.{\i  Sardegna; Malta, Linosa; S. Greece}. Gr Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. O. caulescens} D'Urv., {\i Enum.} 105 (1822) ({\i O. sibthorpianum} Boiss. & Heldr.). Plant up to 50 cm, with unicellular hairs, not viscid. Stem yellowish, usually with a dense arachnoid indumentum; wings dentate-spiny, not reticulate-veined, with an apical spine up to 6 mm. Leaves up to 20 × 6 cm, lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, sessile, pinnatifid, with 6-8 pairs of lobes, greyish-green and sparsely arachnoid-hairy above, whitish-tomentose beneath; lobes with an apical spine up to 6 mm. Capitula 30-35 × 25-35 mm; involucral bracts appressed in basal 1/5, the outer and middle bracts with long, free, coriaceous, semi-conical, patent or recurved points, 3-5 mm wide at their base, tapering to a spine up to 5 mm. Corolla 22-25 mm. Achenes 4-5 mm, brownish; pappus 11-13 mm, the hairs shortly plumose.{\i  Aegean region}. Gr *Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b caulescens}: Stem-wings up to 10 mm wide. Leaf-lobes lanceolate-oblong, entire or rarely with 1-2 pairs of basal teeth. Capitula ovoid-globose; involucral bracts gradually narrowing to a spiny process 25-35 mm, the lower bracts arachnoid-hairy.{\i  Kikladhes}.
\par

\par
246}
\par