{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 with vittae, the apex usually long, rigid, patent, with a pungent spine, rarely spinulose. Receptacular scales numerous, setaceous. Florets hermaphrodite, purple, rarely white. Anthers with basal appendages 2-4 mm. Achenes obliquely obovoid, usually scarcely compressed, smooth, woody, the truncate apex indistinctly marginate; pappus-hairs in several rows, plumose, subequal, connate at base, deciduous, often fewer and simple in outermost florets.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: S. Tamamschian,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 16}: 470-478 (1954). W. Greuter, {\i Boissiera}{\b  13}: 145-147 (1967);{\b  22}: 1-215 (1973).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Measurements of the diameter of the involucre refer to the middle of the capitulum excluding the patent apices of the bracts.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Dwarf shrub; leaves narrowly linear, without spines;
\par
  involucral bracts appressed or with short patent to 
\par
  deflexed apex, unarmed to weakly spinescent
\par
2 Leaves on flowering branches not expanded or laciniate 
\par
  at the base, with acute apex ................................................... {\b 4. chamaepeuce}
\par
2 Leaves on flowering branches with the base somewhat 
\par
  expanded, with 1-2, often minute, narrow laciniae on 
\par
  each side, the apex acuminate, spinulose .............................. {\b 5. gnaphaloides} 
\par
1 Herb, sometimes woody at base; leaves linear to oblong-
\par
  lanceolate, with stout spines at least at the base;
\par
  involucral bracts with long, patent to erecto-patent,
\par
  pungent apex
\par
3 Stem with narrow spiny wings; leaves decurrent, sparsely 
\par
  arachnoid-lanate to glabrescent beneath ......................................... {\b 1. strictus}
\par
3 Stem not winged; leaves not decurrent, densely 
\par
  tomentose beneath
\par
4 Annual; leaves with 1-3 stout basal spines on each side .............. {\b 9. stellatus}
\par
4 Biennial or perennial; leaves regularly spiny up to the apex
\par
5 Leaves entire or slightly sinuate; marginal spines in 
\par
  clusters of 2-4(-7), arising from a common insertion;
\par
  capitula subsessile, in a spike ..................................................... {\b 8. casabonae}
\par
5 Leaves lobed to pinnatisect, sometimes sinuate-dentate;
\par
  marginal spines borne singly on the lobes or teeth;
\par
  capitula pedunculate, in a corymb or raceme
\par
6 Leaves lobed or sinuate-dentate, with broadly triangular
\par
  lobes bearing 2-4(-5) somewhat approximate spines ................ {\b 7. hispanicus}
\par
6 Leaves pinnately divided for at least ½ their width,
\par
  with narrow, spine-tipped lobes 
\par
7 Leaves pinnatisect; involucral bracts without marginal
\par
  spines ................................................................................. {\b 6. echinocephalus} 
\par
7 Leaves pinnatifid; outer involucral bracts usually with
\par
  marginal spines 
\par
8 Usually biennial; leaves subglabrous above; corolla
\par
  22-27(-30) mm ..................................................................................... {\b 3. afer} 
\par
8 Perennial; leaves sparsely arachnoid-hairy above;
\par
  corolla (28-)30-33(-36) mm ............................................................. {\b 2. niveus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. strictus} (Ten.) W. Greuter,{\i  Boissiera }{\b 13}: 147 (1967) ({\i Cirsium strictum} (Ten.) Link). Perennial herb (30-)60-100(-120) cm. Stem sparsely arachnoid-hairy, glabrescent towards the base, with narrow spinose wings. Leaves decurrent, narrowly oblong to oblong-lanceolate, lobed to pinnatifid, sparsely arachnoid-lanate to glabrescent beneath; segments 2-lobed, with stout spines 2-5(-11) mm. Capitula in dense clusters on stems and branches. Involucre 17-24 × 12-17 mm; outer and middle bracts with white ventral swelling, the apex patent, subulate-spinose. Corolla 16-21 mm. Achenes 3·5-5 mm; pappus 13-18 mm.{\i  Deciduous woods and scrub. • C. & S.Italy; W. & S.parts of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. niveus} (C. Presl) W. Greuter, {\i loc. cit.} (1967) ({\i Cirsium niveum} (C. Presl) Sprengel). Perennial herb 20-65 cm. Stem white-arachnoid-tomentose. Leaves lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, pinnatifid, sparsely arachnoid-hairy above; segments 2- to 3-lobed, the lobes narrowly triangular, with stout spines 5-9 mm. Capitula 1-5, in a lax corymb. Involucre 37-50 × 32-40(-45) mm; base of outer and middle bracts with 0-4(-7) fine marginal spines 1·5-2·5 mm on each side, with inconspicuous, white ventral swelling, the apex flat, with a slender spine, deflexed in outer and erecto-patent in middle bracts. Corolla (28-)30-33(-36) mm. Achenes (4·5-)5-5·5 mm; pappus 22-27 mm. {\i Rocky slopes; calcicole. • Mountains of S.W. Italy and N.E. Sicilia.} It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. afer} (Jacq.) W. Greuter, {\i loc. cit.} (1967) ({\i Cirsium afrum} (Jacq.) Fischer). Usually biennial 40 75(-100) cm. Stem white-arachnoid-tomentose to subglabrous. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, pinnatifid, subglabrous above; segments deeply 2- to 3-lobed, the lobes narrowly triangular, with stout spines 5-12(-15) mm. Capitula (4-)10-16(-20), in a dense terminal corymb or cylindrical raceme. Involucre 20-40(-50) × 35-45 mm; base of outer bracts with 0-2(-4) stout marginal spines 3-6 mm on each side, the apex flat, with a stout spine, deflexed in outer and erecto-patent in middle bracts. Corolla 22-27(-30) mm. Achenes (3·5-)4-4·5(-5) mm; pappus 15-20(-23) mm.{\i  Rocks and stony slopes; calcicole. Mountains of Balkan peninsula; one station in S.W. Romania.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. chamaepeuce} (L.) Less., {\i Gen. Cynaroceph. Spec. Arctot.} 5 (1832) ({\i Cirsium chamaepeuce} (L.) Ten.). Dwarf shrub 30-100 cm. Flowering branches tomentose, occasionally glabrescent, with leaves as long as those on the main stem. Leaves narrowly linear, acute, densely white-tomentose beneath, the margin conspicuously revolute. Capitula usually few, in corymbs, rarely solitary. Involucre 14-18(-22) × 13-20(-23) mm; bracts lanceolate-triangular, with inconspicuous vittae, appressed to arcuate-deflexed, or the apex erecto-patent and the outer bracts shortly deflexed, unarmed or with spines less than 1 mm. Corolla 20-25 mm. Achenes 3·5-5 mm; pappus 14-17 mm.{\i  Rocks. Greece and Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. gnaphaloides} (Cyr.) Soják,{\i  Novit. Bot. Horti Bot. Univ. Carol. Prag.}{\b  1962}: 46 (1962). Like {\b 4} but upper leaves much shorter, spinulose-mucronate at the apex, with the base somewhat expanded and with 1-2 narrow laciniae on each side; involucral bracts triangular-subulate, without vittae; achenes 4-6 mm. {\i Rocks. S. Italy, Greece, Kriti.} Cr Gr It [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b gnaphaloides} ({\i Cirsium gnaphalodes} Sprengel): Leaf-base with laciniae 0·3-2(-4) mm. Involucre 16-22 × 15-18(-25) mm; inner and middle bracts appressed, unarmed, the outer with patent to deflexed apex having a soft spinule up to 1 mm. {\i S. Italy, N.W. Greece} ({\i Kerkira});{\i  locally naturalized in S.E. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pseudofruticosus} (Pamp.) W. Greuter,{\i  Candollea}{\b  24}: 48 (1969) ({\i Cirsium fruticosum} auct. &{\i  Chamaepeuce fruticosa} auct., non {\i Cnicus fruticosus} Desf.): Leaf-base with laciniae 1-5(-9) mm. Involucre 18-25 × 18-26 mm; bracts with erecto-patent apex, the middle and outer with an apical spinule 1-3 mm. {\i S. Greece, Kriti}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. echinocephalus} (Willd.) W. Greuter, {\i Boissiera}{\b  13}: 146 (1967) ({\i Lamyra echinocephala} (Willd.) Tamamsch.). Perennial herb (20-)30-50(-60) cm, woody at base. Stem white-tomentose. Leaves oblong, pinnatisect; segments linear to linear-triangular, with one lobe at the base, the spines 3-6 mm. Capitula solitary or few in a terminal corymb. Involucre 20-30 × 18-25(-30) mm; bracts with conspicuous white ventral swelling, the apex patent, subulate-spiny. Corolla (22-)25-31 mm. Achenes 4-6 mm; pappus (16-)19-25 mm.{\i  Rocks. Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. hispanicus} (Lam.) W. Greuter,{\i  loc. cit.} (1967) ({\i Chamaepeuce hispanica} (Lam.) DC.). Perennial (30-)60-100 cm, woody
\par

\par
243}
\par