{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. scolymus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 827 (1753). Like {\b 5} but stems up to 200 cm, glabrescent; leaves up to 80 × 40 cm, soft, glabrescent above and greyish-tomentose beneath, with wide, unarmed or mucronulate segments; involucre 60-70 × 70-80 mm, the bracts fleshy, with a flattish apical appendage; appendage 15-40 × 12-35 mm, ovate to triangular, truncate, cuspidate or sinuate-truncate.{\i  Unknown in the wild state, but widely cultivated on a large scale in S., W. & C. Europe, and in gardens elsewhere, for the immature capitula, which are eaten as a vegetable} ({\i artichoke}). [Au Be Co Cr Cz Ga Gr He Ho Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W) Sa Si.] ({\i Derived from}{\b  5}, {\i perhaps originally in S. W. Europe or N. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ACAULON Franco. Stems absent. Leaves pinnatifid, with flat, shortly spiny segments. Involucre globose; appendages of involucral bracts with a short, slender apical spine. Achenes not winged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. tournefortii} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Diagn. Pl. Nov. Hisp.} 18 (1842). Leaves 15-35 × 4-20 cm, oblong-lanceolate, with arachnoid indumentum above, greyish-tomentose beneath; segments oblong-lanceolate, the apical entire, the basal dentate, with teeth having yellow spines up to 5 mm; petiole short, tomentose. Capitulum solitary; peduncle very short, stout. Involucre 40-80 mm; outer involucral bracts orbicular-ovate; middle bracts ovate-oblong, with a patent, concave, ovate-triangular apical appendage 8-15 × 8-15 mm, tapering into a spine 4-7 mm; inner bracts 20-30 mm, spinose. Corolla blue. Achenes 7-8 × 3-4 mm, brown-spotted; pappus 40-50 mm. {\i Waste ground on clay soils. • C. & S. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 127.            Silybum}                Adanson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. do Amaral Franco 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Robust annual or biennial herbs. Leaves alternate, white-veined or variegated, with strongly spiny margin. Capitula solitary. Involucre ovoid; bracts imbricate, the outer and middle with an apical, setose-dentate appendage terminating (at least in the middle) in a long spine. Receptacle densely hairy. Florets all hermaphrodite. Corolla purple, deeply 5-fid, with a long tube. Achenes obovoid-oblong, compressed, glabrous; pappus of white, scabrid hairs united below into a ring.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Cauline leaves with spines up to 8 mm; outer involucral 
\par
  bracts with appendage tapering into a recurved spine ................. {\b 1. marianum} 
\par
Cauline leaves with spines 7-15 mm; outer involucral 
\par
  bracts without a spine ................................................................... {\b 2. eburneum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. marianum} (L.) Gaertner,{\i  Fruct. Sem. Pl. }{\b 2}: 378 (1791). Stem 20-150 cm, rarely shorter, glabrous or slightly arachnoid-pubescent, green. Basal leaves 25-50 × 12-25 cm, pinnatifid, glabrous or glabrescent, petiolate; cauline leaves smaller, less deeply divided, auriculate-amplexicaul, sessile, with yellowish-white spines up to 8 mm. Capitula 2·5-4 cm; peduncles long, erect, ebracteate or with few, small, leaf-like bracts; outer and middle involucral bracts with appendages 8-15 × 6-10 mm, gradually tapered into recurved, canaliculate spines 20-50 mm. Achenes 6-8 × 2·5-4 mm, shiny, black, with grey spots; pappus 15-20 mm. 2n = 34.{\i  Roadsides, waste places and cultivated ground. Mediterranean region and S. W. Europe; cultivated for ornament and naturalized or casual throughout a large part of Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Be Br Cz He Ho Rm Rs (C,W,K,E)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. eburneum} Cosson & Durieu,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  2}: 366 (1855). Like {\b 1} but stem whitish; basal leaves hispid; cauline leaves with yellowish-brown spines 7-15 mm; peduncles with more numerous and longer, oblong-lanceolate, leaf-like bracts; capitula 4-6 cm; involucral bracts with appendages 4-5 × 7-8 mm, the middle bracts abruptly contracted into an erect or erecto-patent, triquetrous-subulate spine 20-70 mm; pappus 20-30 mm.{\i  Field-margins. N.E. & C. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 128.               Palaeocyanus}           Dostál
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Dostál 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Erect, perennial herbs. Leaves undivided. Capitula terminal, long-pedunculate. Involucre ovoid; bracts entire, coriaceous, without appendage. Florets all tubular, the marginal sterile. Anthers with acuminate apical appendage. Pappus of 2 rows of equal, scabrid setae, the inner row scale-like.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. crassifolius} (Bertol.) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 192 (1976) ({\i Centaurea crassifolia} Bertol.). Glabrous. Stem up to 50 cm, branched above. Leaves up to 6 × 1·5 cm, almost all in a basal rosette, oblanceolate-spathulate, fleshy. Involucre 20-25 mm in diameter; middle bracts ovate, obtuse, finely striate. Florets purple or white. Achenes 6-8 mm, glabrous; pappus slightly longer than the achene, white. 2n = 30. {\i Maritime cliffs. • Malta and Gozo.} Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 129.                Cheirolophus}               Cass.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Dostál 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Leaves entire or lobed. Capitula solitary on stems and branches; peduncles long, swollen below capitula. Involucre ovoid to subglobose; bracts in several rows, imbricate, appressed, coriaceous, with palmately fimbriate apical appendages, the fimbriae 7-9, subequal. All florets tubular, equal, the inner hermaphrodite, the outer female. Achenes compressed, somewhat curved, with transverse, glabrous attachment-scar; pappus of several rows of filiform, rather barbellate hairs on inner achenes, absent on outer achenes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Branches leafy throughout; involucral appendages with 
\par
  long flexuous fimbriae ............................................................ {\b 1. sempervirens}
\par
1 Branches leafless for some distance below capitula;
\par
  involucral appendages with short, rigid fimbriae
\par
2 Leaves dentate to subentire, the lower lanceolate;
\par
  pappus much shorter than achene ................................................ {\b 2. uliginosus}
\par
2 Leaves lyrate-pinnatifid, the lower lyrate; pappus as 
\par
  long as achene ............................................................................. {\b 3. intybaceus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. sempervirens} (L.) Pomel,{\i  Nouv. Mat. Fl. Atl. }32 (1874) ({\i Centaurea sempervirens} L.). Plant scabrid-pubescent; stems 30-60 cm, somewhat woody at base; branches leafy throughout. Leaves lanceolate, acute, denticulate below, sessile, the lower hastate, the upper with narrowly cuneate base and 2 stipuliform lobes. Involucre 15-20 mm; bracts distally striate and glabrous; appendages semi-lunate or broadly triangular, the fimbriae twice as long as the width of the appendages, flexuous. Florets purple. Achenes c. 4·5 mm, subclavate, shiny; pappus very short. 2n = 30.{\i  C. & S. Portugal; a few stations in Spain and S. Italy.} Hs It Lu [*Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. uliginosus} (Brot.) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 193 (1976) ({\i Centaurea uliginosa} Brot.). Plant pubescent to subglabrous; stems up to 150 cm, simple or sparingly branched; branches sparsely leafy, the upper leafless. Lower leaves lanceolate, acute, dentate, long-petiolate; upper leaves linear-lanceolate to linear, subentire. Involucre 15-20 mm; bracts with semicircular appendages, the fimbriae few, short, rigid, the apical fimbria curved. Florets bluish. Achenes 4-5 mm, oblong, dull, minutely striate; pappus 1/4-1/3 as long as achene. 2n = 24, 32.{\i  Marshes. Portugal.} ?.Hs Lu.
\par

\par
249}
\par