{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 at base. Stem white-tomentose. Leaves oblong- to ovate-lanceolate, lobed to sinuate-dentate, the broadly triangular lobes or teeth with stout marginal spines (5-)10-20(-30) mm in lax groups of 2-4(-5). Capitula pedunculate, in a terminal corymb. Involucre 20-30(-35) × (20-)25-33 mm; bracts with inconspicuous white ventral swelling, the apex patent, with a stout spine. Corolla 22-32 mm. Achenes 4·5-5 mm; pappus 16-25 mm. {\i Rocky,stony or sandy places. • S.Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. P. casabonae} (L.) W. Greuter,{\i  loc. cit.} (1967) ({\i Chamaepeuce casabonae} (L.) DC.). Monocarpic perennial 40-100(-150) cm. Stem sparsely arachnoid-hairy to glabrescent. Leaves lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, entire or very slightly sinuate, the marginal spines (2-)5-15 mm, slender, in clusters of 2-4(-7) which arise from a common insertion. Capitula subsessile, in a terminal spike. Involucre 15-25 × 14-20 mm; bracts with a slender apical spine. Corolla 18-22 mm. Achenes 3-4 mm; pappus 13-18 mm. 2n = 32.{\i  Dry, open habitats. • W. Mediterranean region.} Co Ga It Sa [Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. P. stellatus} (L.) W. Greuter, {\i loc. cit.} (1967) ({\i Cirsium stellatum} (L.) All.). Annual (6-)15-30(-70) cm. Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate, entire, sparsely arachnoid-hairy to glabrescent and scabrid above, with 1-3 stout basal spines (5-)10-20(-35) mm on each side, and an apical spine 1-1·5 mm. Capitula few, in racemes or corymbs, rarely solitary. Involucre 15-25 × 10-15 mm; outer and middle bracts with conspicuous white ventral swelling, the apex patent, subulate-spinose. Corolla 12-18 mm. Achenes 4-5 mm; pappus 11-15 mm. 2n = 24. {\i Waste places and stony ground. • E. Mediterranean region, extending westwards to Sicilia.} Al Cr Gr It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 122.                Lamyropsis}              (Charadze) Dittrich 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By K. Werner.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Ptilostemon} but achenes oblong, compressed, coriaceous, the truncate apex with a distinct, raised margin surrounding a cylindrical central projection.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: M. Dittrich,{\i  Candollea}{\b  26}: 97-102 (1971). W. Greuter & M. Dittrich, {\i Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  1}: 85-98 (1973).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Involucre 27-35 × 25-30 mm, the bracts with long, patent
\par
  to deflexed apex ......................................................................... {\b 1. cynaroides}
\par
Involucre 14-18 × 12-15 mm, the bracts with short,
\par
  erecto-patent apex ................................................................. {\b 2. microcephala}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. cynaroides} (Lam.) Dittrich,{\i  Candollea}{\b  26}: 98 (1971) ({\i Cirsium cynaroides} (Lam.) Sprengel). Perennial 20-50 cm. Stem white-arachnoid-lanate. Leaves broadly oblong, pinnatifid to pinnatisect, villous on the veins above, white-tomentose beneath; segments 3- to 5-lobed, the lobes triangular, with spines 1·5-4 mm. Capitula pedunculate, solitary or few in clusters. Involucre 27-35 × 25-30 mm; bracts ,with a long, patent to deflexed, subulate apex bearing a stout spine. Corolla 26-34 mm, purplish-pink. Achenes 5-6 mm; pappus 17-21 mm. {\i Waste places and open Pinus-woods. S. Greece, Kriti.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. microcephala} (Moris) Dittrich & W. Greuter,{\i  Exsicc. Genav.}{\b  3}: 47 (1972) ({\i Cirsium microcephalum} Moris). Perennial 20-50 cm. Stem white-arachnoid-lanate. Leaves broadly oblong-lanceolate, pinnatifid, lanate on the veins and sparsely arachnoid-hairy above, white-tomentose beneath; segments deeply 2- to 3-lobed, the lobes narrowly triangular, with stout spines 7-12 mm. Capitula solitary or few in terminal racemose clusters,surrounded and exceeded by the upper leaves. Involucre 14-18 × 12-15 mm; bracts with a short, erecto-patent apex bearing a stout spine 2-6 mm. Corolla 15-17 mm, whitish. Achenes 4·5-5·5 mm; pappus c. 12 mm.{\i  Stony slopes. • Sardegna. }Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 123.                Galactites}              Moench
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. do Amaral Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 White-tomentose, annual herbs. Leaves alternate, with spiny lobes or teeth. Capitula solitary or in corymbose cymes or clusters. Involucre ovoid; involucral bracts imbricate, the outer and middle with a rigid, erecto-patent apical spine. Receptacle densely hairy. Inner florets small, tubular, hermaphrodite; outer florets large, infundibuliform, sterile. Corolla purple to white. Achenes subcylindrical, striate, glabrous; pappus-hairs plumose, white.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Cauline leaves with spines 1·5-6(-8) mm; spines of involucral 
\par
  bracts 5-10 × 0·3-0·5 mm, greenish ........................................... {\b 1. tomentosa} 
\par
Cauline leaves with spines 6-15 mm; spines of involucral
\par
  bracts 10-25 × 0·5-1 mm, yellow .................................................... {\b 2. duriaei}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. tomentosa} Moench, {\i Meth. }558 (1794) ({\i G. pumila} Porta). Stems (8-)15-100 cm. Leaves white-veined or variegated above, white-tomentose beneath; basal oblanceolate, serrate, petiolate, soon decaying; cauline 4-18 × 1-8 cm, pinnatifid, rarely undivided, sessile and shortly decurrent, the spines 1·5-6(-8) mm. Capitula pedunculate, solitary or in a corymbose cyme; involucre 10-15 mm, arachnoid-pubescent, the bracts with greenish spines 5-10 × 0·3-0·5 mm. Achenes 3-5 × 1-1·5 mm, yellowish; pappus 3-4 times as long as the achene. 2n = 22.{\i  Mediterranean region and S.W. Europe.} Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. G. duriaei} Spach ex Durieu in Duchartre, {\i Rev. Bot.}{\b  1}: 363 (1846). Like {\b 1} but cauline leaves with spines 6-15 mm; capitula subsessile, in terminal clusters on stems and branches; involucre 10-20 mm, arachnoid-tomentose and whitish, the bracts with stout, yellow spines 10-25 × 0·5-1 mm; achenes 5-6 × 2 mm; pappus twice as long as the achene. 2n = 22.{\i  S.E. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 124.             Tyrimnus}               (Cass.)Cass.   
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. do Amaral Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Slender, erect, lanate annual or biennial herbs. Leaves alternate. Capitula solitary, on long, naked peduncles. Involucre hemispherical; involucral bracts imbricate, appressed, entire, mucronate-spinose. Receptacular scales numerous, setaceous. Inner florets hermaphrodite; outer florets usually sterile. Corolla purplish-pink, rarely white, regularly 5-fid, with a short tube. Achenes oblong, tetragonal, compressed, glabrous; pappus of many rows of white hairs which are minutely scabrid distally.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. leucographus} (L.) Cass., {\i Dict. Sci. Nat.}{\b  56}: 207 (1828). Stems 20-60 cm. Leaves thin, decurrent, white-veined, sinuate-dentate, with spinulose margin, green and slightly lanate above, greyish-lanate beneath; lower leaves obovate-oblong, attenuate into a short petiole; cauline leaves smaller, lanceolate-oblong, acute, sessile. Capitula 14-16 mm; involucral bracts lanceolate, acuminate. Achenes c. 4 mm, blackish-red; pappus c. 12 mm.{\i  Waste places and open, sandy or stony habitats. Mediterranean region.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa ?Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 125.               Onopordum}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. do Amaral Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Biennials. Stems spinose-winged, or absent. Leaves spinose-dentate, pinnatifid to pinnatisect or almost pinnate, rarely subentire. Capitula globose to ovoid. Involucral bracts in several rows, coriaceous, densely imbricate at least near the base, spine
\par

\par
244}
\par