{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 a deflexed, triangular-acuminate, fimbriate-spinose apex. Corolla-lobes eglandular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 13. O. majorii} Beauverd,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Genève }ser. 2, {\b 6}: 152 (1914). Plant up to 150 cm. Stem whitish-arachnoid-hairy; wings up to 8 mm wide, triangular-acuminate, with 3- to 5-palmate spines, with apical spine up to 15 mm. Leaves up to 45 × 15 cm, lanceolate, sessile, pinnatisect or almost pinnate, greyish-green, sparsely hairy and glandular above, densely greyish-tomentulose beneath; lobes triangular-acute, deeply lobulate, with apical spine up to 10 mm. Capitula 45-50 × 70-80 mm, hemispherical, glabrous; involucral bracts 5-8 mm wide at base, the outer and middle deflexed, with wide fimbriate-spiny apex, the apical spine up to 10 mm, caudate, the other spines 1-3 mm. Corolla 35-50 mm, purple. Achenes 6-7 mm; pappus 9-14 mm.{\i  Karpathos, E. Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 126.            Cynara}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. do Amaral Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs; stems erect, striate to ribbed, sometimes absent. Leaves in a basal rosette or alternate, usually deeply divided and with spiny segments. Capitula solitary or in a sparingly branched, corymbose cyme. Involucre ovoid to globose; involucral bracts imbricate, glabrous, the outer and middle with a stout spine or an ovate to triangular appendage at the apex. Receptacle fleshy, the scales setaceous. Florets all hermaphrodite. Corolla purplish, blue or white, tubular, 5-fid; style long-exserted. Achenes obpyramidal or obovoid-cylindrical, glabrous; pappus of many rows of plumose, dirty white hairs connate at the base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaf-segments unarmed or mucronulate; involucral bracts
\par
  with large, cuspidate, apical appendage ........................................ {\b 6. scolymus} 
\par
1 Leaf-segments spiny; involucral bracts with apical 
\par
  spine or spiny appendage
\par
2 Stems absent; apical spine of middle involucral bracts
\par
  not more than 7 mm, slender ...................................................... {\b 7. tournefortii}
\par
2 Stems present; apical spine of middle involucral bracts
\par
  at least 10 mm, stout
\par
3 Cauline leaves 1- to 2-pinnatisect, with linear, 
\par
  revolute segments; achenes winged on angles ................................. {\b 1. humilis}
\par
3 Cauline leaves 1- to 2-pinnatifid, with lanceolate to
\par
  oblong, flat segments; achenes not winged
\par
4 Leaves up to 50 × 35 cm, with spines 15-35 mm, clustered
\par
  at base of each segment; achenes 6-8 × 3-4 cm ........................ {\b 5. cardunculus}
\par
4 Leaves up to 40 × 32 cm, with spines 2-20 mm, not in
\par
  clusters; achenes 3-5 × 2-3 mm
\par
5 Involucre 40-50 mm, subglobose; middle involucral bracts 
\par
  with cochleariform appendages, abruptly contracted 
\par
  into a spine 20-50 mm ................................................................... {\b 4. cornigera}
\par
5 Involucre 15-35 mm, ovoid; middle involucral bracts 
\par
  with ovate to ovate-lanceolate appendages, tapering 
\par
  into a spine 10-30 mm
\par
6 Leaves sparsely and shortly tomentose to lanate, glabrescent,
\par
  with a distinct reticulum of veins beneath; corolla white ...................... {\b 2. alba}
\par
6 Leaves white-tomentose beneath, with indistinct reticulum
\par
  of veins; corolla purplish-blue .................................................. {\b 3. algarbiensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. BOURGAEA (Cosson) Franco. Stems present. Cauline leaves 1- to 2-pinnatisect, with linear, spinose, revolute segments. Involucre ovoid; middle and upper involucral bracts tapering into a pungent, triangular-subulate spine. Achenes tetragonal, winged on angles.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. humilis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 828 (1753) ({\i Bourgaea humilis} (L.)Cosson). Stems 15-80 cm, usually white-tomentose. Leaves lanceolate in outline, glabrous above, white-tomentose beneath; lower leaves up to 40 × 15 cm, 2-pinnatisect, shortly petiolate, the middle and upper smaller and sessile, the uppermost pinnatisect. Involucre 30-60 × 20-45 mm, the bracts purplish, becoming brownish. Corolla purplish-blue, sometimes white. Achenes 6-8 × 4-6 mm, dull, pale brown; pappus 20-35 mm. 2n = 34.{\i  Dry, waste places. C. & S. parts of Iberian peninsula.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CYNARA. Stems present. Cauline leaves 1- to 2-pinnatifid, with lanceolate to oblong, flat, dentate to pinnatifid segments. Involucre ovoid to globose; involucral bracts with a stout, pungent apical spine or an ovate to triangular, mucronate appendage. Achenes not winged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. alba} Boiss. ex DC., {\i Prodr.} {\b 7}: 304 (1838). Stems 40-70 cm, floccose-lanate. Leaves sparsely and shortly tomentose to lanate, glabrescent, with a distinct reticulum of veins beneath; segments lanceolate, deeply spinose-dentate; basal leaves up to 35 × 32 cm, petiolate, with spines c. 5 mm, the cauline smaller, sessile, with spines 7-20 mm. Involucre 20-40 mm, ovoid; involucral bracts pale green, the outer spinose, recurved, the middle with an ovate appendage tapering into an erecto-patent spine 20-25 × 5-7 mm. Corolla white.{\i  Dry hillsides. S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. algarbiensis} Cosson ex Mariz, {\i Bol. Soc. Brot.}{\b  10}: 236 (1893). Stems 10-50 cm, white-tomentose. Leaves with arachnoid indumentum and glaucous above, white-tomentose beneath, the marginal spines 4-6 mm, yellow, mixed with shorter spines; basal leaves 5-8 × 2·8-3·5 cm, elliptic-lanceolate, spinose-dentate, shortly petiolate; cauline leaves 7-20 × 3·5-12 cm, lanceolate, with ovate-lanceolate, pinnatifid segments, sessile. Involucre 15-35 mm, ovoid; involucral bracts greenish or purplish, the outer spinose, recurved, the middle with an ovate-lanceolate appendage tapering into an erecto-patent spine 10-30 × 3-5 mm. Corolla purplish-blue. Achenes 3-5 × 2-3 mm, shiny, brown; pappus 20-25 mm.{\i  Cultivated or waste ground. S. Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. cornigera} Lindley in Sibth. & Sm., {\i Fl. Graeca}{\b  9}: 25 (1837) ({\i C. sibthorpiana} Boiss. & Heldr.). Stems up to 30 cm, arachnoid-lanate. Leaves mostly basal, up to 40 × 16 cm, broadly oblong, pinnatifid, coriaceous, glabrous and bright green with pale veins above, white-tomentose with prominent veins beneath, petiolate; cauline leaves sessile; segments caudate, with triangular lobes having terminal yellow spines 2-6 mm. Involucre 40-50 mm, subglobose; outer involucral bracts with a slender apical spine c. 5 mm; middle bracts with a cochleariform appendage 8-10 × 10-15 mm, abruptly narrowed into an erecto-patent spine 20-50 × 2-4 mm. Corolla yellowish. Achenes 4-5 × 2·5-3 mm; pappus 20-25 mm. {\i S. Greece and Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. cardunculus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 827 (1753). Stems 20-100 cm, lanate. Leaves up to 50 × 35 cm, subcoriaceous, bright green and shortly tomentose above, white-tomentose beneath; segments ovate to linear-lanceolate, with rigid, yellow spines 15-35 mm at apex and clustered at base; lower leaves petiolate, the uppermost sessile. Involucre 45-60 × 40-55 mm, ovoid-globose; involucral bracts ovate to elliptical, gradually or abruptly narrowed into an erecto-patent spine 10-50 × 2-6 mm, glaucescent or purplish. Corolla blue, lilac or whitish. Achenes 6-8 × 3-4 mm, shiny, brown-spotted; pappus 25-40 mm. 2n = 34.{\i  Stony or waste places and dry grassland, mainly on clay soils. S. & W. parts of Mediterranean region and S. Portugal; occasionally cultivated elsewhere for the leaves which are blanched and eaten as a vegetable} ({\i cardoon}). Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\par
248}
\par