{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 41 Stems simple or branched; appendages with (5-)7-11 
\par
   spines; pappus absent on outer achenes ....................................... {\b 151. seridis}
\par
35 Pappus about twice as long as achene or shorter;
\par
   apical spine of appendage simple or pinnate, usually
\par
   much longer than the others (Subgen.{\i  Solstitiaria})
\par
42 Appendages decurrent, with entire filiform spine;
\par
   florets purple ................................................................................. {\b 163. diluta}
\par
42 Appendages not decurrent, with pinnate spine; florets
\par
   yellow, rarely purple
\par
43 Upper leaves not decurrent; pappus shorter than achene ..... {\b 161. nicaeensis}
\par
43 Upper leaves decurrent
\par
44 Achenes c. 4·5 mm, about twice as long as pappus;
\par
   involucre (12-)15-20 mm in diameter
\par
45 Bracts very densely arachnoid; lateral spines of 
\par
   appendages less than 5 mm ..................................................... {\b 162. eriophora}
\par
45 Bracts sparsely lanate to subglabrous; lateral spines
\par
   of appendages 5-6 mm ............................................................ {\b 160. sulphurea}
\par
44 Achenes c. 2·5 mm, shorter than to as long as pappus;
\par
   involucre 7-12 mm in diameter
\par
46 Leaves lanate or greyish-tomentose; florets eglandular;
\par
   pappus twice as long as achene .............................................. {\b 157. solstitialis}
\par
46 Leaves with arachnoid indumentum or crispate-puberulent
\par
   and greenish; florets glandular; pappus as long as achene
\par
47 Stem up to 80 cm; involucre glabrous or puberulent;
\par
   apical spine of appendages 5-8 mm ....................................... {\b 159. melitensis}
\par
47 Stem up to 15 cm; involucre tomentose; apical spine 
\par
   of appendages 15-30 mm ............................................................... {\b 158. idaea}
\par
30 Appendage of middle bracts unarmed or with a solitary
\par
   spine, lacerate- to pectinate-fimbriate
\par
48 Appendages not decurrent on the bracts
\par
49 Florets yellow
\par
50 Appendage of middle bracts small, lanceolate, with a
\par
   patent, deciduous apical spine (Subgen.{\i  Microlophus}) ........... {\b 68. thracica}
\par
50 Appendage of middle bracts large, ovate-lanceolate, with a 
\par
   rigid, persistent apical spine (Subgen.{\i  Cynaroides}) ............... {\b 69. charrelii}
\par
49 Florets pink or purple, very rarely white or yellow
\par
51 Leaves linear-lanceolate, entire; appendage not 
\par
   clearly separated from the bract; pappus-setae very 
\par
   numerous (Subgen.{\i  Odontolophus}) ....................................... {\b 209. trinervia}
\par
51 Basal and lower cauline leaves lanceolate or wider,
\par
   often divided; appendage clearly separated from the 
\par
   bract; pappus-setae few or absent
\par
52 Lower leaves white- or grey-tomentose beneath
\par
53 Marginal florets with staminodes; style-branches of 
\par
   inner florets short; pappus caducous, of 2 rows of 
\par
   scabrid setae (Subgen. {\i Psephellus})
\par
54 Appendages ovate-orbicular, covering bracts; involucre
\par
   30-40 mm in diameter; lower leaves with acute segments ....... {\b 204. dealbata}
\par
54 Appendages triangular-lanceolate, not covering bracts;
\par
   involucre not more than 20 mm in diameter; lower 
\par
   leaves with obtuse segments
\par
55 Involucre not more than 15 mm in diameter; appendages
\par
   yellow or pale brown ........................................................... {\b 202. leucophylla}
\par
55 Involucre 15-20 mm in diameter; appendages brown ........... {\b 203. declinata}
\par
53 Marginal florets without staminodes; style-branches of
\par
   inner florets long; pappus persistent, the inner row 
\par
   of connate, lanceolate scales   (Subgen. {\i Heterolophus})
\par
56 Bracts covered by appendages; appendage of middle bracts 
\par
   5-9 mm, broadly ovate, with 6-12 fimbriae on each side
\par
57 Stems up to 60 cm, erect; appendage of middle bracts
\par
   yellowish-brown ........................................................................ {\b 205. sibirica}
\par
57 Stems not more than 20 cm, procumbent; appendage of middle 
\par
   bracts brown at base, blackish-brown towards apex .............. {\b 206. carbonata}
\par
56 Bracts not covered by appendages; appendage of middle
\par
   bracts not more than 3 mm, oblong or lanceolate,
\par
   entire or with 1-4 fimbriae on each side
\par
58 Appendage of middle bracts oblong, with 3-4 fimbriae 
\par
   on each side, brown ......................................................... {\b 207. marschalliana}
\par
58 Appendage of middle bracts narrowly lanceolate or
\par
   triangular-lanceolate, entire or with 1-3 fimbriae on
\par
   each side, blackish-brown ....................................................... {\b 208. sumensis} 
\par
52 Lower leaves not white- or grey-tomentose beneath 
\par
   (Subgen. {\i Jacea, Phalolepis})
\par
59 Lower and middle leaves 1- to 2(-3)-pinnate, with linear, 
\par
   lanceolate or oblong segments, rarely undivided or lyrate
\par
60 Capitula not more than 10; involucral appendages with 
\par
   brownish to reddish centre, with spine 0·5-3 mm ....................... {\b 166. sterilis}
\par
60 Capitula usually more than 10; involucral appendages
\par
   concolorous or with a brownish to black centre, with a
\par
   setaceous spine, or muticous ........................................................... {\b 167. alba}
\par
59 Lower and middle leaves undivided, or pinnately lobed
\par
   with triangular-lanceolate or oblong segments
\par
61 Appendages triangular or ovate-triangular, lanceolate 
\par
   or ovate-lanceolate, with short fimbriae; pappus
\par
   usually absent
\par
62 Appendages not more than 2 mm, with 5-12 fimbriae on 
\par
   each side, the terminal fimbria shorter than the lateral
\par
63 Involucre 12-15 mm in diameter,globose or ovoid-globose;
\par
   appendages ± covering bracts; stems stout ........................... {\b 183. transalpina}
\par
63 Involucre 6-12 mm in diameter, ovoid-cylindrical to narrowly 
\par
   cylindrical; appendages not covering bracts; stems slender
\par
64 Lower leaves orbicular-ovate, the cauline broadly 
\par
   amplexicaul, dentate; involucre not more than 8 mm in
\par
   diameter .................................................................................. {\b 185. carniolica}
\par
64 Lower leaves oblong, lanceolate or elliptical, rarely 
\par
   ovate, the cauline ± attenuate at base; involucre up to
\par
   12 mm in diameter ................................................................ {\b 184. nigrescens}
\par
62 Appendages more than 2 mm, mostly covering bracts, 
\par
   with 7-15 fimbriae on each side, the terminal fimbria
\par
   mostly longer than the lateral
\par
65 Appendages ovate-triangular to ovate-lanceolate, erect, not recurved
\par
66 Appendages brown, the fimbriae 9-10 on each side, pale
\par
   brown ...................................................................................... {\b 179. decipiens}
\par
66 Appendages blackish-brown, the fimbriae 10-15 on each
\par
   side, blackish-brown ................................................................. {\b 180. subjacea}
\par
65 Appendages lanceolate, rarely ovate-triangular,
\par
   recurved or rarely erect
\par
67 Involucre 12-14 mm in diameter; leaves scabrid .............. {\b 181. macroptilon}
\par
67 Involucre 3-10 mm in diameter; leaves not scabrid .......... {\b 182. microptilon}
\par
61 Appendages linear to lanceolate or triangular-lanceolate,
\par
   rarely orbicular, with long fimbriae; pappus usually present
\par
68 Appendages erect or somewhat recurved at apex,not 
\par
   attenuate into a narrow acumen; pappus much shorter 
\par
   than achene or absent
\par
69 Involucre 9-14 mm in diameter; appendages brown, not
\par
   recurved at apex; pappus absent or very short ........................ {\b 186. debeauxii}
\par
69 Involucre 15-20 mm in diameter; appendages black or
\par
   blackish-brown, somewhat recurved at apex;
\par
   pappus 1/6-1/3 as long as achene ................................................... {\b 187. nigra}
\par
68 Appendages attenuate into a subulate-filiform or 
\par
   linear-lanceolate, recurved, rarely erect, acumen;
\par
   pappus much shorter than to as long as achene
\par
70 All leaves linear or filiform
\par

\par
256}
\par