{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Throughout the range of the species except Albania and W Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cetingensis} (Rohlena) Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 734 (1931): Stems leafless above or nearly so. Leaves scabrid at margin and on the veins only, rarely almost smooth, the terminal lobe scarcely larger than the lateral.{\i  Albania and W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. S. gmelinii} Tausch, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 11}: 485 (1828). Plant 60-100 cm, stout, erect, scabrid-pubescent, rarely subglabrous. Basal leaves deeply and somewhat irregularly pinnatifid, the lobes remotely and irregularly dentate; cauline leaves similar or the upper entire, absent from upper part of stem. Capitulum (15-)20-25 × c. 20 mm, subglobose, solitary. Outer involucral bracts subglabrous, shining or with sparse tomentum, with very short, soft, deciduous mucro at apex; inner bracts linear-lanceolate, with apical appendage. Florets purplish.{\i  C. & S.E. Russia.} Rs (C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. tanaitica} Smirnov,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou} nov. ser., {\b 49}({\b 1}): 92 (1940), from S.E. Russia, appears closely related to {\b 15}, from which it is said to differ in its glabrous stem, rather regular, narrow leaf-lobes, smaller capitula and paler florets. It may perhaps also be related to {\b 14}({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b S. donetzica} Dubovik in Wissjul., {\i Fl. RSS Ucr.}{\b  12}: 560 (1965), from S.E. Russia and E. Ukraine, is said to be intermediate between {\b 15} and {\i S. tanaitica}, differing from both in its shorter, densely pubescent stem and longer spines of the outer involucral bracts.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. S. cardunculus} (Pallas) Schischkin in Krylov,{\i  Fl. Zap. Sibir.}{\b  11}: 2937 (1949). Plant 40-60 cm, slender, erect, sparingly branched, glabrous. Leaves narrowly lanceolate, the basal entire or remotely dentate, the cauline sometimes deeply and irregularly pinnatifid. Capitula 15-17 mm, campanulate, 2-3 in a branched inflorescence. Outer involucral bracts ovate, acute, strongly mucronate but scarcely spiny at apex; inner bracts chartaceous, long-attenuate, with sometimes geniculate or rather hooked mucronate apex. Florets purplish.{\i  S.E. Russia and E. Ukraine.} Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. S. erucifolia} (L.) Boriss. in Bobrov & Czerep.,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  28}: 270 (1963). Plant 20-60 cm, with many patent branches, scabrid. Leaves deeply, often irregularly, pinnatifid, the basal sometimes only shallowly so; cauline leaves becoming reduced and bract-like towards apex, dentate to entire. Capitula 10-15 × 4-6 mm, cylindrical, numerous in a corymbose inflorescence. Outer involucral bracts glabrous, with short apical spine; inner bracts chartaceous, with distinct midrib prolonged into short mucro. Florets purplish. {\i S. part of U.S.S.R.} Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 131.              Leuzea}               DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Rhaponticum} Adanson, non Ludwig)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Dostál.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Biennials or perennials. Stem simple, rarely sparingly branched. Leaves entire to lyrate or pinnatifid. Capitula solitary, terminal. Involucre ovoid-globose or globose; bracts imbricate, with membranous, entire or lacerate appendages. Florets all hermaphrodite. Anthers with obtuse basal appendages. Achenes ovoid or turbinate, sometimes compressed, glabrous; pappus-hairs in several rows, plumose or barbellate, connate into an annulus at the base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: J. Holub, {\i Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}) {\b 8}: 377-395 (1973)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Pappus-hairs barbellate, the cilia not or scarcely 
\par
  longer than the width of the hair
\par
2 Bracts narrowly lanceolate, acuminate, without a distinct
\par
  appendage; basal leaves pinnatisect ........................................ {\b 1. centauroides}
\par
2 Bracts broadly ovate, obtuse or subacute, with an 
\par
  orbicular appendage up to 10 mm wide; basal leaves 
\par
  undivided, lyrate or pinnatisect .................................................. {\b 2. rhapontica}
\par
1 Pappus-hairs plumose, the cilia at least 3 times as 
\par
  long as the width of the hair
\par
3 Stem 5-30 cm; involucre ovoid-globose; achenes densely
\par
  tuberculate, without an apical collar; pappus c. 6 times
\par
  as long as achene, the cilia 10-20 times as long as the
\par
  width of the hair ............................................................................. {\b 4. conifera}
\par
3 Stem 20-150 cm; involucre globose; achenes ± smooth, with a 
\par
  small apical collar; pappus 2-3 times as long as achene, the 
\par
  cilia not more than 8 times as long as the width of the hair 
\par
4 Stem 20-80 cm, leafless above; leaves white-tomentose 
\par
  beneath ......................................................................................... {\b 6. longifolia}
\par
4 Stem 40-150 cm, with a few leaves above; leaves green 
\par
  on both surfaces or arachnoid-hairy beneath
\par
5 Stem 100-150 cm; leaves pinnatifid; involucre 6-8 cm in
\par
  diameter; appendages of involucral bracts suborbicular,
\par
  the outer lanceolate .............................................................. {\b 5. rhaponticoides}
\par
5 Stem 40-100 cm; leaves undivided or with 1-3 pairs of lobes 
\par
  at the base; involucre 3-6 cm in diameter; appendages 
\par
  of involucral bracts ovate, long-acuminate ....................................... {\b 3. altaica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. centauroides} (L.) J. Holub,{\i  Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}) {\b 8}: 391 (1973) ({\i Cnicus centauroides} L.). Stem up to 100 cm, arachnoid-tomentose. Basal leaves 30 × 20 cm, pinnatisect, with lanceolate, acute, serrate-dentate segments, petiolate; cauline leaves smaller, pinnatifid or incise-dentate, sessile, the uppermost surrounding the capitulum; all leaves green above, white-tomentose beneath. Involucre up to 5 cm in diameter, globose; bracts narrowly lanceolate, acuminate, lacerate, with brown margin, the appendage absent. Corolla purple. Achenes 8-10 mm, dark brown; pappus barbellate, brownish, 4 times as long as achene. 2n = 26.{\i  Mountain rocks and pastures. • Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. rhapontica} (L.) J. Holub, {\i op. cit.} 392 (1973) ({\i Rhaponticum scariosum }Lam., {\i Centaurea rhapontica} L.). Stem up to 100 cm, lanate. Basal leaves 20-60 × 12-15 cm, acute, subcordate at base, petiolate; cauline leaves attenuate or sublyrate at base, undivided or lyrate, dentate, sessile; all leaves green, glabrous above, grey or white-tomentose beneath. Involucre up to 11 cm in diameter, globose; bracts oblong or ovate, the appendages c. 10 mm wide, orbicular, lacerate, brown. Corolla red or purple. Achenes brown; pappus barbellate, twice as long as achene, purplish-brown. 2n = 26.{\i  Subalpine and alpine meadows. • Alps}. Au Ga He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucre 5-6(-7) cm in diameter; bracts subacute;
\par
  cauline leaves gradually narrowed to base, undivided,
\par
  grey-tomentose beneath; stem leafless below the 
\par
  capitulum ....................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b rhapontica}
\par
1 Involucre 7-11 cm in diameter; bracts obtuse; cauline 
\par
  leaves abruptly narrowed to base, undivided, lyrate or
\par
  pinnatisect, distinctly white-tomentose beneath; stem 
\par
  leafy up to the capitulum
\par
2 Basal leaves undivided or lyrate, with one pair of 
\par
  lobes at the base ............................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b heleniifolia}
\par
2 Basal leaves deeply pinnatisect into lanceolate,
\par
  serrate-dentate segments .................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b bicknellii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rhapontica}: Stem up to 70 cm, leafy only at the base. Basal leaves lanceolate to ovate, undivided, grey-tomentose beneath. Capitula long-pedunculate. Involucre 5-6(-7) cm in diameter; bracts subacute, densely ciliate.{\i  Calcifuge. S.W. & C. Alps}.
\par

\par
252}
\par