{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 71 Leaves filiform, glabrous; pappus c. 1 mm ............................. {\b 199. parilica}
\par
71 Leaves 2-3 mm wide, linear, scabrid or scabrid-
\par
   puberulent; pappus 1·5-2 mm
\par
72 Involucre 10-12 mm in diameter; stem simple or 
\par
   sparingly branched; appendages blackish-brown at base,
\par
   reddish-brown at apex ............................................................... {\b 197. linifolia}
\par
72 Involucre 6-8 mm in diameter; stem much branched from 
\par
   the base; appendages pale brown throughout ..................... {\b 198. hyssopifolia} 
\par
70 Basal and middle leaves lanceolate to ovate, oblong or
\par
   elliptical
\par
73 Appendages linear or linear-lanceolate, attenuate into
\par
   a subulate-filiform acumen, not covering the bracts
\par
74 Involucre 8-18 mm in diameter
\par
75 Stems up to 40 cm, erect or ascending; involucre 
\par
   13-18 mm in diameter, ovoid or subglobose; appendages
\par
   black below; pappus c. 0·5 cm ................................................ {\b 193. pectinata}
\par
75 Stems not more than 18 cm, procumbent; involucre
\par
   8-10 mm in diameter, obovoid-obconical; appendages 
\par
   brown below; pappus c. 1 mm ................................................ {\b 194. antennata}
\par
74 Involucre 6-12 mm in diameter
\par
76 Stems 40-60 cm, erect, corymbosely branched; leaves yellowish-
\par
   green or green, scabrid; involucre 6-10 mm in diameter; 
\par
   bracts lanate, the appendage brown or yellow ................. {\b 195. trichocephala}
\par
76 Stems 5-10 cm, ascending, simple; leaves greyish-white,
\par
   lanate; involucre c. 12 mm in diameter; bracts tomentellous,
\par
   the appendage reddish-brown ....................................................... {\b 196. janeri}
\par
73 Appendages narrowly lanceolate or triangular-lanceolate,
\par
   attenuate into a linear-lanceolate acumen, covering the bracts
\par
77 Involucre 12-25 mm in diameter; stems simple
\par
78 Upper leaves linear-lanceolate; pappus 1/4-1/3 as long
\par
   as achene .................................................................................... {\b 191. uniflora}
\par
78 Upper leaves oblong to ovate-lanceolate; pappus ½ as
\par
   long to as long as achene ........................................................ {\b 192. kernerana}
\par
77 Involucre 8-20 mm in diameter; stems usually branched
\par
79 Involucre 10-20 mm in diameter; appendages with 12-25
\par
   fimbriae on each side ................................................................. {\b 188. phrygia}
\par
79 Involucre 8-14 mm in diameter; appendages with 8-12
\par
   fimbriae on each side
\par
80 Involucre 8-10 mm in diameter, ovoid or ovoid-cylin-
\par
   drical; appendages with an acumen 6-7 mm ............................. {\b 190. indurata}
\par
80 Involucre 9-14 mm in diameter, oblong-ovoid or ovoid-
\par
   cylindrical; appendages with an acumen 8-10 mm ................ {\b 189. stenolepis} 
\par
48 Appendages decurrent on the bracts
\par
81 Appendages forming a narrow margin decurrent to the 
\par
   base of the bract
\par
82 Middle bracts with a slender, remotely pinnate-spinulose, 
\par
   recurved spine; pappus of spirally arranged scales 
\par
   (Subgen. {\i Melanoloma}) ............................................................ {\b 221. pullata}
\par
82 Middle bracts muticous; pappus of filiform, barbellate
\par
   setae, the inner row connate at the base (Subgen. {\i Cyanus})
\par
83 Teeth or fimbriae not longer than the width of the
\par
   entire part of the margin of appendage, black or
\par
   blackish-brown at least at apex
\par
84 Appendages with teeth shorter than the width of the margin
\par
85 Leaves somewhat rigid, gradually acuminate, grey tomen
\par
   tose beneath; involucre ovoid ...................................................... {\b 211. mollis}
\par
85 Leaves thin, soft, abruptly acuminate, subglabrous and
\par
   green beneath; involucre subcylindrical ..................... {\b 212. maramarosiensis}
\par
84 Appendages with fimbriae as long as the width of the margin
\par
86 Leaves ovate to oblong, usually entire; stem broadly 
\par
   winged; fimbriae dark brown; achene 5-6 mm ........................ {\b 210. montana}
\par
86 Leaves oblong to narrowly lanceolate, entire or 
\par
   pinnate; stem narrowly or broadly but shortly winged;
\par
   fimbriae brown to white; achene 3-5 mm
\par
87 Leaves patent, lanceolate; stem not more than 20 cm,
\par
   simple, narrowly winged; capitula long-pedunculate ........... {\b 213. pinnatifida}
\par
87 Leaves erect, ovate or oblong to lanceolate; stem up 
\par
   to 80(-100) cm, simple or branched, broadly or 
\par
   narrowly winged; capitula not long-pedunculate .................... {\b 216. triumfetti}
\par
83 Fimbriae 2-3 times as long as the width of the entire part
\par
   of the margin of appendage, white or silvery at least at apex
\par
88 Annual (rarely biennial)
\par
89 Stems 8-20 cm, erect or procumbent, simple or sparingly 
\par
   branched; lower leaves obovate to oblanceolate ....................... {\b 219. pinardii}
\par
89 Stems 20-80 cm, erect, branched; lower leaves oblong 
\par
   to lanceolate
\par
90 Lower leaves oblong, obtuse; appendages reddish-black,
\par
   the fimbriae c. 2 mm; pappus 6-8 mm ..................................... {\b 218. depressa}
\par
90 Lower leaves lanceolate, acute; appendages brown, the
\par
   fimbriae c. 1 mm; pappus 3-4 mm .............................................. {\b 220. cyanus}
\par
88 Perennial
\par
91 Roots fusiform or napiform; inner florets purple or lilac .... {\b 217. napulifera}
\par
91 Roots not swollen
\par
92 Inner florets violet, outer blue .............................................. {\b 216. triumfetti}
\par
92 Inner and outer florets cream
\par
93 Leaves linear-lanceolate in outline, entire or lyrate-lobed;
\par
   involucre 6-8 mm in diameter ................................................. {\b 214. baldaccii}
\par
93 Leaves oblong in outline, lyrate-pinnatisect;
\par
   involucre c. 18 mm in diameter ............................................... {\b 215. pindicola}
\par
81 Appendages shortly decurrent
\par
94 Perennial, rarely biennial; stems usually sparingly 
\par
   branched or absent; capitula usually comparatively 
\par
   large; bracts usually without or with very indistinct
\par
   veins on the dorsal surface (Subgen. {\i Lopholoma, Jacea})
\par
95 Appendages linear or triangular
\par
96 Leaves membranous, usually white-tomentose; involucre
\par
   12-20 mm in diameter ........................................................ {\b 200. procumbens}
\par
96 Leaves subcoriaceous, glabrous; involucre 8-15 mm in
\par
   diameter ..................................................................................... {\b 201. rhaetica}
\par
95 Appendages usually semilunate
\par
97 Stems 0-5(-10) cm
\par
98 At least the outer bracts with fimbriate appendages
\par
99 Florets pink or purple
\par
100 Leaves lanate ....................................................................... {\b 64. amblensis}
\par
100 Leaves glabrous or scabrid-puberulent ................................ {\b 57. raphanina}
\par
99  Florets yellowish or orange
\par
101 Leaves white-lanate or arachnoid-lanate 
\par
102 Pappus twice as long as achene ......................................... {\b 17. granatensis} 
\par
102 Pappus equalling or shorter than achene
\par
103 Florets orange; pappus much shorter than achene ............ {\b 60. macrorrhiza}
\par
103 Florets pale yellow; pappus about as long as achene ....... {\b 19. macedonica}
\par
101 Leaves floccose-tomentose or sublanate, often sub-
\par
    glabrous or ± glabrescent 
\par
104 Leaves undivided ............................................................. {\b 63. argecillensis} 
\par
104 Leaves mostly divided
\par
105 Stems at least 5 cm
\par
106 Pappus 2-3 times as long as achene ....................................... {\b 22. rupestris}
\par
106 Pappus less than twice as long as achene ......................... {\b 19. macedonica}
\par

\par
257}
\par