{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3 Middle bracts with scarious margin 2-4 mm wide near
\par
  apex; pappus shorter than or almost as long as achene
\par
4 Leaves glabrous, all pinnatisect, the upper with 
\par
  broadly ovate segments .............................................................. {\b 2. amplifolia}
\par
4 Leaves lanuginous-villous, the lower undivided or lyrate,
\par
   the upper pinnatisect with linear-lanceolate segments ............... {\b 3. fraylensis}
\par
2 Florets yellow
\par
5 Basal leaves undivided; cauline leaves undivided or lyrate .......... {\b 4. africana}
\par
5 All leaves pinnatisect
\par
6 Middle bracts with scarious margin 1·5-2·5 mm wide near apex
\par
7 Leaf-segments ovate-oblong; stems not more than 70 cm,
\par
  glabrous ..................................................................................... {\b 7. kasakorum}
\par
7 Leaf-segments linear or linear-lanceolate
\par
8 Stems 80-100 cm, villous below .................................................... {\b 8. taliewii}
\par
8 Stems 100-150 cm, lanate below ................................................ {\b 5. ruthenica}
\par
6 Middle bracts with scarious margin 0·5-1 mm wide near apex
\par
9 Leaves pale green, the segments oblong-lanceolate,
\par
  entire at base, sometimes serrate at apex .......................................... {\b 9. alpina}
\par
9 Leaves deep green, the segments linear-lanceolate,
\par
  serrate from base to apex
\par
10 Stems lanate at the nodes below; leaves ovate-oblong 
\par
   in outline ...................................................................................... {\b 5. ruthenica}
\par
10 Stems villous at the nodes below; leaves linear- or 
\par
   oblong-lanceolate in outline .......................................................... {\b 6. linaresii}
\par
1  Middle bracts usually with a scarious or membranous 
\par
   margin, or with a spinose appendage
\par
11 Middle bracts with an entire, denticulate or lacerate,
\par
   but not imbriate, appendage (Subgen.{\i  Jacea, Phalolepis,
\par
   Lopholoma} Sect.{\i  Hyaleoloma})
\par
12 Lower and middle leaves 1- to 2(-3)-pinnate, with linear, 
\par
   lanceolate or oblong segments, rarely undivided or lyrate
\par
13 Appendages hyaline throughout .................................................. {\b 10. jankae}
\par
13 Appendages coriaceous at least in centre
\par
14 Biennial; appendages with the margin scarcely demarcated
\par
   from the centre ................................................................... {\b 164. margaritacea}
\par
14 Biennial or perennial; appendages with the margin 
\par
   distinct from the centre
\par
15 Stems 10-100 cm, erect, rarely ascending or procumbent,
\par
   with many branches
\par
16 Capitula not more than 10; appendages with brownish to
\par
   reddish centre, with spine 0·5-3 mm ........................................... {\b 166. sterilis}
\par
16 Capitula usually more than 10; appendages concolorous 
\par
   or with a yellowish, brownish or black centre, with a
\par
   setaceous spine, or muticous
\par
17 Appendages with a brown, reddish or blackish central
\par
   spot, or entirely whitish ................................................................... {\b 167. alba}
\par
17 Appendages with a yellow central spot
\par
18 Leaves lanate and scabrid; florets purple ...................... {\b 165. transcaucasica}
\par
18 Leaves puberulent; florets pink or white ....................................... {\b 167. alba}
\par
15 Stems 5-50 cm, erect or procumbent, ascending distally,
\par
   simple or sparingly branched
\par
19 Lower leaves pinnatifid or lobed, the segments lanceolate
\par
   to ovate
\par
20 Involucre 8-15 mm in diameter; florets purple ................ {\b 168. deustiformis}
\par
20 Involucre 20-25 mm in diameter; florets yellow ................... {\b 170. musarum}
\par
19 Lower leaves pinnatisect, the segments linear to setiform
\par
21 Segments of lower leaves numerous, setiform; involucre
\par
   18-20 mm in diameter ............................................................. {\b 169. ferulacea}
\par
21 Segments of lower leaves few, remote, linear; involucre
\par
   7-8 mm in diameter ......................................................................... {\b 167. alba}
\par
12 Lower and middle leaves undivided, or pinnately lobed
\par
   with triangular-lanceolate or oblong segments
\par
22 Involucre 6-7(-10) mm in diameter, obconical; leaves 
\par
   linear-lanceolate ............................................................ {\b 177. dracunculifolia}
\par
22 Involucre 9-22 mm in diameter, ovoid to globose or 
\par
   ovoid-cylindrical; basal leaves ovate to lanceolate
\par
23 Upper leaves densely crowded; involucre 18-22 mm in 
\par
   diameter; appendages 7-10 mm wide ..................................... {\b 171. haynaldii}
\par
23 Upper leaves not crowded; involucre 9-20 mm in diameter;
\par
    involucral appendages 4-8 mm wide
\par
24 Appendages orbicular, (4-)5-8 mm wide, with yellowish-
\par
   brown or pale reddish-brown centre; florets pinkish-orange
\par
25 Involucre (12-)14-20 mm in diameter, globose; appendages
\par
   6-8 mm wide ............................................................................ {\b 172. bracteata}
\par
25 Involucre c. 10 mm in diameter, ovoid-cylindrical;
\par
   appendages (4-)5-7 mm wide
\par
26 Upper leaves longer than internodes, narrowed below ...... {\b 173. weldeniana}
\par
26 Upper leaves shorter than internodes, auriculate-
\par
   semiamplexicaul .................................................................... {\b 174. rocheliana}
\par
24 Appendages ovate to orbicular, 4(-5) mm wide, with 
\par
   yellowish-brown, brown or blackish-brown centre
\par
27 Florets pinkish-orange; bracts mucronate ........................... {\b 174. rocheliana}
\par
27 Florets pink or purple; bracts muticous
\par
28 Stems with short branches; basal leaves lanceolate to
\par
   ovate; involucre ovoid; florets purple ............................................ {\b 178. jacea}
\par
28 Stems with long branches; basal leaves lanceolate; involucre 
\par
   ovoid-globose or ovoid-cylindrical; florets pink
\par
29 Leaves green and sparsely hairy, often glabrescent,
\par
   the cauline lanceolate to linear, entire to pinnately
\par
   or sinuately lobed ................................................................... {\b 175. pannonica}
\par
29 Leaves lanate-pubescent or arachnoid-hairy, hastate to
\par
   auriculate .................................................................................. {\b 176. vinyalsii}
\par
11 Middle bracts with a lacerate- to pectinate-fimbriate
\par
   or spinose appendage
\par
30 Appendage of middle bracts with palmately, pinnately 
\par
   or pectinately arranged spines
\par
31 Biennial; leaves not decurrent; pappus about as long 
\par
   as achene, or absent (Subgen. {\i Calcitrapa})
\par
32 Florets yellow ...................................................................... {\b 146. hyalolepis}
\par
32 Florets purple
\par
33 Capitula long-pedunculate; appendages with basal spines
\par
   up to 15 mm ............................................................................... {\b 149. pontica}
\par
33 Capitula sessile or almost so; appendages with basal 
\par
   spines not more than 5 mm
\par
34 Young leaves green, hispidulous; involucre 8-14 mm in
\par
   diameter ....................................................................................... {\b 147. iberica}
\par
34 Young leaves lanate; involucre 6-8 mm in diameter ............ {\b 148. calcitrapa}
\par
31 Annual, biennial or perennial; upper leaves usually 
\par
   decurrent; pappus shorter than to twice as long as
\par
   achene, or absent
\par
35 Pappus usually shorter than achene, or absent; apical spine 
\par
   of appendage not or slightly longer than the others; 
\par
   all spines of appendage palmately arranged (Subgen.{\i  Seridia})
\par
36 Florets orange; pappus about twice as long as achene ........ {\b 156. hermannii}
\par
36 Florets purple; pappus shorter than achene, or absent
\par
37 Appendages narrowed at base, broadly semilunate
\par
38 Lower leaves broadly ovate to lyrate; capitula solitary;
\par
   involucre c. 10 mm in diameter; appendages with 
\par
   5-9(-11) slender spines ............................................................. {\b 154. napifolia}
\par
38 Lower leaves pinnately lobed; capitula in clusters;
\par
   involucre c. 8 mm in diameter; appendages with
\par
   c. 5 spines, the apical stouter .............................................. {\b 155. micracantha}
\par
37 Appendages not narrowed at base, narrowly ovate-
\par
   semilunate to ovate
\par
39 Appendages with spines not more than 3 mm, rarely 
\par
   muticous; outer florets scarcely patent ........................................ {\b 153. aspera}
\par
39 Appendages with spines 3-5 mm or more; outer florets patent
\par
40 Stems not winged ........................................................ {\b 152. sphaerocephala}
\par
40 Stems winged 
\par
41 Stems corymbosely branched; appendages with 5-7 spines;
\par
   pappus c. 2 mm .................................................................... {\b 150. sonchifolia}
\par

\par
255}
\par