{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b heleniifolia} (Gren. & Godron) J. Holub, {\i loc. cit.} (1973) ({\i Rhaponticum scariosum} subsp.{\i  lyratum} (Bellardi) Hayek, {\i Centaurea lyrata} Bellardi): Stem up to 100 cm, sparingly leafy up to the capitulum. Basal leaves oblong,undivided or lyrate, with one pair of lobes at the base. Capitula sessile. Involucre 6-10 cm in diameter; bracts obtuse, sparsely to densely ciliate.{\i  Calcicole. Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b bicknellii} (Briq.) J. Holub, {\i loc. cit.} (1973): Stem leafy up to the capitulum. Basal leaves oblong-lanceolate, deeply pinnatisect into lanceolate, serrate-dentate segments. Capitula sessile. Involucre 8-11 cm in diameter; bracts obtuse, sparsely ciliate.{\i  Calcicole. Maritime Alps, Alpi Liguri}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. altaica} (Fischer ex Sprengel) Link,{\i  Enum. Horti Berol. Alt.}{\b  2}: 356 (1822) ({\i Rhaponticum serratuloides }(Georgi) Bobrov,{\i  Centaurea serratuloides} Georgi). Stem up to 100 cm, arachnoid tomentose. Basal leaves 30 × 15 cm, undivided or lyrately pinnatipartite with 1(-3) pairs of lobes at the base, dentate, petiolate; cauline undivided, entire or shallowly dentate, sessile; all leaves green on both surfaces, arachnoid-lanate beneath. Involucre 3-6 cm in diameter, globose; middle bracts with an oblong-ovate, long-acuminate, indistinctly lacerate, brown appendage with a recurved apex; inner bracts with a narrow, acute appendage. Corolla purple. Achenes 6-8 mm, pale brown; pappus plumose, 2-3 times as long as the achene, creamy-white.{\i  Meadows and saline steppes. S. part of U.S.S.R., E. Romania.} Rm Rs (?C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. conifera} (L.) DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  4}: 109 (1805) ({\i Centaurea conifera} L.). Stem 5-30 cm, white-lanate, leafy up to the capitulum. Leaves white-tomentose beneath; lower leaves ovate-lanceolate, entire or lyrate-pinnatifid, petiolate. Involucre up to 4 cm in diameter, ovoid-globose; middle bracts puberulent, with reddish-brown appendages. Corolla purple to whitish. Achenes up to 4 mm, turbinate, densely tuberculate, black; pappus c. 6 times as long as achene, snow-white. 2n = 26.{\i  Dry places. W. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Bl Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. rhaponticoides} Graells,{\i  Mem. Real Acad. Ci. Madrid}{\b  2}: 468 (1859). Stem 100-150 cm, with a few leaves above. Leaves pinnatifid, sparsely arachnoid-pubescent beneath, the lower petiolate, the cauline sessile; uppermost leaves sinuately lobed. Involucre 6-8 cm in diameter, globose; middle bracts sparsely puberulent, with reddish-brown appendages. Corolla violet-purple. Achenes c. 4·5 mm, ovoid, indistinctly costate, dark brown; pappus c. 3 times as long as achene, ivory-white. 2n = 26.{\i  Mountain woods. • C. Spain, N.E. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. longifolia} Hoffmanns. & Link,{\i  Fl. Port. }{\b 2}: 217 (1825). Stem 20-80 cm, leafless above. Leaves white-lanate beneath; lower leaves lanceolate, entire, the base with falcate, lyrate lobes, petiolate; cauline leaves lyrate-pinnatifid. Involucre up to 3 cm in diameter, globose; middle bracts glabrous, with brown appendages. Corolla purple. Achenes quadrangular; pappus c. 3 times as long as achene, ivory-white. 2n = 26.{\i  Damp scrub. • Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 132.        Amberboa}       (Pers.) Less.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Dostál.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or biennials. Capitula medium, solitary, sessile to long-pedunculate. Involucre ovoid; bracts imbricate, appressed, ovate or oblong, the inner row with appendage. Marginal florets sterile, radiate. Anthers long-caudate at base. Achenes oblong, compressed, villous, the apex denticulate, the centre umbilicate; pappus of several rows of scale-like hairs, persistent, shorter than to about as long as the achene.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. turanica} Iljin,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. URSS}{\b  30}: 110 (1932). Annual. Stem 20(-50) cm, branched from the base. Basal leaves undivided, rarely lobed, remotely dentate, petiolate; upper pinnately lobed to pinnatisect, dentate, sessile. Capitula sessile in the centre of a basal rosette of leaves, or sessile or shortly pedunculate at the apices of branches. Involucre c. 12 mm wide; appendage lanceolate. Corolla pale yellow, 5- to 10-fid. Achenes 4-5 mm. {\i Gravelly and sandy places. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E). ({\i W.&C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. moschata} (L.) DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 560 (1838) ({\i Centaurea moschata} L.), from S.W. Asia, is cultivated for ornament and has been reported as a casual or perhaps naturalized in the Mediterranean region. It is a sparingly branched annual or biennial up to 70 cm and can be distinguished from {\b 1} by the long-pedunculate capitula, the involucre c. 20 mm in diameter, the inner bracts having a broadly ovate appendage, and the pink, multifid corolla. The achenes often lack a pappus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 133.        Volutaria}           Cass.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Dostál.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Capitula solitary or in pairs at apex of branches, small. Involucre ovoid; bracts imbricate, in few rows, with shortly decurrent, acute, mucronate apical appendage. Marginal florets sterile, radiate. Filaments hairy. Achenes ribbed, pitted between the ribs, pubescent, the apex with a denticulate margin; pappus in 2 subequal rows, the outer of setae, the inner of scales.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. V. lippii} (L.) Maire in Jahandiez & Maire, {\i Cat. Pl. Maroc}{\b  3}: 817 (1934) ({\i Centaurea lippii} L.). Plant crispate-papillose; stems 20-40 cm, erect, divaricately branched, sulcate, leafy up to the capitula. Basal leaves more or less in a rosette, obovate, lyrate or pinnatipartite, long-petiolate; segments oblong, remotely dentate; cauline leaves pinnatipartite, shortly decurrent, with short, winged petiole. Involucre 10-12 mm; middle bracts villous, with appendage c. 3 mm, lanceolate, yellow, brown at base. Florets bright pink. Achenes 3-4 mm; pappus c. 2·5 mm.{\i  Cultivated and waste ground. Naturalized in S.E. Spain and Linosa.} [Hs Si.] ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   V. maroccana }(Barratte & Murb.) Maire,{\i  op. cit.} 818 (1934) ({\i Amberboa maroccana} Barratte & Murb.), from Morocco, which is like {\b 1} but has pinnatisect leaves with linear, entire segments, the upper leaves as long as the basal, and the middle involucral bracts with a minute, black appendage, has been reported from S.E. Spain, and is perhaps naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 134.                  Cyanopsis}               Cass.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Dostál.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Capitula solitary on stems or branches. Involucre ovoid; bracts ovate-lanceolate, setulose-punctate on outer surface, with narrow black margin and apical spine. Outer florets sterile, radiate. Achenes somewhat compressed, ribbed; pappus of many rows of scales.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. muricata} (L.) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 193 (1976) ({\i Centaurea muricata} L., {\i Amberboa muricata} (L.) DC.). Plant arachnoid-hairy; stems up to 50 cm, erect, sulcate; upper branches leafless. Leaves oblong or oblong-lanceolate, entire to pinnatipartite, the segments remotely dentate; lower leaves petiolate, the middle sessile, the upper mucronulate at apex and auriculate at base. Capitula up to 5 cm in diameter. Involucre
\par

\par
253}
\par