{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   S. legionensis} Lacaita,{\i  Cavanillesia}{\b  3}: 37 (1930), recorded from two localities in N.W. Spain and said to be related to {\b 12}, appears to be a minor geographic variant of {\b 3}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. abulensis} Pau, {\i Bol. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat.}{\b  21}: 150 (1921) (?{\i S. pinnatifida} sensu Coutinho, non (Cav.) Poiret). Like {\b 3} but leaves with rather obscure lateral veins, distinctly dentate to pinnatifid, usually only hairy on the veins beneath and greenish-black when dry; capitula 25-40 mm, campanulate; outer involucral bracts 2-5 mm wide, usually purplish, with shortly subulate, rather weak apical spine. 2n = 90. •{\i  W.C. Spain, C. & S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. baetica} Boiss. ex DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  7}: 306 (1838). Stems up to 50 cm, puberulent. Basal leaves entire to dentate, the petiole as long as or longer than lamina; cauline entire to somewhat pinnatifid, usually absent from the upper part of the stem or rarely represented by bracts. Capitula 30-40 mm, campanulate, solitary or 2-4 together. Outer involucral bracts long, up to 3 mm wide, rigid, gradually narrowed into a stout apical spine; inner bracts chartaceous, long-attenuate. Florets purplish. •{\i   Mountains of S.W. Spain, W.C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. alcalae} Cosson,{\i  Not. Pl. Crit. }40 (1849) ({\i S. baetica} var.{\i  pinnatifida} Willk.). Like {\b 5} but often smaller, stem leafy almost up to the capitulum; leaves all pinnatifid; outer involucral bracts up to 3 mm wide, the inner somewhat erose and slightly ciliate at apex. Florets pinkish-purple. {\i Mountains of S.W. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. pauana} Iljin, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  35}: 354 (1934). Stems 8-30 cm, puberulent. Leaves broadly ovate to narrowly lanceolate, denticulate, rarely slightly pinnatifid, pale green when dry, long-petiolate. Capitula 30-50 mm, up to 40 mm in diameter, broadly campanulate, solitary. Outer involucral bracts 2-5 mm wide, gibbous, with rather short apical spine. Florets yellowish-purple. •{\i  C. & S.E. Spain. }Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. nudicaulis} (L.) DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 4}: 86 (1805) ({\i S. albarracinensis} Pau). Stems 13-25(-70) cm, glabrescent, usually with some leaves towards the base, with a few small bracts above. Leaves in a basal rosette, narrowly elliptical to narrowly lanceolate, subentire to coarsely serrate. Capitula 20-25 mm, broadly campanulate, solitary. Outer involucral bracts mucronate, purplish at apex and margin; middle bracts sometimes with apical appendages; inner bracts chartaceous, crispate, erose at apex. Florets pinkish-purple. 2n = 30.{\i  Mountains of S.W. Europe.} Ga He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. flavescens} (L.) Poiret in Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  6}: 562 (1805). Stems up to 70 cm, stout, erect, glabrescent. Leaves narrowly elliptical to elliptical, serrate-dentate, rarely subentire. Capitula 25-40 mm, campanulate, solitary or 2-5. Outer involucral bracts 1·5-2 mm wide, with apical spines which often become recurved; inner bracts chartaceous, long-attenuate, sometimes slightly geniculate and erose at apex. Florets yellow.{\i  C., E. & S. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   S. neglecta} Iljin, {\i Feddes Repert.} {\b 35}: 353 (1934), from S.E. Spain (Sierra de Cartama, prov. Málaga), is closely related to {\b 9}, and very probably conspecific with it. It appears to be less stout, with the leaf-margin somewhat shallowly dentate to subentire.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. leucantha} (Cav.) DC., {\i Prodr.} {\b 6}: 670 (1838). Like {\b 9} but leaves finely and regularly serrate-dentate, darker green when dry; capitula rather ventricose; outer involucral bracts c. 3 mm wide, few, with subulate apical spine; florets cream to white, rarely pale pink. •{\i  E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. cichoracea} (L.) DC.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1838). Plant up to 70 cm, stout, puberulent. Leaves denticulate, the basal oblanceolate to elliptical, rarely entire, the cauline linear-lanceolate, sometimes long-decurrent on stem, absent from upper part of stem. Capitula 30-40 mm, ventricose, solitary or occasionally a few together. Outer involucral bracts glabrous, shining, with long, rigid apical spine, the spine usually strongly recurved at maturity; inner bracts rather rigid, somewhat geniculate or recurved at apex. Florets purple.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Cr Hs It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaf-bases not, or only very slightly, decurrent ............ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b mucronata} 
\par
1 Leaf-bases clearly decurrent
\par
2 Outer involucral bracts velutinous ................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b cichoracea}
\par
2 Outer involucral bracts sparsely ciliate ................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b cretica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cichoracea}: Leaf-bases decurrent on the stem which sometimes appears winged. Outer involucral bracts velutinous, the apical spine 5-8 mm. •{\i  C. & S. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b mucronata} (Desf.) Jahandiez & Maire, {\i Cat. Pl. Maroc}{\b  3}: 805 (1934): Stems scapose, with few small bracts. Leaf-bases not, or only very slightly decurrent on stem. Outer involucral bracts sparsely ciliate, the apical spine 4-5 mm.{\i  Sicilia, S.E. Spain.} ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b cretica} Turrill, {\i Kew Bull.}{\b  12}: 391 (1957): Cauline leaves numerous. Leaf-bases decurrent. Outer involucral bracts with a few marginal papillae and cilia, the apical spine 2·5-3 mm. •{\i  E. Kriti}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. lycopifolia} (Vill.) A. Kerner,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  22}: 13 (1872) ({\i S. heterophylla }auct. ross., non (L.) Desf.). Plant up to c. 100 cm, puberulent. Basal leaves broadly lanceolate, coarsely dentate-serrate, sometimes with a few deeply pinnatifid basal lobes, with conspicuous veins; cauline leaves very deeply pinnatifid, scalariform, with linear lobes, sometimes with a large terminal lobe, absent from upper part of stem. Capitulum 20-30 mm, campanulate, solitary. Outer involucral bracts inconspicuously mucronate, with purplish apex and margin; inner bracts chartaceous, crispate, sometimes more or less geniculate at apex. Florets purplish. 2n = 60. •{\i  E.C. Europe and S.part of U.S.S.R., northwards to} c. 56°{\i  N.; mountains of S.E. France}. Au Cz Ga Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. S. bulgarica} Acht. & Stoj.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Bulg.}{\b  5}: 111 (1932). Plant 40-100 cm, slender, erect, very slightly asperous. Basal leaves lanceolate-ovate, dentate, the teeth coarse near base, becoming finer towards apex; cauline leaves lanceolate, long-cuneate at base, deeply or shallowly dentate, the uppermost becoming progressively more deeply cut and markedly apiculate and merging into the dentate bracts; rarely all leaves more or less entire. Capitulum c. 30 mm, campanulate, solitary. Outer involucral bracts broadly ovate, with conspicuous, irregular, membranous appendages; inner bracts acute, chartaceous, with crispate, membranous margin. Florets pinkish-purple. •{\i  N.E. Bulgaria and E. Romania.} Bu Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. S. radiata} (Waldst. & Kit.) Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3}: 545 (1819). Plant up to 60 cm, slender, scabrid. Leaves deeply pinnatifid, scalariform, the lobes entire or with occasional irregularly spaced teeth, scabrid to almost smooth. Capitula (20-)25-30 × 10-20 mm, campanulate, solitary or 2-4 in subcorymbose clusters. Outer involucral bracts abruptly contracted into a short rigid spine, the lower floccose; inner bracts rather rigid, with rather geniculate, occasionally almost hooked, spiny apex. Florets purplish. 2n = 30.{\i  S.E. Europe, extending to Hungary and S.C. Russia.} Al Bu Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b radiata}: Stems leafy almost to apex. Leaves distinctly scabrid, with terminal lobes usually larger than the lateral.
\par

\par
251}
\par