{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 150 Appendages of inner bracts brown or yellow throughout,
\par
    not large and conspicuous, not black in the centre
\par
151 Leaves smooth ........................................................................ {\b 53. badensis}
\par
151 Leaves scabrid at least on the veins or margin
\par
152 Appendages broadly decurrent, fimbriate
\par
153 Bracts 3-4 mm wide, ovate, numerous ................................... {\b 49. scabiosa}
\par
153 Bracts c. 6 mm wide, orbicular, few ............................. {\b 50. cephalariifolia}
\par
152 Appendages usually narrowly decurrent, shortly 
\par
    fimbriate to subentire
\par
154 Involucre 7-10 mm in diameter; appendages 2-4 mm ..... {\b 56. stereophylla}
\par
154 Involucre (10-)14-20 mm in diameter; appendages 0·5-2 mm
\par
155 Appendages not mucronate or spinulose at apex;
\par
    achenes glabrous ....................................................................... {\b 54. grinensis}
\par
155 Appendages mucronate or spinulose at apex; achenes hairy . {\b 55. apiculata}
\par
149 Appendages indistinctly and narrowly decurrent,
\par
    usually with a stout apical spine
\par
156 Florets pink to red or purple
\par
157 Leaf-segments not more than 1 mm wide, narrowly 
\par
    linear; florets violet or dark red ................................................ {\b 23. kosaninii}
\par
157 Leaf-segments at least 2 mm wide, oblong to ovate;
\par
    florets purple
\par
158 Involucre c. 12 mm in diameter ........................................ {\b 21. dichroantha}
\par
158 Involucre 15-40 mm in diameter
\par
159 Involucre 30-40 mm in diameter .......................................... {\b 45. redempta}
\par
159 Involucre 15-25 mm in diameter
\par
160 Appendages yellow
\par
161 Leaves not confined to a basal rosette ................................. {\b 12. salonitana}
\par
161 Leaves mostly confined to a basal rosette ................................. {\b 40. graeca}
\par
160 Appendages black or brown
\par
162 Pappus 3 times as long as achene ........................................ {\b 47. ebenoides}
\par
162 Pappus less than twice as long as achene
\par
163 Leaves subglabrous ............................................... {\b 35. immanuelis-loewii}
\par
163 Leaves lanate to pubescent at least beneath 
\par
164 Achenes sericeous; pappus slightly shorter than achene .. {\b 30. polymorpha} 
\par
164 Achenes puberulent; pappus as long as achene 
\par
165 Leaves subglabrous above .................................................... {\b 37. oliverana} 
\par
165 Leaves white-tomentose above ............................................ {\b 39. rechingeri}
\par
156 Florets cream, yellow or orange
\par
166 Florets orange or deep golden yellow
\par
167 Involucre c. 25 mm in diameter ................................................. {\b 16. ornata}
\par
167 Involucre 12-20 mm in diameter
\par
168 Lower cauline leaves pinnatisect with numerous segments
\par
169 Involucre 15-20 mm in diameter; leaves 1-pinnatisect ............. {\b 15. nicolai}
\par
169 Involucre 12-15 mm in diameter; leaves usually 
\par
    2-pinnatisect .............................................................................. {\b 22. rupestris}
\par
168 Lower cauline leaves lyrate-pinnatifid with few segments
\par
170 Involucre 12-15 mm in diameter ............................................ {\b 22. rupestris}
\par
170 Involucre 15-20 mm in diameter
\par
171 Leaves white-lanate ............................................................ {\b 17. granatensis}
\par
171 Leaves subglabrous ................................................................ {\b 29. prolongi}
\par
166 Florets cream or pale yellow, rarely bright yellow
\par
172 Appendages ± mucronulate at apex
\par
173 Lower leaves undivided or lyrate-pinnatifid .......................... {\b 14. rumelica}
\par
173 Lower leaves 2-pinnatifid ...................................................... {\b 22. rupestris}
\par
172 Appendages mucronate or spinose at apex
\par
174 Basal leaves 2-pinnatisect, the segments not more 
\par
    than 2 mm wide
\par
175 Leaf-segments narrowly linear, awned ............................ {\b 20. mannagettae}
\par
175 Leaf-segments linear to oblong, not awned
\par
176 Involucre 15-20 mm in diameter
\par
177 Florets bright yellow; pappus 7-9 mm, reddish ................... {\b 12. salonitana}
\par
177 Florets pale yellow; pappus c. 4 mm, white ........................... {\b 38. ragusina}
\par
176 Involucre 12-15 mm in diameter
\par
178 Leaves glabrous, with mucronulate segments c. 1 mm wide;
\par
    florets yellow or purple, the outer distinctly longer 
\par
    than the inner ....................................................................... {\b 21. dichroantha}
\par
178 Leaves arachnoid-hairy or sublanate, with segments
\par
    c. 2 mm wide; florets yellow, the outer scarcely 
\par
    longer than the inner
\par
179 Appendages with fimbriae joined by a hyaline membrane
\par
    below; florets pale to deep yellow ............................................. {\b 22. rupestris}
\par
179 Appendages with fimbriae free to the base; florets 
\par
    pale yellow ........................................................................... {\b 19. macedonica}
\par
174 Basal leaves undivided, pinnatisect, or lyrate-pinnatifid,
\par
    the segments at least 3 mm wide
\par
180 Leaf-segments lanceolate to linear
\par
181 Involucre 20-30 mm in diameter; leaf-rhachis winged ........ {\b 12. salonitana}
\par
181 Involucre (13-)15-25(-30) mm in diameter; leaf-rhachis
\par
    not winged
\par
182 Bracts orbicular, the apical spine erectopatent .......................... {\b 16. ornata}
\par
182 Bracts oblong-ovate, the apical spine patent or recurved
\par
183 Involucre 13-17 mm in diameter ............................................... {\b 11. collina}
\par
183 Involucre c. 25 mm in diameter ................................................. {\b 16. ornata}
\par
180 Leaf-segments ovate-oblong to narrowly oblong
\par
184 Involucre c. 12 mm in diameter ........................................ {\b 19. macedonica}
\par
184 Involucre (13-)15-25 mm in diameter
\par
185 Involucre up to 25 mm in diameter, globose
\par
186 Apical spine of appendage more than 4 mm; florets yellow, 
\par
    with black veins .................................................................. {\b 13. centauroides}
\par
186 Apical spine of appendage not more than c. 4 mm;
\par
    florets pale yellow ..................................................................... {\b 38. ragusina}
\par
185 Involucre not more than 20 mm in diameter, usually ovoid
\par
187 Florets pale yellow; apical spine of appendages 
\par
    spinulose at base ........................................................................... {\b 11. collina}
\par
187 Florets cream; apical spine of appendages entire at base ........ {\b 18. tuntasia}
\par
94  Annual, biennial or perennial; stems usually much-
\par
    branched and erect; capitula comparatively small;
\par
    bracts usually with (3-)5-7 more or less distinct 
\par
    veins on the dorsal surface (Subgen. {\i Acrolophus})
\par
188 Spiny dwarf shrub or herb with woody base
\par
189 Stems spiny, woody above; pappus absent ............................ {\b 145. spinosa}
\par
189 Stems unarmed, herbaceous or woody only at base;
\par
    pappus present
\par
190 Florets pink; leaves all pinnatisect, the terminal
\par
    segment with a single spine ......................................................... {\b 87. horrida}
\par
190 Florets yellow; spring leaves undivided; summer leaves 
\par
    divided, the terminal segment with three spines ....................... {\b 88. balearica}
\par

\par
259}
\par