{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 c. 15 mm in diameter; bracts appressed, villous, the spine up to 5 mm, erect to deflexed, straw-coloured. Florets pink, the outer up to 2 cm. Achenes up to 4 mm; pappus-scales 2/3 as long as achene, oblong-lanceolate, with serrulate apex, ivory-white.{\i  Roadsides and vineyards. • S. Spain} ({\i Malaga Prov}.). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 135.              Mantisalca}                  Cass. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Dostál.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Biennials or perennials. Capitula solitary on branches. Involucre ovoid-globose; bracts appressed, coriaceous, the appendage a short, erect to deflexed, deciduous spine. Anthers caudate at base. Achenes subcompressed, transversely rugose, 10- to 15-ribbed, the ribs anastomosing at base and apex; pappus of long, subacuminate scales, surrounded by setae as long as or longer than the achene.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. salmantica} (L.) Briq. & Cavillier, {\i Arch. Sci. Phys. Nat.} ({\i Genève}) ser. 5, {\b 12}: 111 (1930) ({\i Centaurea salmantica} L.). Plant glabrous above, arachnoid-pubescent below; stems up to 100 cm, with slender branches, leafless above. Lower leaves up to 25 cm, oblong, pinnately lobed; cauline linear-lanceolate to narrowly oblong, remotely dentate to pinnatisect, decreasing in size upwards. Involucre 10-15 mm in diameter; bracts ovate, acute, yellowish-green, black distally, with apical spine 1-3 mm. Marginal florets more or less radiate. Corolla purple, rarely white. Achenes c. 3 mm, dark brown; pappus brownish-white or reddish. 2n = 18, 20, 22.{\i  Cultivated ground, roadsides and other dry habitats. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Bl ?Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 136.            Acroptilon}              Cass.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Dostál.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizomatous perennials. Capitula small to medium, solitary on branches. Involucre oblong-ovoid to cylindrical; bracts imbricate, the outer with broadly ovate to lunulate appendage, the inner with oblong appendage. Florets tubular, hermaphrodite. Anthers shortly caudate at base. Achenes obovoid, indistinctly striate; pappus simple, caducous, the hairs barbellate, not connate into an annulus at base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. repens} (L.) DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 663 (1838) ({\i Centaurea picris} Pallas ex Willd., {\i C. repens} L.). Stem erect, branched, densely leafy. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, entire or remotely dentate. Involucre 5-15 mm in diameter; bracts villous on outer surface, with entire or lacerate margin, the outer orbicular, the middle ovate, the inner lanceolate. Florets pink or lilac-pink, longer than the involucre. Achenes 3-4 mm; pappus twice as long as achene. {\i Cultivated fields and dry pastures. S. Ukraine, S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 137.             Phalacrachena}               Iljin
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Dostál.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs with long rhizomes. Leaves simple. Capitula medium, solitary on branches. Involucre subglobose; bracts with membranous appendages. Inner florets tubular, hermaphrodite, the outer sterile, radiate. Anthers with short, basal appendages, the apical appendages free. Stigmas with long hairs at base. Achenes somewhat compressed; pappus absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. inuloides} (Fischer ex Janka) Iljin, {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  7}: 5l (1937). Stem simple or sparingly branched. Leaves lanceolate, entire, acute, pale green. Involucral bracts sub-coriaceous; middle with ovate, shortly mucronate, shortly decurrent appendages, having long, white, pectinate fimbriae; inner with large, oblong-ovate, recurved, irregularly fimbriate appendages. Florets pinkish-purple. Achenes 5·5-6 mm, glabrous.{\i  Saline soils. • S.E. Russia, E. Ukraine.} Rs (W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 138.           Centaurea}                L. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Dostál.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs, rarely dwarf shrubs. Leaves undivided to pinnatisect. Capitula solitary or in groups of 2-3 at apex of branches. Involucre cylindrical to globose; bracts often with a fimbriate or spiny appendage. Inner florets hermaphrodite; outer sterile, often radiate; corolla tubular, 5(-8)-fid. Achenes somewhat compressed. Pappus usually present, persistent or rarely caducous, of 2 or several rows of scabrid to plumose setae or oblong to linear scales; innermost row short, the setae or scales sometimes connate at the base, usually differing in shape or texture from the outer; outer rows imbricate, the inner the longest.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The problem of a practical and natural division of this vast genus still remains to be solved. Some subgenera and sections stand clearly apart and seem comparable to other genera already recognized within the Centaureineae, but the status of others is still uncertain. A very thorough study, involving many lines of evidence, may well provide a basis for further division of Centaurea, but there is little general agreement that this can be done with the present information. In view of the prevailing uncertainty and the drastic nomenclatural consequences which would result from further generic splitting, it has been decided to adopt here a relatively conservative circumscription.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Descriptions of leaves refer to the lower cauline, and of appendages and fimbriae to those of the middle involucral bracts unless otherwise stated. Diameter of involucre is measured at anthesis and is exclusive of spines.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   In order to assist with identification, the names of subgenera have in many cases been included in the key, even though sometimes these leads also include some species of other subgenera.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: J. Arènes, {\i Mém. Mus. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Paris}) Sér. Bot.,{\b  2}: 175-266 (1951) (Subgen.{\i  Acrolophus}). A. Borhidi, {\i Ann. Hist.Nat. Mus. Hung.} nov. ser., {\b 8}: 222-225 (1957) (Subgen. {\i Cyanus}). J. Briquet, {\i Monographie des Centaurées des Alpes maritimes.} Bâle, Genève. 1902. J. Dostál,{\i  Preslia}{\b  10}: 57-69 (1931); {\i Acta Bot. Bohem.}{\b  10}: 68-14 (1931) (Subgen. {\i Cyanus});{\i  Publ. Fac. Sci. Univ. Charles}{\b  160} (1938) (Subgen.{\i  Lopholoma}). C. Gardou, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  83}: 311-472 (1972) (Subgen.{\i  Jacea}). W. Gugler, {\i Die Centaureen des ungarischen Nationalmuseums.} Budapest. 1907. A. von Hayek, {\i Denkschr. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Cl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 70}: 585-773 (1901). E. M. Marsden-Jones & W. B. Turrill, {\i British Knapweeds.} London. 1954. (Subgen. {\i Jacea} etc.). D. Phitos, {\i Ber. Deutsch. Bot. Ges.}{\b  83}: 69-73 (1970) (Subgen. {\i Lopholoma}). J. Prodan, {\i Centaureele României} ({\i Centaureae Romaniae}), {\i Monographie}. Cluj. 1930. B. Stefanov & T. Georgiev, {\i Spis. Balg. Akad. Nauk.}{\b  44}: 133-193 (1931) (Subgen. {\i Cyanus}). Papers discussing general problems of taxonomy in the genus include M. Dittrich, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  88}: 70-122 (1968). J. Dostál, {\i Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  9}: 73-79 (1973). C. Jeffrey,{\i  Kew Bull.} {\b 21}: 107-113 (1967). G. Wagenitz, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 142}: 213-279 (1955).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Middle bracts without an appendage (the inner sometimes
\par
  with an appendage), the margin coriaceous, not scarious
\par
  or membranous (Subgen. {\i Centaurea})
\par
2 Florets purple or pink
\par
3 Middle bracts with scarious margin c. 1 mm wide near apex; 
\par
  pappus much longer than achene .............................................. {\b 1. centaurium}
\par

\par
254}
\par