{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. intybaceus} (Lam.) Dostál, {\i op. cit.} 274 (1976) ({\i Centaurea intybacea} Lam.). Plant glabrous to pubescent; stems 30-60 cm, often woody at base; branches leafless for some distance below capitula. Lower leaves lyrate, with linear segments, petiolate, the upper sessile and the uppermost entire, linear-lanceolate, acuminate. Involucre 12-16 mm; bracts with short, semi-lunate appendages, the fimbriae short, rigid. Florets purple, rarely white. Achenes c. 4·5 mm, striate; pappus as long as achene. 2n = 32. {\i Rocks and cliffs. • E. Spain, S. France, Islas Baleares.} Bl Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 130.              Serratula}                L
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J.F.M. Cannon & J.B. Marshall.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs with unarmed leaves. Capitula solitary or 2-many in a paniculate, rarely a compact, corymbose inflorescence. Usually with all florets hermaphrodite, rarely gynodioecious or more or less dioecious. Involucral bracts usually without appendages. Florets tubular; anther-appendages short or absent. Achenes glabrous. Pappus of several rows of free, finely serrulate or plumose hairs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Florets yellow or cream to white, rarely pale pink
\par
2 Outer involucral bracts 1·5-2 mm wide, with acicular 
\par
  apical spines; florets yellow ........................................................ {\b 9. flavescens}
\par
2 Outer involucral bracts c. 3 mm wide, with subulate 
\par
  apical spines; florets cream to white (rarely pale pink) .............. {\b 10. leucantha}
\par
1 Florets pink to purple, rarely yellowish-purple
\par
3 Outer involucral bracts with conspicuous membranous apical ap-
\par
   pendages, distinctly keeled, with dark coloured marginal band  {\b 13. bulgarica}
\par
3 Outer involucral bracts usually without conspicuous
\par
  membranous apical appendages, very rarely slightly 
\par
  developed and ± flat with the whole apex dark coloured
\par
4 Capitula 5-many in a paniculate or compact corymbose
\par
  inflorescence
\par
5 Involucral bracts with an apical spine ................... {\b 17. erucifolia}
\par
5 Involucral bracts acute, not obviously spiny
\par
6 Capitula (20-)25-30 mm; involucral bracts distinctly velutinous .... {\b 2. wolffii}
\par
6 Capitula 15-20 mm; involucral bracts slightly floccose 
\par
  at the margin ................................................................................... {\b 1. tinctoria}
\par
4 Capitula 1-3(-4)
\par
7 Leaves regularly scalariform-pinnatifid, with segments
\par
  at least 4 times as long as wide ....................................................... {\b 14. radiata}
\par
7 Leaves subentire to pinnatifid, with often irregular 
\par
  segments not more than 3 times as long as wide
\par
8 Stem leafy almost up to the capitulum
\par
9 Involucral bracts up to 3 mm wide, gradually narrowed 
\par
  to fine, rigid, apical spines ................................................................ {\b 6. alcalae}
\par
9 Involucral bracts 2-5 mm wide, often abruptly contracted 
\par
  to shortly subulate, rather weak apical spines 
\par
10 Leaf-margins denticulate (rarely slightly pinnatifid);
\par
   leaves pale green when dry ............................................................. {\b 7. pauana} 
\par
10 Leaf-margins strongly dentate to pinnatifid; leaves
\par
   greenish-black when dry .............................................................. {\b 4. abulensis}
\par
8 Stem leafless above (or with a very few greatly reduced bracts)
\par
11 Involucral bracts gradually narrowed into long, acute,
\par
   rigid apex ......................................................................................... {\b 5. baetica}
\par
11 Involucral bracts abruptly contracted into fine apical
\par
   spines or almost without spines 
\par
12 Involucral bracts with long spines
\par
13 Cauline leaves denticulate, linear-lanceolate, sometimes
\par
   long-decurrent on the stem ...................................................... {\b 11. cichoracea}
\par
13 Cauline leaves pinnatifid, rarely denticulate and 
\par
   broadly elliptical, not decurrent ................................................. {\b 3. pinnatifida} 
\par
12 Involucral bracts with apical spines inconspicuous or
\par
   almost absent
\par
14 Basal leaves pinnatifid
\par
15 Capitula 10-20 mm in diameter; outer involucral bracts
\par
   with short, rigid spines ................................................................... {\b 14. radiata}
\par
15 Capitula c. 20 mm in diameter; outer involucral bracts
\par
   with soft, deciduous mucros ........................................................ {\b 15. gmelinii}
\par
14 Basal leaves subentire to serrate
\par
16 Capitula 15-17 mm, 2-3 in a branched inflorescence .......... {\b 16. cardunculus}
\par
16 Capitula 20-30 mm, solitary
\par
17 All or most leaves in a basal rosette, sometimes with 
\par
   reduced cauline leaves ................................................................ {\b 8. nudicaulis}
\par
17 Basal rosette of leaves absent; cauline leaves present .......... {\b 12. lycopifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. tinctoria} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 816 (1753). Stems 4-100 cm, erect, subglabrous to puberulent. Leaves ovate-lanceolate, finely to coarsely and irregularly serrate to very deeply pinnatifid. Capitula 15-20 mm, in a rather lax panicle or subsessile in a compact cluster. Involucral bracts greenish or often deeply purple-tinted, the outer acute, slightly floccose at the margin; inner bracts long-attenuate, slightly floccose. Florets purple, rarely white. More or less dioecious. 2n = 22.{\i  Much of Europe, but absent from the north-east, much of Fennoscandia and much of the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   An extremely variable species in which numerous taxa have been described at the species level and below. Two subspecies have been widely recognized: subsp.{\b  tinctoria}, with cylindrical capitula c. 6 mm wide in a spreading inflorescence, and subsp.{\b  macrocephala} (Bertol.) Rouy ex Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.} {\b 6}({\b 2}): 929 (1928), with fewer, subsessile, campanulate capitula 6-12 mm wide in a compact group. The former has been recorded over a very wide range, while the latter is said to occur characteristically in mountainous regions. However, examination of herbarium material casts strong doubts as to the validity of these taxa and their supposed distributions. A small variant with very narrow leaf-segments, which occurs in N. Portugal, N.W. Spain and S.W. France, has been recognized as {\b S. seoanei} Willk.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  39}: 317 (1889).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. wolffii} Andrae, {\i Bot. Zeit.}{\b  13}: 321 (1855) ({\i S. coronata} L. pro parte). Stems 80-150 cm, stout, erect, subglabrous. Basal leaves rather irregularly pinnatifid, the segments usually elliptic-lanceolate, sometimes pinnately lobed to subentire, the leaflets irregularly serrate with setulae on the margin and veins; cauline leaves similar, becoming reduced upwards and grading into the bracts. Capitula 25-30 mm, campanulate, up to 15 in a lax, irregular panicle. Outer involucral bracts acute, velutinous; inner bracts rather rigid, long-attenuate, sometimes slightly geniculate and hooked at apex. Florets purple. Gynodioecious. {\i S. & C. parts of U.S.S.R., Romania}. Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. pinnatifida} (Cav.) Poiret in Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  6}: 561 (1805). Stems 7-25(-45) cm, erect, pubescent. Leaves with lateral veins more or less prominent, often floccose beneath, usually pale green when dry; basal broadly lanceolate, denticulate to deeply pinnatifid, often with a large terminal lobe; cauline pinnatifid, rarely denticulate and broadly elliptical, absent from upper part of stem. Capitula 20-30 mm, more or less cylindrical, solitary or a few together. Outer involucral bracts yellow-green, abruptly contracted into a long, yellow apical spine (rarely almost spineless); inner bracts chartaceous, sometimes with geniculate apex. Florets pinkish-purple.{\i  C. & S. Spain, W.C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par
250}
\par