{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 near the base upwards; pedicels shorter than diameter of corolla. Corolla 2-3 mm in diameter, white to yellowish. Fruit 2-3 mm in diameter, dark brown. {\i Very dry places. • E.C. & S. Spain.} Hs ?Lu.
\par 

\par 
 
\pard\f0\fs28 The specific distinctness from {\b 42} and {\b 46} has yet to be studied.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. G. corrudifolium} Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 20 (1779) ({\i G. adriaticum} Ronniger). Stolons absent. Stems 20-40 cm, erect, nearly always with short papilliform hairs c. 0·1 mm at the base, with relatively few and short non-flowering branches. Leaves 5-11 × (0·3-)0·5-1 mm, narrowly linear, coriaceous; midrib prominent; margin revolute, strongly scabrid. Inflorescence oblong, dense, with short, erect branches from about the middle of the stem; pedicels 1·2-7 mm. Corolla 3-3·6 mm in diameter, cream to white or yellowish, very rarely reddish. 2n = 22. {\i Dry, rocky places. • Mediterranean region.} Al Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. G. truniacum} (Ronniger) Ronniger in A. Kerner,{\i  Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung.}{\b  10}: 52 (1913). Stolons usually absent. Stem 25-40 cm, erect, smooth and glabrous, reddish at base, with few non-flowering branches. Leaves 10-25 × 1-2 mm, linear-oblanceolate, widest in upper third, thin, with soft, hyaline apiculum; midrib slender; margin scarcely revolute, nearly always smooth. Inflorescence ovoid, lax; pedicels 2-7 mm. Corolla 3-5 mm in diameter, pale yellow. 2n = 22.{\i  Montane calcareous screes. • N.E. Alps.} Au Ge.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. G. montis-arerae} Merxm. & Ehrend.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  104}: 228 (1957). Stock long and robust, with long stolons. Stems 15-25 cm, numerous, procumbent at base, ascending-erect, slender, smooth. Leaves (5-)6-10(-15) × 1·1-1·5(-2·1) mm, linear-oblanceolate, somewhat fleshy, with short, soft, hyaline apiculum; margin slightly revolute, smooth. Inflorescence cylindrical, dense, with few branches; pedicels 1·4-1·7 mm, slender. Corolla 3-3·6 mm in diameter, pale yellowish. 2n = 22.{\i  Alpine calcareous screes. • Alpi Bergamasche.} It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. G. meliodorum} (G. Beck) Fritsch,{\i  Exkursionsfl. Österr.} ed. 2, 573 (1909). Stolons usually present. Stems 15-40 cm, procumbent to ascending, smooth and glabrous, mostly with long branches from the base. Leaves 10-25 × 1-2 mm, linear-oblanceolate, somewhat fleshy, with long, soft, hyaline apiculum; midrib not very prominent; margin nearly flat, smooth. Inflorescence broadly ovoid, rather dense, strongly branched; pedicels 1·5-4·5 mm. Corolla 3-5 mm in diameter, pale yellowish to greenish. 2n = 44.{\i  Calcareous rocks and screes. • N.E. Alps.} Au.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. G. lucidum} All.,{\i  Auct. Syn. Stirp. Horti Taur.} 5 (1773) ({\i G. rigidum} Vill.). Stolons usually present. Stems 25-70 cm, erect or ascending, glabrous or with hairs 0·1-1·5 mm, with relatively few and short, non-flowering branches. Leaves 10-30 × 1-2 mm, linear-lanceolate, with slender, hyaline apiculum; midrib narrow; margin somewhat revolute, scabrid. Inflorescence oblong or ovoid, dense, with ascending to patent branches; pedicels 1-3 mm. Corolla 3-5 mm in diameter, white, more rarely yellowish or greenish. Fruit dark brown. 2n = 44.{\i  Dry places. S. & S.C. Europe.} Al Au Bl Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Commonly connected by intermediate forms with {\b 39} and {\b 45} in zones of contact.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. G. bernardii} Gren. & Godron, {\i Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 23 (1850). Like {\b 46} but inflorescence rather lax; corolla reddish.{\i  Rocky places. • Corse, W. Italy.} Co It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Possibly only a variant of {\b 46}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. G. aetnicum} Biv., {\i Stirp. Rar. Sic. Descr.}{\b  4}: 21 (1816). Glaucous and pruinose; stolons present or absent. Stems usually 30-60 cm, numerous, slender, procumbent-ascending, glabrous and smooth, with few non-flowering branches; internodes up to 7 cm. Leaves 10-20 × 0·7-2 mm, linear-oblanceolate, with narrow midrib. Inflorescence narrowly oblong, the lateral branches erect, forming ovoid partial inflorescences. Corolla (2-)3-4 mm, white; lobes narrow, strongly apiculate. Fruit black, somewhat pruinose. 2n = 44.{\i  Dry, rocky places. • C. & S. Italy, Sicilia, Sardegna}. It Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48} includes plants from Italy formerly called{\i  G. cinereum}. On Monte Etna there is a continuous series from tall coastal to very short alpine variants. Populations from Sardegna may lack stolons and have more erect stems and shortly apiculate corolla lobes; they have been described as {\b G. schmidii} Arrigoni,{\i  Webbia}{\b  27}: 507 (1972).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. G. cinereum} All.,{\i  Auct. Syn. Stirp. Horti Taur.} 5 (1773). Glaucous and pruinose; stolons long. Stems 40-80 cm, usually solitary, usually glabrous, robust and erect, with few, weak non-flowering branches; internodes short at base of stem, 8-10 cm above, obscurely angled. Leaves 8-15(-20) × 0·5-2 mm, linear, widest in upper third, with narrow midrib. Inflorescence relatively wide, the branches up to 30 cm, ascending, with basal internodes up to 7 cm, forming corymbose partial inflorescences. Corolla 3-5 mm in diameter, white; lobes wide, shortly apiculate. 2n = 44.{\i  Dry places. W. Mediterranean region.} Bl Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. G. crespianum} J. J. Rodr., {\i Anal. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat.}{\b  8}: 55 (1879). Stolons absent. Stems glabrous (rarely somewhat hairy above), strongly branched, decumbent and ascending; internodes up to 5 cm at middle of stem, scarcely longer than the leaves. Leaves 30-40 × 2·5-5 mm, narrowly linear-lanceolate, often somewhat falcate, with narrow but prominent midrib and somewhat scabrid, revolute margin. Inflorescence broadly ovoid dense, with long branches from above base of stem; pedicels 2-3 mm. Corolla 3-4 mm in diameter, white; lobes patent, strongly apiculate. Fruit somewhat fleshy.{\i  Rocky places. • Islas Baleares.} Bl.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 51-58}). {\b G. incurvum} group. Green or rarely glaucous and pruinose; stock strongly woody, usually without stolons. Stems 10-80(-120) cm, shortly hairy or glabrous, more rarely with long hairs. Leaves 5-40 × 0·5-4 mm, usually blackening when dried, narrowly lanceolate to linear, acicular or filiform; midrib mostly prominent; margin usually strongly revolute and scabrid. Inflorescence usually long and narrow but often with only a few internodes. Corolla yellowish to greenish or purplish, rarely pure white, slightly cup-shaped; lobes incurved, strongly apiculate. Anthers usually darkening when dried. Fruit dark brown to blackish.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems robust, densely villous at base, with hairs more than 1 mm;
\par 
  lower cauline leaves oblong; corolla less than 2·5 mm in diameter
\par 
  ........................................................................................................ {\b 51. mirum}
\par 
1 Stems scarcely robust, glabrous at base or with hairs 
\par 
  less than 1 mm; lower cauline leaves ± linear
\par 
2 Inflorescence broadly ovoid, with long branches; leaves
\par 
  usually more than 15 mm
\par 
3 Midrib conspicuous, more than half as wide as leaf ............... {\b 58. flavescens}
\par 
3 Midrib slender, much less than half as wide as leaf .... {\b 53. peloponnesiacum}
\par 
2 Inflorescence narrow, with usually short branches;
\par 
  leaves usually less than 15 mm
\par 
4 Middle internodes longer than leaves
\par 

\par 
25}
\par