{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 105 Acaulescent or stems not more than 3 cm
\par
107 Florets orange-yellow .......................................................... {\b 62. haenseleri}
\par
107 Florets pale yellow
\par
108 Leaves lyrate-pinnatisect with ovate segments ......................... {\b 66. acaulis}
\par
108 Leaves pinnatisect with oblong segments
\par
109 Bracts oblong-ovate; pappus much shorter than achene ......... {\b 61. toletana}
\par
109 Bracts orbicular to ovate; pappus about as long as 
\par
    achene .................................................................................. {\b 19. macedonica}
\par
98  At least the outer bracts subentire or indistinctly denticulate
\par
110 Florets purple
\par
111 Leaves interruptedly pinnatisect .............................................. {\b 67. loscosii}
\par
111 Leaves undivided or lyrate
\par
112 Apical spine of appendages 1-3 mm ................................. {\b 58. aegialophila}
\par
112 Apical spine of appendages 5-9 mm ........................................ {\b 59. pumilio}
\par
110 Florets yellow
\par
113 Appendages with apical spine up to 16 mm; capitula 1-10 .. {\b 65. lagascana}
\par
113 Appendages with apical spine 4-8 mm; capitula solitary
\par
114 Involucre 15-18 mm in diameter; outer florets slightly
\par
    longer than the inner ................................................................ {\b 65. lagascana}
\par
114 Involucre 18-25 mm in diameter; outer florets 
\par
    distinctly longer than the inner ................................................... {\b 67. loscosii}
\par
97  Stems at least 10 cm
\par
115 Appendages mostly covering the bracts, usually
\par
    mucronate or spinulose-mucronate at apex
\par
116 Florets cream, yellow or orange
\par
117 Older leaves white-tomentose or white-lanate
\par
118 Basal leaves pinnatisect; involucre c. 25 mm in diameter ... {\b 24. clementei}
\par
118 Basal leaves entire; involucre 15-20 mm in diameter ....... {\b 17. granatensis}
\par
117 Older leaves ± glabrous
\par
119 Involucre 15-18 mm in diameter; florets golden yellow
\par
    or orange .................................................................................... {\b 29. prolongi}
\par
119 Involucre 20-40 mm in diameter; florets cream or yellow
\par
120 Appendages triangular-lanceolate
\par
121 Appendages gradually attenuate into an apical spine,
\par
    straw-yellow .......................................................................... {\b 28. chrysolepis}
\par
121 Appendages not spinose at apex, dark brown .................. {\b 31. atropurpurea}
\par
120 Appendages ovate or suborbicular
\par
122 Involucre 30-40 mm in diameter; florets yellow ........... {\b 27. tauromenitana}
\par
122 Involucre c. 20 mm in diameter; florets cream
\par
123 Appendages pale brown, mucronate ..................................... {\b 25. orientalis}
\par
123 Appendages dark brown, with an apical spine ........................ {\b 26. neiceffii}
\par
116 Florets pink to dark purple
\par
124 Leaves 2-pinnatifid, with narrowly linear segments;
\par
    florets pink to purple .............................................................. {\b 116. filiformis}
\par
124 At least the basal leaves undivided or lyrate-pinnate,
\par
    rarely pinnatisect with broad segments, florets dark purple
\par
125 Stems much-branched above ........................................... {\b 34. candelabrum}
\par
125 Stems simple or sparingly branched above
\par
126 Stem leafless above
\par
127 Leaves subglabrous; involucre 15-20 mm in diameter;
\par
    appendages not covering bracts ................................ {\b 35. immanuelis-loewii}
\par
127 Leaves densely arachnoid-lanate; involucre
\par
    25-30 mm in diameter; appendages covering bracts .......... {\b 36. grbavacensis}
\par
126 Stem leafy above
\par
128 Appendages long-decurrent; fimbriae dark brown ................. {\b 51. alpestris}
\par
128 Appendages shortly decurrent; fimbriae whitish at 
\par
    least at apex
\par
129 Basal leaves pinnatisect; fimbriae arising abruptly 
\par
    from appendages ................................................................. {\b 31. atropurpurea}
\par
129 Basal leaves undivided; fimbriae arising gradually 
\par
    from appendages 
\par
130 Lower cauline leaves lyrate; involucre 20-30 mm in 
\par
    diameter ................................................................................ {\b 32. kotschyana}
\par
130 Lower cauline leaves not lyrate; involucre c. 40 mm 
\par
    in diameter .............................................................................. {\b 33. murbeckii}
\par
115 Appendages not covering the bracts, usually spinose at apex
\par
131 Appendages with a spine at least 7 mm
\par
132 Appendages orbicular, ovate or triangular
\par
133 Appendages orbicular ................................................................ {\b 42. achaia}
\par
133 Appendages ovate or triangular
\par
134 Florets purple or pink
\par
135 Pappus twice as long as achene; involucre 20-30 mm in
\par
    diameter .................................................................................... {\b 43. sibthorpii}
\par
135 Pappus less than twice as long as achene; involucre 
\par
    13-30 mm in diameter
\par
136 Involucre 13-17 mm in diameter; leaf-rhachis not winged ....... {\b 11. collina}
\par
136 Involucre 15-30 mm in diameter; leaf-rhachis winged ........ {\b 12. salonitana}
\par
134 Florets yellow or orange
\par
137 Pappus 2-3 times as long as achene
\par
138 Involucre more than 20 mm in diameter .................................... {\b 16. ornata}
\par
138 Involucre less than 20 mm in diameter .................................. {\b 22. rupestris}
\par
137 Pappus less than twice as long as achene
\par
139 Leaf-segments c. 2 mm wide; involucre c. 12 mm in 
\par
    diameter ................................................................................ {\b 19. macedonica}
\par
139 Leaf-segments at least 3 mm wide; involucre more than
\par
    12 mm in diameter 
\par
140 Leaf-rhachis winged ............................................................ {\b 12. salonitana} 
\par
140 Leaf-rhachis not winged
\par
141 Leaves ± glabrous, the lower undivided .................................... {\b 16. ornata}
\par
141 Leaves scabrid to white-tomentose, the lower usually divided 
\par
142 Florets without black veins; involucre 13-17 mm in
\par
    diameter; spine of appendage 5-13 mm ....................................... {\b 11. collina}
\par
142 Florets with black veins; involucre up to 25 mm in
\par
    diameter; spine of appendage up to 20 mm ........................ {\b 13. centauroides}
\par
132 Appendages semilunate
\par
143 Appendages black or dark brown
\par
144 Stems and leaves glabrous; stems 30-100 cm ........................ {\b 46. cytherea}
\par
144 Stems and leaves arachnoid-hairy or lanate; stems not
\par
    more than 20 cm
\par
145 Involucre 30-40 mm in diameter ........................................... {\b 45. redempta}
\par
145 Involucre c. 15 mm in diameter ........................................... {\b 47. ebenoides}
\par
143 Appendages light brown or yellow, rarely dark brown
\par
146 Basal leaves undivided or pinnate
\par
147 Appendages with patent apical spine 3-20 mm ......................... {\b 40. graeca}
\par
147 Appendages with erecto-patent apical spine (20-)25-50 mm . {\b 48. spruneri}
\par
146 Basal leaves ± 2-pinnatifid
\par
148 Involucre 20-30 mm in diameter, globose .............................. {\b 41. laconica}
\par
148 Involucre 10-15 mm in diameter, ovoid ............................. {\b 44. psilacantha}
\par
131 Appendages mucronate or with a spine less than 7 mm
\par
149 Appendages distinctly, often broadly, decurrent, mucronate 
\par
    or with a slender apical spine not more than 5 mm
\par
150 Appendages of inner bracts large and conspicuous,
\par
    whitish with a black centre ...................................................... {\b 52. sadlerana}
\par

\par
258}
\par