{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 yellow or purple, the outer longer than the inner. Achenes c. 4 mm, blackish; pappus c. 4 mm. 2n = 20. {\i Open hillsides. • S.W. Europe. }?Bl Co Ga Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b collina}: Leaf-segments linear, entire. Appendages of outer bracts brown, more or less patent, the spine 5-13 mm. Florets pale yellow. {\i Corse, S. France, N.W. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b serratulifolia} (Sennen & Pau ex Hayek) Hayek, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  12}: 123 (1913): Leaf-segments oblong, irregularly serrate. Appendages of outer bracts blackish, the spine 3-5 mm, erecto-patent. Florets purple.{\i  Spain, S. Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. salonitana} Vis., {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 12} (Ergänz. 1): 23 (1829) ({\i C. collina} sensu Sibth. & Sm., non L.). Stems up to 100 cm, sparingly branched. Lower leaves 1- to 2-pinnatisect; middle cauline pinnatifid, with obovate to lanceolate, mucronulate segments; rhachis winged. Involucral bracts broadly ovate; appendages pale yellow, with an apical spine c. 3 mm (up to 40 mm in var.{\i  macracantha} DC.). Florets bright yellow, rarely purple, the outer slightly longer than the inner. Achenes c. 5 mm, pubescent; pappus 7-9 mm, reddish. 2n = 20, 40. {\i Stony places and grassland. S.E. & E.C. Europe.} Al Bu ?Cr Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b salonitana}: Leaves scabrid; segments lanceolate to oblong, entire or dentate. Involucre 15-20 mm in diameter; appendages acute or obtuse; fimbriae c. 1 mm. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ognianoffii} (Urum.) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 195 (1916) ({\i C. ognianoffii} Urum.): Leaves arachnoid-pubescent, glabrescent; segments linear-lanceolate, entire. Involucre 20-30 mm in diameter; appendages acute; fimbriae 2-3 mm.{\i  Jugoslavia and Bulgaria}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. C. centauroides} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 918 (1753). Stems up to 100 cm, sparingly branched above. Leaves white-tomentose, glabrescent, lyrate; lateral segments at least 3 mm wide, ovate-oblong, the terminal up to 7 × 10 mm, broadly ovate. Involucre up to 25 mm in diameter, globose; bracts broadly ovate; appendages broadly decurrent, with margin c. 0·5 mm wide, with an apical spine up to 20 mm; fimbriae c. 2 mm. Florets yellow with black veins. Achenes 4 mm; pappus about as long as achene.{\i  Mountain woods. S. Italy.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. C. rumelica} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 3}({\b 3}): 78 (1856). Stems 30-50 cm. Leaves with somewhat arachnoid indumentum, glabrescent; lower undivided; upper lyrate-pinnatifid; lateral segments lanceolate, the terminal oblong-lanceolate. Involucre 17-20 mm in diameter; appendages long-acuminate. Florets pale yellow, the outer as long as the inner. Achenes 3 times as long as pappus.{\i  Dry grassland. • From E. Jugoslavia to S.E. Romania.} Bu Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. C. nicolai} Bald.,{\i  Malpighia }{\b 5}: 74 (1891) ({\i C. lanceolata} (Vis.) Hayek). Stems 20-60 cm, simple or sparingly branched. Leaves glabrous, pinnatisect; segments numerous, lanceolate, entire. Involucre 15-20 mm in diameter; appendages obtuse, yellow, with short apical spine. Florets bright orange, the outer slightly longer than the inner. Achene 3 mm; pappus twice as long as achene, white.{\i  Rocky places in mountains. • S.W. Jugoslavia, Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. C. ornata} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.} {\b 3}: 2320 (1803). Stems up to 80 cm, sparingly branched. Leaves undivided or 1(-2)-pinnatisect; segments 0·5-3 mm wide, few, oblong to linear; rhachis not winged. Involucre 10-25 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; bracts ovate; appendages reddish-brown; apical spine up to 35 mm, pinnate below. Florets yellow, bright orange or rarely purple. Achenes 4·5 mm, sericeous. {\i Dry places. • C., S. & E. Spain, N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ornata}: Leaves arachnoid to puberulent, the lower divided. Capitula shortly pedunculate. Appendages pectinate-fimbriate, with patent or recurved apical spine. Pappus about twice as long as achene. 2n = 20, 40. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b saxicola} (Lag.) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 195 (1976) ({\i C. saxicola} Lag.): Leaves more or less glabrous, the lower undivided. Capitula long-pedunculate. Appendages shortly fimbriate, with erect apical spine. Pappus about as long as achene. 2n = 60. {\i Calcareous mountain rocks. S.E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. C. granatensis} Boiss. ex DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  7}: 303 (1838). Stems 5-30 cm, simple. Leaves white-lanate; basal undivided, the petiole white-lanate at base; lower cauline sublyrate-pinnatisect; segments at least 3 mm wide, oblong; appendages sometimes covering the broadly ovate bracts, with an erecto-patent or recurved apical spine 3-6 mm, spinose below. Florets golden yellow, the outer somewhat longer than the inner. Achenes 3·5 mm, pale brown; pappus twice as long as achene.{\i  Calcareous mountain rocks. • S. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in length of stem and division of the leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   C. omphalotricha} Cosson & Durieu ex Batt. in Batt. & Trabut,{\i  Fl. Algér. Dicot.} 497 (1889), from Algeria and Tunisia, has been recorded from S.E. Spain, but only as a casual; it is like {\b 17} but the stem is branched from the base, the involucre is c. 15 mm in diameter and the appendages have a yellow apical spine.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. C. tuntasia} Heldr. ex Halácsy,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  6}: 646 (1898). Like {\b 17} but stems up to 60 cm, somewhat branched; leaves grey-puberulent, scabrid, the basal with petiole not white-lanate at base; appendages of involucral bracts with apical spine entire below; florets cream; pappus 4 times as long as achene.{\i  Cultivated ground. • S.E. Greece }({\i Attiki}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. C. macedonica} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 6}): 130 (1846) ({\i C. thessalonica} Halácsy). Stems up to 50 cm. Leaves arachnoid-lanate to scabrid, pinnatisect; segments c. 2 mm wide. Involucre c. 12 mm in diameter; bracts puberulent; appendages shortly pectinate-fimbriate, the fimbriae not confluent below, reddish-brown, with a slender apical spine 1-6(-10) mm. Florets pale yellow, the outer somewhat longer than the inner. Achenes puberulent; pappus about as long as or slightly longer than achene.{\i  Rocky places. • Greece and Albania.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b macedonica}: Stems 20-50 cm, sparingly branched above. Leaves with numerous linear-lanceolate segments, scabrid and sparsely arachnoid. {\i N. Greece; C. Albania}.
\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b parnonia} (Halácsy) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 195 (1976) ({\i C. parnonia} Halácsy): Stems 1-3 cm, simple. Leaves with few, narrowly oblong segments, arachnoid-lanate.{\i  S. Greece} ({\i Parnon Oros}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. C. mannagettae} Podp., {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  52}: 661 (1902). Like {\b 19}({\b a}) but stems shorter; leaves 2-pinnatisect, the segments up to 2 mm wide, narrowly linear, aristate; involucral bracts with long pectinate-fimbriate, brown or blackish appendages. {\i Rocky places; calcicole. • S. Bulgaria.} Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. C. dichroantha} A. Kerner, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  24}: 104 (1874). Like {\b 19}({\b a}) but leaves glabrous, with linear, pinnatisect mucronulate segments; appendages with fimbriae joined by a hyaline membrane below, and with spines not more than 5 mm;
\par

\par
264}
\par