{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 5 Leaves not more than 10 × 0·8 mm, filiform .................. {\b 54. asparagifolium}
\par 
5 Leaves up to 15(-20) × 1-2 mm, linear
\par 
6 Pedicels often longer than diameter of corolla; corolla
\par 
  greenish-purple ................................................................ {\b 55. melanantherum}
\par 
6 Pedicels shorter than diameter of corolla; corolla
\par 
  greenish yellow to white ...................................................... {\b 52. scabrifolium}
\par 
4 Middle internodes shorter than leaves
\par 
7 Longest leaves more than 10 mm, with a short hyaline
\par 
  apiculum .................................................................................... {\b 57. incurvum}
\par 
7 Longest leaves less than 10 mm, with a long hyaline
\par 
  apiculum ................................................................................. {\b 56. rhodopeum}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. G. mirum} Rech. fil., {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  69}: 512 (1939). Stems up to 120 cm, usually robust and strongly branched, densely villous at base with hairs more than 1 mm; internodes up to 10 cm with whitish angles. Middle cauline leaves 15-25 × 1-2 mm, linear, the lower oblong; leaves with a short hyaline apiculum, and the margin slightly revolute. Inflorescence very broadly ovoid, with very long and patent branches; pedicels c. 2-4(-6) mm, slender. Corolla 1·5-2·5 mm in diameter. 2n = 22.{\i  Sub-mediterranean scrub. • S.E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. G. scabrifolium} (Boiss.) Hausskn.,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver.} nov. ser., {\b 5}: 120 (1893). Stems 50-80 cm, usually with short hairs at base (rarely with longer hairs), erect, usually strongly branched. Leaves 7-20 × 0·5-1·5(-2) mm, linear, with hyaline apiculum of medium length; midrib prominent; margin revolute. Inflorescence oblong or ovoid, with erect branches. Pedicels as long as or shorter than diameter of corolla. Corolla (2-)3-5 mm in diameter, yellowish-white. 2n = 22, 44. {\i Dry places. S. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   This polymorphic species seems to contain a number of variants which may deserve taxonomic recognition. One, with stiffly erect and white-angled stems, short leaves and dense inflorescences ranges from S.E. Macedonia to W. Anatolia. Another has more patent branches and longer leaves; it is diploid and occurs in Macedonia and adjacent W. Bulgaria. In the higher mountains of Thraki and on Thasos there is a third, tetraploid variant with less branching, shorter internodes, slightly wider and shorter leaves, and less apiculate corolla-lobes.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. G. peloponnesiacum} Ehrend. & Krendl, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  68}: 271 (1974). Stems 50-80 cm, with short or long hairs at base, slender; internodes long. Leaves 15-30 × 2-4 mm, lanceolate, relatively thin, with short, hyaline apiculum; midrib slender, comprising less than half the width of the leaf; margin slightly revolute and somewhat scabrid. Inflorescence broadly ovoid, lax, with long, patent to ascending branches; pedicels slender. Corolla 2-4 mm in diameter, usually yellowish. 2n = 44. •{\i  Mountains of S. Greece} ({\i Peloponnisos}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Variable in habit and leaf-shape. A closely related plant with purplish flowers and longer, narrower, revolute leaves occurs in S.W. Peloponnisos; it appears to be diploid, and may merit specific rank.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. G. asparagifolium} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 3}({\b 6}): 91 (1859). Stems slender, ascending, with short hairs; internodes not more than 3 cm. Leaves 10 × 0·5-0·8 mm, filiform, with a short, hyaline apiculum; midrib slender; margin slightly scabrid. Inflorescence narrow, with patent to erect, relatively long branches; pedicels 2-3 mm. Corolla 2-3 mm in diameter.{\i  Mountain rocks. S.C. & N. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. G. melanantherum} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 6}): 68 (1846-1847). Stems up to 50 cm, rigid, with prominent angles, nearly always with short hairs at base; internodes short below middle of stem, the upper longer. Leaves 10-15(-20) × 1(-2) mm, narrowly linear, coriaceous, shining; midrib prominent; margin strongly revolute, slightly scabrid. Inflorescence very lax, oblong, with short, erect branches; pedicels 5(-8) mm, slender. Corolla 5(-7) mm in diameter, greenish-purple. 2n = 22. {\i Dry, rocky places. • S.E. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. G. rhodopeum} Velen., {\i Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ({\i Math.Nat. Kl.}) {\b 1893} ({\b 37}): 32 (1893). Laxly caespitose, with densely leafy non-flowering shoots. Flowering stems 10-35 cm, mostly with short hairs, rigid and erect, with prominent, white ridges; internodes (7-)10-30(-40) mm. Leaves (5-)7-12(-15) × 0·5-1 mm, about as long as or longer than internodes, linear, acicular, gradually narrowed into a long hyaline apiculum. Inflorescence few-flowered, lax, long and narrow, with short, rigid, erect branches; pedicels (2-)2·5-5(-6) mm, slender. Corolla 3·5-4·5 (-5) mm in diameter, pale yellowish or white; lobes shortly apiculate. 2n = 22, 44. {\i Calcareous mountain cliffs. • C. part of E. Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. G. incurvum} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 92 (1806). Green or glaucous and pruinose. Stems 20-35(-40) cm, glabrous, ascending or erect; middle internodes usually shorter than leaves. Leaves 10-20(-30) × 2(-3) mm, linear-lanceolate, coriaceous or succulent, with short, hyaline apiculum; midrib prominent; margin revolute, slightly scabrid. Inflorescence often dense, with rigid, erect branches 3(-7) cm; pedicels 2-3 mm. Corolla up to 5 mm in diameter, yellowish or reddish; lobes shortly apiculate. 2n = 44.{\i  Rocky places. • S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    It may be possible to separate the typical species from the higher mountains of Kriti, with slender habit, and incurved, linear, non-succulent green leaves, from {\b G. amorginum} Halácsy, {\i Consp. Fl. Graec. }{\b 1}: 712 (1901), comprising coastal populations of the S. Aegean with more robust growth, and linear-lanceolate, succulent, and often glaucous-pruinose leaves.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. G. flavescens} Borbás,{\i  Akad. Közl.}{\b  11}({\b 7}): 266 (1874). Stems up to 80(-100) cm, robust, strongly branched from the base, glabrous or with short (very rarely long) hairs. Leaves 25-40 × 1 mm, narrowly linear; midrib prominent; margin strongly revolute, sharply scabrid. Inflorescence broadly ovoid, with numerous erect branches; pedicels up to 7 mm. Corolla up to 5 mm in diameter; lobes strongly apiculate. 2n = 44. {\i Dry places. From C. Romania to N. Macedonia.} Bu Ju Rm ?Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Ser.{\i  Octonaria }(Klokov) Pobed. Plants glaucous-pruinose. Stems terete to 4-angled. Leaves linear to filiform, more rarely elliptical or oblanceolate, not more than 45 mm and often less than 25 mm, uniformly glaucous on upper and lower surfaces. Inflorescences broadly ovoid to pyramidal, with long lower branches; partial inflorescences usually corymbiform; pedicels rather stout, not divaricate after anthesis. Corolla white, infundibuliform to cup-shaped, with tube somewhat longer to much shorter than lobes; lobes acute, rarely shortly apiculate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    Species {\b 62}-{\b 65} are very closely related and connected by intermediates.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. G. pruinosum} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 57 (1838). Stolons absent. Stems 20-100 cm, more or less rounded, with 4 ridges, glabrous. Leaves 10-20 × 2-6 mm, in whorls of 5-7, elliptical to broadly lanceolate, somewhat coriaceous; margin with 1-2 rows of papillose teeth, revolute but not to the midrib. Inflorescence ovoid; partial inflorescences corymbiform, lax, few-flowered; pedicels shorter than diameter of corolla. Corolla 3-4 mm in diameter, infundibuliform; tube much shorter than lobes.{\i  Crevices of limestone cliffs. • Mountains of S. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 
26}
\par