{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 327 Involucre ovoid-globose, rounded at base
\par
328 Appendages with mucro 0·3-0·5 mm .................................... {\b 122. rhenana}
\par
328 Appendages with apical spine or mucro 0·5-1 mm ........ {\b 128. biebersteinii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Centaurea.} Perennial. Leaves usually lyrate or pinnatisect. Bracts entire, with coriaceous margin, the middle bracts without an appendage, the inner bracts sometimes with an appendage. Pappus present.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. centaurium} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 910 (1753). Glabrous. Stems up to 100 cm, erect, sparingly branched above, sparsely leafy. Leaves pinnatisect; lower 50 × 25 cm, petiolate; segments 12-15 × 5-8 cm, oblong-obovate, serrate, broadly winged. Involucre 15-17 mm in diameter, globose; middle bracts with scarious margin c. 1 mm wide near apex, subacute. Florets dark purple. Achenes 6-8 mm; pappus much longer than achene, brown. {\i Mountain woods. • S.C. Italy.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. amplifolia} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 3}({\b 3}): 68 (1856). Like {\b 1} but stems densely leafy; lower leaves larger, the segments 20 × 10 cm, broadly ovate, sometimes 2- to 3-partite; middle bracts with scarious, sometimes lacerate margin 2-4 mm wide near apex, obtuse; florets pink; pappus c. 8 mm, about as long as achene, dark brown. {\i Shady places.  • S. part of Balkan peninsula.} ?Al Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. fraylensis} Schultz Bip. ex Nyman, {\i Consp.} 420 (1879) ({\i C. vicentina} Welw. ex Mariz). Stems up to 50 cm, procumbent or ascending, simple. Leaves lanate-villous, petiolate; lower 15-22 × 7-10 cm, undivided or lyrate, obovate-lanceolate; upper pinnatisect with linear-lanceolate segments. Involucre up to 25 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; middle bracts with scarious margin 2-3 mm wide near apex. Florets purple. Pappus shorter than achene. •{\i  S.W. Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. africana} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 664 (1785) ({\i C. tagana} Brot.). Stems 50-100(-150) cm, simple, rarely sparingly branched above. Basal leaves 18-22 × 8-12 cm, undivided, ovate-lanceolate, erose-dentate, long-petiolate; cauline undivided or lyrate, sessile. Involucre 20-25 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; bracts dark-striate, the middle with narrow scarious margin near apex, broadly ovate, the inner with wide scarious margin near apex. Florets pale yellow. Achenes c. 8 mm; pappus longer than achene, brown. 2n = 30. {\i Dry woods and scrub. C. & S. Portugal, S.W. Spain.} Hs Lu *Si. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. ruthenica} Lam., {\i op. cit.} 663 (1785). Stems 100-150 cm, from a woody rhizome, simple or sparingly branched above, lanate at the nodes below, glabrous above. Leaves 20-25 × 10-13 cm, deep green, glabrous, ovate-oblong in outline; lower pinnatipartite, long-petiolate; upper pinnate, with linear-lanceolate segments, serrate from base to apex, broadly decurrent. Involucre 10-20 mm in diameter, cylindrical-ovoid; bracts obscurely striate, the middle oblong, without or with scarious margin c. 0·5 mm wide near apex, the inner linear, with orbicular appendage. Florets pale yellow. Pappus shorter than to as long as achene.{\i  Steppes and stony grassland. S. part of U.S.S.R., extending locally westwards to C. Romania.} Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable; {\b 6-8} perhaps may prove to be subspecies of {\b 5} upon further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. linaresii} Laz.-Ibiza,{\i  Anal. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat.}{\b  29}: 152 (1900). Like {\b 5} but stems villous at the nodes below; leaves pinnatisect, oblong- or linear-lanceolate in outline; segments linear-lanceolate, denticulate, with subspinose, cartilaginous teeth; involucre c. 20 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose, the middle bracts broadly ovate. •{\i  N.W. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. kasakorum} Iljin, {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 7}: 66 (1937). Like {\b 5} but stems up to 70 cm, glabrous; leaf-segments ovate-oblong; middle bracts with wide scarious margin near apex; inner bracts with oblong-ovate appendage; florets deep golden yellow. {\i Stony slopes. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. taliewii} Kleopow,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. Kieff}{\b  5-6}: 87 (1927). Like {\b 5} but stems 80-100 cm, sparsely villous below; leaf-segments linear to oblong-linear, serrulate to pinnately lobed; involucre 10-15 mm in diameter; middle bracts with scarious margin c. 2 mm wide near apex; inner bracts with ovate appendage; florets golden-yellow.{\i  Steppes. S. & E. Ukraine, S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. alpina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 910 (1753). Glabrous. Stems up to 70 cm, erect, simple or sparingly branched above. Leaves pale green, pinnate, the lower c. 35 × 12 cm; segments oblong- to linear-lanceolate, often deeply 2-fid, entire at the base, sometimes serrate at the apex. Involucre (15-)18-20 mm in diameter, ovoid; middle bracts ovate, obtuse, dark-striate, with narrow scarious margin near apex; inner bracts narrowly oblong, with orbicular appendage. Florets pale yellow. Pappus slightly shorter than achene. {\i Mountain woods. • S. Alps; some isolated stations in S.E. Spain and C. Jugoslavia. }Ga Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Lopholoma} (Cass.) Dobrocz. ({\i Sagmen} Hill, {\i Colymbada} Hill). Perennial, rarely biennial. Stems usually erect and sparingly branched, or absent. Lower leaves usually pinnatisect; uppermost undivided. Capitula comparatively large. Bracts usually without or with indistinct veins on dorsal surface; appendages usually semilunate, shortly decurrent, fimbriate, spiny or mucronate at apex. Pappus present.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. HYALEOLOMA Dostál. Involucre globose to ovoid; bracts ovate to ovate-oblong, not spinose; appendages hyaline.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. jankae} Brandza,{\i  Anal. Acad. Române} ser. 2, {\b 4}: 446 (1884). Perennial. Stems up to 70 cm, often corymbosely branched in upper half. Leaves 1(-2)-pinnatisect, petiolate; segments entire, arachnoid-pubescent, glabrescent. Involucre (15-)20 mm in diameter; bracts appressed; appendages entire or lacerate. Florets purple, the outer rather longer than the inner. Achenes c. 3 mm; pappus c. 6 mm. {\i Dry grassland. • S.E. Romania.} Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. crocodylium}  L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 919 (1753), from S.W. Asia, an annual with the lower leaves entire and the upper pinnatisect, long-pedunculate capitula and bracts with hyaline appendages and a long spine, has been recorded, probably in error, from Kriti.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ACROCENTRON (Cass.) DC. Involucre ovoid, rarely globose; bracts ovate to suborbicular; appendages triangular, narrowly decurrent, pectinate-fimbriate, spinose or mucronate, yellow or brown.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. collina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 918 (1753). Stems 20-60 cm, simple or sparingly branched above. Leaves scabrid, sometimes floccose, lower pinnatipartite or 2-pinnatisect, rarely undivided; rhachis and petiole not winged; segments at least 3 mm wide, oblong or linear, mucronate; upper leaves undivided. Involucre 13-17 mm in diameter; bracts oblong-ovate; appendages covering the bracts, with an apical spine with a somewhat spinulose base. Florets
\par

\par
263}
\par