{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 above. Leaves pinnatifid, rarely undivided; segments narrowly elliptical to ovate, obtuse, crenate-dentate. Involucre 20-40 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; appendages c. 5 mm, ovate, completely covering bracts, broadly decurrent, the fimbriae dark brown. Florets purple, the outer longer than the inner. Achenes c. 4 mm, puberulent, brown; pappus 4-6 mm, brown. 2n = 20. •{\i  Pyrenees; Alps, Jura; W. Carpathians.} Au Cz Ga He ?Hs It Ju Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. C. sadlerana} Janka, {\i Term. Füz.} {\b 2}: 142 (1878). Stems up to 120 cm, sparingly branched above. Leaves glabrous above; lower ovate-lanceolate in outline, pinnatifid, with entire, mucronate segments; upper lanceolate, entire. Involucre 16-18 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; bracts oblong or ovate, not covered by appendages; inner appendages orbicular, white with a triangular, often black, centre; middle appendages semilunate, brown, with white fimbriae. Florets purple, the outer longer than the inner. Achenes c. 4·5 mm, brown; pappus c. 4·5 mm, pale brown. 2n = 20.{\i  Dry scrub on hillsides. • E. Austria, N. Hungary, S.E. Czechoslovakia.} Au Cz Hu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. C. badensis} Tratt., {\i Arch. Gewachsk. }{\b 1}: 28 (1812) ({\i C. scabiosa} subsp.{\i  badensis} (Tratt.) Gugler). Stems 60-100 cm, simple, glabrous. Leaves shiny, smooth, sometimes subscabrid on margin; lower pinnate, with entire, lanceolate segments; upper pinnatifid, with linear-lanceolate segments. Involucre 15-18 mm, ovoid-globose; bracts not covered by the appendages; appendages triangular-semilunate, the outer black, the inner brown or yellow; fimbriae white. Florets purple, the outer longer than the inner. Achenes c. 5 mm; pappus c. 5 mm, dirty white.{\i  Dry scrub on hillsides. • E. Austria, S.E. Czechoslovakia. }Au Cz.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from W. Czechoslovakia and N. Hungary intermediate between {\b 49} and {\b 53} have been called {\b C. scabiosa} subsp. {\b tematinensis} (Domin) Domin, {\i Preslia }{\b 13-15}: 246 (1936) (subsp. {\i vertesensis} (Boros) Soó, {\i  C. vertesensis} Boros); they have 2n = 20.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. C. grinensis} Reuter, {\i Cat. Sem. Jard. Bot. Genève}{\b  1857}: 4 (1858) ({\i C. coriacea} auct., non Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd.). Leaves 1(-2)-pinnatifid or entire, floccose, glabrescent, scabrid on the veins beneath. Involucre ovoid; bracts ovate, not covered by appendages, sparsely tomentose; appendages 1-2 mm, triangular, black, the margin narrowly (0·5 mm) and long-decurrent, shortly pectinate-fimbriate; inner appendages brown or yellow. Florets purple. Achenes c. 4·5 mm, brown, glabrous; pappus pale brown. •{\i  S.C. Europe and W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Bu Cz He Hu It Ju ?Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b grinensis} ({\i C. tenuifolia} auct., non Dufour, nec Salisb.): Stems up to 100 cm, sparingly branched. Leaf-segments lanceolate. Involucre 14-15 mm in diameter; appendages with 3-5 fimbriae on each side. Outer florets slightly longer than the inner. Pappus slightly shorter than achene.{\i  S. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b fritschii} (Hayek) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 195(1976)({\i C. fritschii} Hayek): Stems up to 200 cm, corymbosely branched. Leaf-segments oblong-lanceolate. Involucre 15-18 mm in diameter; appendages with 5-7 fimbriae on each side. Outer florets distinctly longer than the inner. Pappus as long as achene. 2n = 20.{\i  From S. Czechoslovakia to Bulgaria and N. Albania}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. C. apiculata} Ledeb.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Dorpat., Suppl.} 3 (1824). Stems branched above. Leaves with arachnoid indumentum or glabrous, more or less scabrid, pinnatifid. Involucre 10-20 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; bracts ovate, not covered by appendages; appendages 0·5-2 mm, triangular, blackish, narrowly and sometimes indistinctly decurrent, with up to 12 fimbriae on each side, the apex mucronulate or with a spine up to 5 mm; inner bracts with suborbicular, brown appendages about as long as the bracts. Achenes hairy.{\i  Dry places. S.E. Europe, extending northwards to Hungary and to }c. 55° {\i N. in E.C. Russia.} Al Bu Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Appendages with apical spine 3-5 mm, with 8-12 fimbriae
\par
  1-2 mm on each side; florets purple, the outer distinctly
\par
  longer than the inner ........................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b spinulosa}
\par
1 Appendages mucronate or with apical spine up to 2 mm,
\par
  with few, indistinct fimbriae not more than 1 mm on 
\par
  each side, sometimes absent; florets pink, the outer 
\par
  slightly longer than the inner
\par
2 Bracts thin, not appressed; appendages very narrowly 
\par
  but distinctly decurrent, the fimbriae c. 1 mm .................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b apiculata}
\par
2 Bracts coriaceous, firmly appressed; appendages not or 
\par
  very narrowly decurrent, the fimbriae 0-0·5 mm ............... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b adpressa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b apiculata}: Stems 80-100 cm, sparsely lanate, somewhat scabrid. Leaf-segments linear-oblong or oblong. Involucre 10-17 mm in diameter; bracts not appressed; appendages very narrowly but distinctly decurrent, the fimbriae c. 1 mm, the apex mucronate or with spine up to 2 mm. Florets pink. Achenes 3·5-4·5 mm; pappus 3·5-4·5 mm.{\i  S. part of U.S.S.R}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b spinulosa} (Rochel ex Sprengel) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 196 (1976) ({\i C. spinulosa} Rochel ex Sprengel): Stems up to 150 cm, glabrous to somewhat scabrid. Leaf segments lanceolate. Involucre 15-20 mm in diameter; bracts not appressed; appendages black, narrowly but distinctly decurrent, the fimbriae 1-2 mm, the apex with spine 3-5 mm. Florets purple. Achenes c. 5 mm; pappus c. 5 mm.{\i  E.C. Europe, Balkan peninsula and Romania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b adpressa} (Ledeb.) Dostál,{\i  loc. cit. }(1976) ({\i C. adpressa }Ledeb.): Stems 50-80(-100) cm, with appressed arachnoid indumentum. Leaf-segments linear to narrowly oblong. Bracts firmly appressed; appendages indistinct, not or very narrowly decurrent, the fimbriae 0-0·5 mm, the apex mucronate or with spine up to 2 mm. Florets pink. Achenes 4-6 mm; pappus 4-6 mm.{\i  S. part of U.S.S.R., E. Romania}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. C. stereophylla} Besser,{\i  Enum. Pl. Volhyn.} 35 (1822). Stems 80-100 cm, virgately branched above, with sparse arachnoid indumentum. Leaves arachnoid-pubescent, scabrid, pinnatifid, rarely entire; segments oblong-linear. Involucre 7-10 mm in diameter, narrowly ovoid; bracts appressed, lanceolate, subglabrous, not covered by appendages; appendages 2-4 mm, triangular-lanceolate, brown, shortly and narrowly decurrent, shortly pectinate-fimbriate, usually with apical spine up to 2 mm; inner bracts brown or yellow. Florets pale pink, rarely white or pale yellow, the outer slightly longer than the inner. Achenes 3-4 mm, puberulent; pappus slightly shorter than achene, brownish.{\i  Dry grassland. From Macedonia to S. Ukraine.} Bu Gr Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. RHIZANTHAE Boiss. Stems short, or absent. Leaves usually in a basal rosette. Involucre ovoid; bracts ovate to oblong, with dorsal veins; appendages very narrowly decurrent, fimbriate or denticulate, spinose at apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. C. raphanina} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  2}: 205 (1813). Acaulescent, or rarely with stem up to 5(-20) cm. Leaves oblong-lanceolate and undivided or lyrate-pinnatifid; segments oblong-lanceolate. Capitula usually in groups of 2-4, subsessile or shortly pedunculate. Involucre 12-20 mm in diameter; bracts oblong to ovate; appendages triangular or semilunate, subentire or with 1-3 fimbriae 0·5-3 mm long on each side, mucronate or with apical spine up to 25 mm; Florets pink or purple, the outer
\par

\par
268}
\par