{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. C. laconica} Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  3}: 660 (1875). Stems 30-50 cm, simple or sparingly branched above, arachnoid-lanate at base. Lower leaves petiolate, interruptedly 2-pinnatisect, more or less lyrate; segments ovate-oblong to linear-lanceolate, acute; upper sessile, lyrate. Involucre 20-30 mm in diameter, globose; bracts ovate-orbicular, glabrous; appendages semilunate, not covering the bracts, dark brown, with stout apical spine 10-20 mm. Florets pinkish-purple. Achenes c. 4 mm, puberulent, about half as long as pappus.{\i  Rocky places. • S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. C. achaia} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 3}): 79 (1856). Like {\b 41} but lower leaves interruptedly pinnatipartite, segments lyrate-pinnatisect, mucronate; bracts orbicular; appendages covering the bracts, straw-coloured, with apical spine 20-35 mm, rarely mucronate; florets pink. •{\i  S. Greece. }Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. C. sibthorpii} Halácsy, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  6}: 635 (1898) (incl. {\i C. euboica} Rech. fil.). Like {\b 41} but basal leaves 1- to 2-pinnatisect segments lanceolate, entire or pinnately lobed; involucral bracts with ovate appendages with an apical spine 15-20 mm; florets pink.{\i  Cultivated ground. S.E. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. C. psilacantha} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 3}({\b 3}): 82 (1856). Stems 50-80 cm, corymbosely branched above. Leaves with sparse arachnoid indumentum, more or less glabrescent; lower petiolate, 2-pinnatifid; segments ovate-oblong, mucronate; upper sessile, pinnatifid. Involucre 10-15 mm in diameter, ovoid; bracts puberulent; appendages semilunate, light brown, the apical spine 10-30 mm. Florets purple. Achenes c. 4 mm, puberulent; pappus twice as long as achene.{\i  Mountain scrub. • N. & C. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. C. redempta} Heldr.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b 37}: 243 (1890). Stems 10-20 cm, erect, simple or sparingly branched, arachnoid-lanate. Leaves with arachnoid indumentum, glabrescent; lower petiolate, pinnatifid; segments ovate-lanceolate, dentate to lobed; upper sessile. Involucre 30-40 mm in diameter, globose; bracts subglabrous; appendages semilunate, black, the apical spine 15-30 mm, sometimes unarmed. Florets dark purple, the outer as long as the inner. Achenes c. 4 mm; pappus twice as long as achene. 2n = 20. {\i Rocky places on mountains. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. C. cytherea} Rech. fil.,{\i  Boissiera}{\b  13}: 149 (1967). Like {\b 45} but stems 30-60(-100) cm, much-branched from the base, glabrous; leaves glabrous; basal in rosettes, 2-pinnatisect; involucre 20-30 mm in diameter; bracts glabrous. •{\i  S. Greece} ({\i Kithira}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. C. ebenoides} Heldr. ex S. Moore, {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 16}: 133 (1878). Stems up to 10 cm, ascending, simple. Leaves lanate, glabrescent above, lyrate; segments triangular-ovate to lanceolate. Involucre c. 15 mm in diameter, narrowly ovoid; bracts glabrous; appendages semilunate, black or dark brown, the apical spine 6-10 mm, deflexed. Florets pink, the outer scarcely longer than the inner. Achenes c. 3 mm, puberulent; pappus 3 times as long as achene.{\i  Woods. • E. Greece} ({\i Evvoia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. C. spruneri} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 6}): 132 (1846). Stems 10-50 cm, erect, branched above. Leaves scabrid, arachnoid-lanate; basal interruptedly lyrate-pinnatifid or pinnatifid, rarely undivided; upper entire. Involucre 15-40 mm in diameter, ovoid to globose; bracts glabrous; appendages semilunate, yellowish-brown, the apical spine erecto-patent. Florets pink to purple, the outer longer than the inner. Achenes c. 3 mm, puberulent; pappus 3 times as long as achene.{\i  Cultivated and waste ground and dry hillsides. • S. Albania, S. & W. Greece, S. Aegean region.} Al Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves pinnatifid with narrowly lanceolate, entire 
\par
  segments ........................................................................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b lineariloba}
\par
1 Leaves lyrate-pinnatifid with oblong to suborbicular 
\par
  segments
\par
2 Stems not more than 20 cm; at least some basal leaves 
\par
  undivided ............................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b minoa}
\par
2 Stems 20-50 cm; basal leaves all divided
\par
3 Involucre 30-35(-40) mm in diameter, globose ................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b spruneri} 
\par
3 Involucre 15-20 mm in diameter, ovoid ........................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b guicciardii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b spruneri}: Stems 20-40 cm. Basal leaves lyrate pinnatifid with oblong to suborbicular lobed segments, withered at anthesis. Involucre 30-35(-40) mm in diameter, globose; appendages with apical spine 30-50 mm. 2n = 110.{\i  S.E. Greece} ({\i Attiki}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b minoa} (Heldr. ex Boiss.) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 195 (1976) ({\i C. minoa} Heldr. ex Boiss.): Stems 10-30 cm. Basal leaves undivided, obovate, or lyrate-pinnatifid. Involucre c. 20 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages with apical spine 10-20 mm.{\i  Kriti}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b guicciardii} (Boiss.) Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 749 (1931) ({\i C. guicciardii} Boiss.): Stems 30-50 cm. Basal leaves lyrate-pinnatifid with oblong to suborbicular, lobed segments, green at anthesis. Involucre 15-20 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages with apical spine 20-30 mm. 2n = 20, 100, 110.{\i  S. & W. Greece, Kikladhes, S. Albania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b lineariloba} (Halácsy & Dörfler) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 195 (1976) ({\i C. guicciardii} var.{\i  lineariloba} Halácsy & Dörfler): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but leaves pinnatifid with linear lanceolate to narrowly linear, entire segments. 2n = 20.{\i  Kikladhes}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. LOPHOLOMA. Involucre ovoid to ovoid-globose; bracts lanceolate to ovate or oblong; appendages conspicuous, coloured, pectinate-fimbriate, long-decurrent, with apical spines not more than 5 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants intermediate between species in this Section are common.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. C. scabiosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 913 (1753). Stems (15-)30-150(-200) cm, corymbosely branched. Leaves scabrid; lower petiolate, 1(-2)-pinnatisect, rarely undivided and entire or dentate; segments oblong to linear, entire to dentate or lobed; upper pinnatisect, sessile. Involucre 18-25 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; bracts 3-4 mm wide, ovate, numerous, glabrous or with arachnoid indumentum; appendages 1-2(-3) × 1-2 mm, not covering the bracts, triangular-ovate, brown or black, decurrent, with light brown fimbriae, inconspicuous and paler on inner bracts. Florets purple, the outer slightly longer to much longer than the inner. Achenes 4-5·5 mm, puberulent, brown; pappus 4-5 mm, greyish or brownish-white. 2n = 20+0-2B, 40.{\i  Europe, from C. Spain, C. Italy and Bulgaria northwards}. Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su [Fa].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in branching, leaf-shape, and the size of the appendages.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. integrifolia} Tausch, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}){\b  11}: 485 (1828), from S. Ural, is similar to 49 but has all leaves undivided and entire. It may merit subspecific status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. C. cephalariifolia} Willk  {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) 34: 762 (1851). Like {\b 49} but stems 30-50 cm, sparingly branched above; involucre 15-20 mm in diameter, ovoid; bracts 6-7 mm wide, orbicular, few, the appendages c. 1 mm; florets pinkish-orange. {\i Cultivated ground. • E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. C. alpestris} Hegetschw., {\i Fl. Schweiz} 854 (1840) ({\i C. alpina} auct., non L.). Stems 30-50 cm, simple, rarely sparingly branched
\par

\par
267}
\par