{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 slightly longer than the inner. Achenes 3-5 mm, sericeous; pappus as long as or slightly longer than achene. •{\i  S. & S.E. Greece, S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b raphanina}: Leaves dull, scabrid-puberulent; segments entire. Involucre ovoid-oblong, narrowed at base. Appendages with simple apical spine 2-9 mm. 2n = 20. {\i Kriti, Karpathos, Kasos}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b mixta} (DC.) Runemark, {\i Bot. Not.}{\b  120}: 175 (1967) ({\i C. mixta} DC.): Leaves shiny, glabrous; at least the larger segments dentate. Involucre ovoid-globose, truncate at base. Appendages with the apical spine 9-25 mm and pinnate towards base. 2n = 20.{\i  S. & E. Greece, Kikladhes}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C. halacsyi} Dörfler,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  51}: 204 (1901), and {\b C. nigrotriangulata} Rech. fil.,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  33}: 14 (1934), are the hybrid {\b 37} × {\b 57}({\b a}); {\b C. eriopoda} Rech. fil., {\i op. cit.} 13 (1934), represents material intermediate between {\b 57}({\b a}) and ({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Records of {\i C. exscapa} D'Urv. from Naxos are erroneous.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. AEGLALOPHILA (Boiss. & Heldr.) O. Hoffm. Stems very short. Leaves in a basal rosette. Involucre ovoid; bracts broadly ovate, coriaceous, with dorsal veins; appendages narrowly decurrent, with hyaline margin, spinose at apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. C. aegialophila} Wagenitz,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  33}: 230 (1914) ({\i Aeglalophila cretica} Boiss. & Heldr., {\i C. cretica} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Nyman, non (L.) Sprengel). Stem very short, simple or branched. Leaves arachnoid-canescent, undivided and cordate-ovate, or lyrate. Capitula solitary or in pairs. Involucre c. 20 mm in diameter, ovoid; bracts broadly ovate, with an indistinctly denticulate hyaline margin; apical spine 1-3 mm. Florets purple, the outer slightly longer than the inner. Achenes 3-4 mm; pappus 3 times as long as achene, reddish, the outer hairs plumose, the innermost row consisting of entire, smooth, subulate setae. 2n = 22.{\i  Maritime sands. E. Kriti, Karpathos.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. C. pumilio} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl.}{\b  1}: 30 (1755). Like {\b 58} but appendages of bracts with spine 5-9 mm; pappus with the outer hairs scabrid and the innermost row consisting of papillose, linear-oblanceolate scales.{\i  Maritimes ands. W. Kriti.} Cr. ({\i N.E. Africa, S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. CHAMAECYANUS Willk. Stems short or absent. Leaves usually in a basal rosette. Involucre oblong-ovoid to ovoid-globose; bracts lanceolate-oblong to ovate or oblong-ovate; appendages pectinate-fimbriate or lacerate, spinose at apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. C. macrorrhiza} Willk.,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  25}: 38 (1852). Acaulescent, or stems up to 6 cm. Leaves white-lanate, the outer ovate-lanceolate, entire or lobed, the rest very long, lyrate-pinnatifid, with few oblong segments. Capitula 1-3. Involucre 15-20 mm in diameter, ovoid; bracts ovate, tomentose to glabrous; appendages triangular, fimbriate, with spinose apex. Florets orange, the outer slightly longer than the inner. Achenes c. 5 mm; pappus much shorter than achene. 2n = 20.{\i  Calcareous rock-crevices and screes. • S.E. Spain} ({\i prov. Almeria}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. C. toletana} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Nov. Hisp.} 18 (1842) ({\i C. cavanillesiana} Graells). Acaulescent or stems up to 5 cm. Leaves floccose-tomentose at least when young, mostly pinnate; segments cordate to narrowly lanceolate, often shallowly lobed. Capitula usually several. Involucre c. 20 mm in diameter, ovoid; bracts oblong-ovate; appendages (8-)10-12 mm, triangular-lanceolate, remotely long-fimbriate, with spinescent apex. Florets pale yellow, the outer as long as the inner. Achenes c. 6 mm, blackish-brown, c. 6 times as long as pappus.{\i  Scrub. • C. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp.{\b  tentudaica} Rivas Goday, {\i Veg. Fl. Cuenca Extr. Guadiana} 666 (1964), from W.C. Spain (Sierra Tudia), is acaulescent, has leaves with spinulose-mucronate segments, solitary capitula, involucre c. 30 mm in diameter and pinkish-orange florets; it is in some ways intermediate between {\b 61} and {\b 62} and the relationship between these three taxa is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. C. haenseleri} (Boiss.) Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 349 (1840). Acaulescent. Leaves greyish-tomentose, mostly pinnatisect; segments ovate-oblong to linear-lanceolate, entire to denticulate. Capitula 1-3. Involucre c. 25 mm in diameter, ovoid; bracts orbicular-triangular, glabrous; appendages up to 8 mm, triangular-lanceolate, fimbriate-serrate, with a brown, fimbriate, apical spine. Florets orange-yellow. •{\i  S.W. Spain} ({\i Sierra Bermeja}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 63. C. argecillensis} Gredilla,{\i  Bol. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat.}{\b  3}: 431 (1903). Acaulescent. Leaves floccose-subtomentose, glabrescent, undivided, ovate or lanceolate, entire or mucronate-dentate. Capitula 1, pedunculate. Involucre 18-20 mm in diameter, ovoid; bracts oblong; appendages lanceolate, fimbriate, with spinescent apex. Florets pale yellow, with orange veins. Achenes whitish, puberulent; pappus white.{\i  Hillsides. • E.C. Spain} ({\i N. of Brihuega}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. C. amblensis} Graells, {\i Mem. Real Acad. Ci. Madrid}{\b  2}: 462 (1859). Stems 1-5 cm, corymbosely branched towards apex. Leaves lanate, mostly pinnatisect or pinnatifid; segments broadly ovate, serrate. Capitula 8-12. Involucre c. 16 mm in diameter, oblong-ovoid; bracts oblong-lanceolate, glabrous; appendages long, lanceolate, recurved, with apical spine 5 mm. Florets pink. •{\i  C. Spain }({\i prov. Avila}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. C. lagascana} Graells, {\i op. cit.} 465 (1859). Usually acaulescent. Leaves lanate, glabrescent above, interruptedly pinnatisect; segments oblong, remotely denticulate. Involucral bracts with subentire appendages, spinose. Florets yellow. Achenes brown, black-striped. •{\i  N. & N.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b lagascana}: Acaulescent. Leaves shortly petiolate. Capitula 1-10. Involucre c. 15 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages with apical spine up to 16 mm. Florets yellow. Pappus very short.{\i  N. Spain }({\i provs. Santander and Valencia}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b podospermifolia} (Loscos & Pardo) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 196 (1976) ({\i C. podospermifolia} Loscos & Pardo): Acaulescent, or with stem up to 8 cm. Leaves long-petiolate. Capitula solitary. Involucre 15-18 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; appendages with apical spine 4-8 mm. Florets pale yellow. Pappus 1/7-1/5 as long as achene.{\i  N.E. Spain} ({\i provs. Teruel and Tarragona}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 66. C. acaulis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 914 (1753). Like {\b 65}({\b a}) but leaves sparsely grey-tomentose, lyrate-pinnatisect with ovate segments, diminishing in size towards the base of the leaf; capitula solitary; appendages with long fimbriae and slightly patent apical spine. {\i Naturalized in Lampedusa and perhaps in S. Spain.} [?Hs It.] ({\i N Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 67. C. loscosii} Willk.,{\i  Ill. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  1}({\b 9}): 133 (1884). Like {\b 65}({\b a}) but involucre 18-25 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; apical spine of appendages short; florets yellow or purple, the outer longer than the inner; pappus 1/3 as long as achene. •{\i  N.E. Spain }({\i W. of Tortosa}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Perhaps the hybrid between {\b 65}({\b b}) and {\b 50}.
\par

\par
269}
\par