{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 238 Leaves green, with narrowly linear segments ..................... {\b 124. triniifolia}
\par
238 Leaves grey-green, with narrowly oblong-lanceolate 
    segments ............................................................................... {\b 108. spinabadia}
\par
237 Involucre 4-8 mm in diameter
\par
239 Stems with short branches; lower leaves with 
\par
    lanceolate, dentate or divided segments ................................... {\b 81. varnensis}
\par
239 Stems with long branches; lower leaves with linear,
\par
    entire segments .................................................................. {\b 128. biebersteinii}
\par
192 Apical spine of appendages absent or not more than
\par
    1·5 mm, usually shorter than lateral fimbriae
\par
240 Appendages scarcely distinct from main part of bracts,
\par
    or absent
\par
241 Biennial ............................................................................ {\b 115. leucophaea}
\par
241 Perennial
\par
242 Florets purple ....................................................................... {\b 134. aplolepa}
\par
242 Florets cream ...................................................................... {\b 136. laureotica}
\par
240 Appendages distinct from main part of bracts
\par
243 Lower leaves whitish-lanate or -tomentose at least 
\par
    beneath, rarely glabrescent on upper surface; capitula
\par
    often comparatively large
\par
244 Lower leaves undivided or lyrate
\par
245 Lower leaves appressed-yellow-tomentose ...................... {\b 77. nicopolitana}
\par
245 Lower leaves not appressed-yellow-tomentose
\par
246 Florets yellow ......................................................................... {\b 75. argentea}
\par
246 Florets purple, pink or white
\par
247 Appendages of outer bracts with distinct hyaline 
\par
    margins or auricles
\par
248 Appendages recurved ............................................................ {\b 71. cuspidata}
\par
248 Appendages appressed ................................................. {\b 133. carratracensis}
\par
247 Appendages of outer bracts without distinct hyaline 
\par
    margins or auricles
\par
249 Appendages dark brown or black
\par
250 Bracts broadly ovate; pappus c. 2/3 as long as achene .......... {\b 70. cineraria}
\par
250 Bracts ovate-oblong; pappus 1/4-1/3 as long as achene ............ {\b 84. affinis}
\par
249 Appendages pale brown
\par
251 Pappus as long as achene ............................................................ {\b 73. kilaea}
\par
251 Pappus not more than ½ as long as achene
\par
252 Pappus not more than ¼ as long as achene; upper 
\par
    leaves not mucronate .................................................................. {\b 80. rutifolia}
\par
252 Pappus ¼-½ as long as achene; upper leaves 
\par
    mucronate ................................................................................ {\b 78. cuneifolia}
\par
244 Lower leaves 1- to 2-pinnatifid or -pinnatisect, with
\par
    terminal segment scarcely larger than laterals
\par
253 Lower fimbriae forming hyaline auricles
\par
254 Stems 30-120 cm; pappus at least ½ as long as achene .......... {\b 89. arenaria}
\par
254 Stems not more than 30 cm; pappus 1/3-1/2 as long as
\par
    achene .................................................................................. {\b 94. chalcidicaea}
\par
253 Lower fimbriae not forming hyaline auricles
\par
255 Pappus not more than 2/3 as long as achene
\par
256 Involucre 3-9 mm in diameter
\par
257 Involucre 3-4 mm in diameter ........................................... {\b 113. paniculata}
\par
257 Involucre 5-9 mm in diameter
\par
258 Leaves usually green, glabrescent ......................................... {\b 122. rhenana}
\par
258 Leaves white-tomentose or arachnoid-lanate
\par
259 Fimbriae of appendages not more than 0·5 mm ...................... {\b 80. rutifolia}
\par
259 Fimbriae of appendages c. 2 mm ............................................ {\b 85. pallidior}
\par
256 Involucre (9-)10-25 mm in diameter
\par
260 Appendages spinose at apex
\par
261 Spine erect .............................................................................. {\b 118. subtilis}
\par
261 Spine recurved ...................................................................... {\b 129. boissieri}
\par
260 Appendages acute or acuminate
\par
262 Appendages pale brown, acute ................................................ {\b 83. friderici}
\par
262 Appendages dark brown to blackish, acuminate
\par
263 Perennial; leaves usually white- or grey-tomentose .............. {\b 70. cineraria}
\par
263 Usually biennial; leaves usually green, glabrescent .............. {\b 122. rhenana}
\par
255 Pappus about as long as or longer than the achene
\par
264 Segments of lower leaves linear ........................................... {\b 86. parlatoris}
\par
264 Segments of lower leaves lanceolate to oblong
\par
265 Lower fimbriae of appendages confluent into a hyaline
\par
    margin ...................................................................................... {\b 122. rhenana}
\par
265 Lower fimbriae of appendages not confluent into a 
\par
    hyaline margin
\par
266 Appendages blackish ........................................................... {\b 74. wettsteinii}
\par
266 Appendages brown
\par
267 Appendages distinctly spinose at apex
\par
268 Appendages short, not covering bracts ................................... {\b 76. pannosa}
\par
268 Appendages long, ± covering bracts ......................................... {\b 72. niederi}
\par
267 Appendages acute to acuminate
\par
269 Florets purple or white; fimbriae of appendages 3-4 
\par
    on each side ................................................................................ {\b 83. friderici}
\par
269 Florets pink; fimbriae of appendages 5-9 on each side ............. {\b 84. affinis}
\par
243 Lower leaves greenish, or greyish-tomentose but
\par
    often glabrescent; capitula often comparatively small
\par
270 Lower fimbriae confluent into a hyaline margin
\par
    or forming auricles
\par
271 Lower fimbriae usually not forming auricles
\par
272 Appendages acuminate or mucronulate ................................. {\b 106. brachtii}
\par
272 Appendages with an apical spine 1-1·5 mm
\par
273 Involucre 3-6 mm in diameter ..................................................... {\b 90. ovina}
\par
273 Involucre 8-10 mm in diameter
\par
274 Pappus longer than achene .............................................. {\b 104. kartschiana}
\par
274 Pappus c. 1/3 as long as achene ......................................... {\b 121. vallesiaca}
\par
271 Lower fimbriae usually forming auricles
\par
275 Pappus absent
\par
276 Apical spine of appendages c. 1 mm; florets lilac ...................... {\b 90. ovina}
\par
276 Apical spine of appendages 1-3 mm; florets pink ......... {\b 92. spinosociliata}
\par
275 Pappus present
\par
277 Stem simple or with few branches
\par
278 Lower leaves undivided, entire or dentate; fimbriae
\par
    4-6 on each side ....................................................................... {\b 71. cuspidata}
\par
278 Lower leaves divided; fimbriae 2-3 on each side .................. {\b 93. incompta}
\par
277 Stems paniculately branched
\par
279 Appendages yellow or pale brown
\par
280 Involucre 8-10 mm in diameter; appendages with apical
\par
    mucro not more than 0·5 mm ................................................ {\b 121. vallesiaca}
\par
280 Involucre 3-8 mm in diameter; appendages often with a
\par
    short apical spine
\par
281 Leaves greenish- or whitish-tomentose .................................. {\b 89. arenaria}
\par
281 Leaves greenish, sparsely to densely arachnoid-hairy ................ {\b 90. ovina}
\par
279 Appendages darkish brown
\par
282 Involucre 7-8 × 3-4 mm ........................................................ {\b 91. tenuiflora}
\par
282 Involucre 10-14 × 5-12 mm
\par
283 Older leaves smooth, glandular-punctate, glabrous .......... {\b 97. biokovensis}
\par
283 Older leaves scabrid or pubescent
\par
284 Involucre 5-8 mm in diameter; florets purple; achenes
\par
    puberulent .............................................................................. {\b 95. grisebachii}
\par

\par
261}
\par