{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 188 Unarmed herb, sometimes woody at base
\par
191 Appendages of bracts filiform and plumose-fimbriate
\par
    at apex ............................................................................... {\b 144. zuccariniana}
\par
191 Appendages of bracts neither filiform nor plumose
\par
    fimbriate at apex
\par
192 Apical spine of appendages (1·5-)2-5 mm, usually 
\par
    longer than lateral fimbriae
\par
193 Lower fimbriae  confluent into a hyaline margin or 
\par
    forming auricles
\par
194 Lower fimbriae not forming auricles
\par
195 Pappus about as long as achene
\par
196 Perennial 10-20 cm; lower leaves lyrate, with oblong
\par
    segments .................................................................................. {\b 130. lagascae}
\par
196 Biennial 30-60 cm; lower leaves 2-pinnatisect, with 
\par
    linear to narrowly oblong or lanceolate segments
\par
197 Stems sparingly branched; lower leaves with linear 
\par
    to narrowly oblong segments ............................................... {\b 108. spinabadia}
\par
197 Stems paniculately much-branched; lower leaves with 
\par
    narrowly lanceolate segments ........................................ {\b 127. peucedanifolia}
\par
195 Pappus not more than ½ as long as achene
\par
198 Pappus c. 1/8 as long as achene ....................................... {\b 131. bombycina}
\par
198 Pappus ¼-½ as long as achene
\par
199 Leaves greyish-tomentose beneath ....................................... {\b 129. boissieri}
\par
199 Leaves green beneath
\par
200 Leaf-segments narrowly linear ............................................. {\b 129. boissieri}
\par
200 Leaf-segments lanceolate to elliptical
\par
201 Leaves glabrous beneath ..................................................... {\b 105. dalmatica}
\par
201 Leaves ± arachnoid beneath ...................................................... {\b 102. attica}
\par
194 Lower fimbriae forming auricles
\par
202 Leaves with segments c. 0·5 mm wide ................................. {\b 98. gracilenta}
\par
202 Leaves with segments more than 1 mm wide
\par
203 Apical spines of appendages erecto-patent to recurved
\par
204 Perennial; appendages blackish ................................................. {\b 102. attica}
\par
204 Annual or biennial; appendages yellow or brown
\par
205 Pappus c. 2/3 as long as achene; leaves arachnoid-
\par
    tomentose ................................................................................. {\b 91. tenuiflora}
\par
205 Pappus very short or absent; leaves green ..................... {\b 92. spinosociliata}
\par
203 Apical spines of appendages ± erect
\par
206 Pappus ¼-½ as long as achene
\par
207 Basal leaves lyrate or almost undivided .............................. {\b 100. transiens}
\par
207 Basal leaves pinnatisect
\par
208 Stem with few branches; florets pink .............................. {\b 101. subsericans}
\par
208 Stem much-branched; florets purple ......................................... {\b 102. attica}
\par
206 Pappus about as long as achene
\par
209 Leaves glabrous ............................................................ {\b 99. kalambakensis}
\par
209 Leaves tomentose or arachnoid-hairy 
\par
210 Involucre 15 mm; florets yellow ............................................. {\b 103. soskae} 
\par
210 Involucre 10-16 mm; florets pink or purple 
\par
211 Leaves arachnoid-lanate; appendages yellowish- or 
\par
    purplish-brown ............................................................................. {\b 79. ipsaria} 
\par
211 Leaves tomentose; appendages dark brown or black ................ {\b 102. attica}
\par
193 Lower fimbriae free, neither confluent into a hyaline
\par
    margin nor forming auricles
\par
212 Involucre not more than 5(-6) mm in diameter, ovoid-cylindrical
\par
213 Pappus absent
\par
214 Florets pale pink; involucre 4-5 mm in diameter .................... {\b 141. diffusa}
\par
214 Florets purple, rarely white, involucre 3-3·5 mm in diameter
\par
215 Involucre 6-7 mm, ovoid ......................................................... {\b 142. bovina}
\par
215 Involucre 10-12 mm, cylindrical ......................................... {\b 143. aemulans} 
\par
213 Pappus present
\par
216 Pappus about as long as achene
\par
217 Florets yellow ............................................................................. {\b 137. pelia}
\par
217 Florets purple .................................................................... {\b 140. orphanidea}
\par
216 Pappus not more than ½ as long as achene
\par
218 Perennial; bracts with prominent veins
\par
219 Capitula solitary; appendages triangular-lanceolate ............. {\b 129. boissieri}
\par
219 Capitula in clusters of 2-3; appendages triangular ................ {\b 81. varnensis}
\par
218 Biennial; bracts with indistinct veins
\par
220 Involucre 5-6 mm in diameter; bracts puberulent;
\par
    appendages reddish-brown, covering the bracts ....................... {\b 138. rufidula}
\par
220 Involucre 3-5 mm in diameter; bracts glabrous;
\par
    appendages pale brown, not covering the bracts ................... {\b 139. tymphaea}
\par
212 Involucre usually 5 mm or more in diameter, ovoid-
\par
    globose or -oblong 
\par
221 Florets white or yellow
\par
222 Pappus c. 1/8 as long as achene ....................................... {\b 131. bombycina}
\par
222 Pappus at least ½ as long as achene
\par
223 Florets white or cream; pappus ½ as long as achene .......... {\b 135. lactiflora}
\par
223 Florets yellow or cream; pappus about as long as achene
\par
224 Florets yellow; involucre 10 × 4-6 mm; appendages 
\par
    pale brown ..................................................................................... {\b 137. pelia}
\par
224 Florets cream; involucre 12 × 6-7 mm; appendages
\par
    reddish-brown ........................................................................ {\b 136. laureotica}
\par
221 Florets pink or purple, rarely white
\par
225 Pappus absent .......................................................................... {\b 80. rutifolia}
\par
225 Pappus present
\par
226 Involucre 18-20 mm in diameter ............................................... {\b 72. niederi}
\par
226 Involucre not more than 14 mm in diameter
\par
227 Apical spine of appendages subulate, with spines or
\par
    fimbriae at base
\par
228 Lower leaves undivided or lyrate ..................................... {\b 131. bombycina}
\par
228 Lower leaves pinnatisect
\par
229 Stem short, usually ascending or procumbent
\par
230 Non-flowering rosettes absent at anthesis ............................ {\b 129. boissieri}
\par
230 Non-flowering rosettes present at anthesis ....................... {\b 131. bombycina}
\par
229 Stem long, ± erect
\par
231 Cauline leaves pinnatisect, crowded ..................................... {\b 129. boissieri}
\par
231 Cauline leaves undivided, not crowded ............................. {\b 132. monticola}
\par
227 Apical spine of appendages without spines or fimbriae
\par
    at base
\par
232 Lower leaves 1-pinnatisect or lyrate
\par
233 Capitula solitary; pappus not more than ¼ as long 
\par
    as achene .................................................................................... {\b 80. rutifolia}
\par
233 Capitula in clusters or solitary; pappus at least ¼
\par
    as long as achene
\par
234 Branches with 3-5 capitula; appendages with 3-4 
\par
    fimbriae on each side ................................................................. {\b 76. pannosa}
\par
234 Branches with 1-3 capitula; appendages with (4-)5-9 
\par
    fimbriae on each side
\par
235 Apical spine of appendages up to 5 mm .......................... {\b 140. orphanidea}
\par
235 Apical spine of appendages not more than 2·5 mm
\par
236 Leaves with elliptical to lanceolate segments ...................... {\b 78. cuneifolia}
\par
236 Leaves with linear to oblong segments .......................... {\b 128. biebersteinii}
\par
232 Lower leaves 2-pinnatisect
\par
237 Involucre 7-11 mm in diameter
\par

\par
260}
\par