{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 in upper half, leafy above. Leaves 1(-2)-pinnatisect; segments 2-3(-20) mm wide. Involucre 20-30 mm in diameter, globose; appendages triangular-lanceolate, dark brown, completely covering the bracts; fimbriae whitish, arising abruptly. Florets dark purple, rarely yellow, the outer scarcely longer than the inner. Achenes c. 4 mm, puberulent, brown; pappus c. 4 mm, pale brown. 2n = 18.{\i  Rocky mountain slopes. • C. part of Balkan peninsula; Romania.} Al ?Bu Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b atropurpurea}: Leaves subglabrous, not lyrate; segments linear-lanceolate. Involucral bracts with appendages c. 10 mm.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b soskae} (Stoj. & Acht.) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 195 (1976) ({\i C. atropurpurea} var.{\i  soskae} Stoj. & Acht.): Leaves arachnoid-lanate, lyrate; segments oblong. Involucral bracts with appendages 5-8 mm.{\i  S. Jugoslavia} ({\i Makedonija}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C. globurensis} E. I. Nyárády,{\i  Bul. Grad. Bot. Univ. Cluj}{\b  14}: 218 (1934), from S.W. Romania (Banat), is like {\b 31} but has simple stems, subglabrous leaves, involucre c. 16 mm in diameter and brown fimbriae on the triangular, mucronate appendages; its status is uncertain and further study is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. C. kotschyana} Heuffel ex Koch,{\i  Syn. Fl. Germ.} ed. 2, 473 (1844). Stems 50-100 cm, usually simple. Leaves crispate-hairy; basal lanceolate, remotely dentate; cauline lyrate-pinnatisect, the segments oblong to linear-lanceolate, dentate or lobed. Involucre 20-30 mm in diameter; appendages ovate-triangular, dark brown or black, completely covering the bracts; fimbriae 3-5 mm, white at apex, arising gradually. Florets dark purple, the outer as long as the inner. Achenes 4-5 mm, puberulent; pappus 4-5 mm.{\i  Mountain grassland. • From the E. Carpathians to Macedonia.} Bu Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. C. murbeckii} Hayek, {\i Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}){\b  70}: 639 (1901). Like {\b 32} but stems always simple; cauline leaves not lyrate, the segments entire or deeply dentate; involucre c. 40 mm in diameter. •{\i  Mountains of C. Jugoslavia} ({\i Bosna}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. C. candelabrum} Hayek & Kosanin in Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 746 (1931). Stems up to 200 cm, paniculately branched, leafless above. Leaves pinnatifid, glabrous; segments 2-4 mm wide, linear-lanceolate, remotely lobed. Involucre c. 20 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; appendages small, triangular, often not covering bracts, black, with short apical spine. Florets dark purple, the outer as long as the inner. Achenes puberulent, slightly shorter than pappus. {\i Serpentine rocks. • N. Albania.} Al.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. C. immanuelis-loewii} Degen, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  16}: 117 (1917). Stems 30-50 cm, usually simple, leafless above. Leaves pinnatifid, oblong-lanceolate in outline, subglabrous; segments 2-4 mm wide, entire to remotely dentate. Involucre 15-20 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages triangular, not completely covering the glabrous bracts, dark brown, with 4-6 silvery fimbriae on each side. Florets dark purple, the outer longer than the inner. Achenes puberulent, as long as pappus.{\i  Mountain rocks. • Macedonia.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. C. grbavacensis} (Rohlena) Stoj. & Acht.,{\i  Stud. Centaur. Bulg.} 39 (1935) ({\i C. immanuelis-loewii} var. {\i grbavacensis} Rohlena). Stems 30-60 cm, simple, leafless above. Leaves densely arachnoid-lanate; basal pinnatifid, with linear segments; cauline 1-2, pinnatisect, with filiform segments. Involucre 25-30 mm in diameter, globose; appendages broadly triangular, covering the lanate bracts, black, with 15-20 fimbriae on each side; fimbriae dark brown at base, silvery above. Florets dark purple, the outer slightly longer than the inner. •{\i  N.C. Macedonia} ({\i near Prilep}). Ju.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CARDUIFORMES (Tzvelev) Dostál. Involucre ovoid to globose; bracts orbicular; appendages pectinate-fimbriate, not covering the bracts, usually with apical spine at least 3 mm, yellow, brown or black, the margins narrowly and shortly decurrent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. C. oliverana} DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 590 (1838). Stems 30-60 cm, simple or sparingly branched above, white-velutinous at the base. Leaves white-lanate beneath, subglabrous above; lower in a basal rosette, petiolate, lyrate or undivided; lower cauline sessile, ovate to elliptical, often lyrate, with linear-lanceolate segments; upper lyrate-dentate. Involucre c. 25 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; bracts glabrous; appendages triangular, dark brown, mucronulate or with apical spine 2-3 mm. Florets brownish-purple, the outer as long as the inner. Achenes 4 mm, puberulent; pappus as long as achene, dirty white. 2n = 22.{\i  Rocky places. • Kikladhes.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. armoracifolia} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  2}: 205 (1813), described from S. Greece (Peloponnisos), is like {\b 37} but has the appendages not fimbriate; it has not been found again.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. C. ragusina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 912 (1753). Plant white-tomentose. Stems 30-60 cm. Leaves mostly basal, petiolate; segments ovate to oblong, obtuse, entire to sinuate-dentate or lobed. Involucre 20-25 mm in diameter, globose; bracts white-tomentose; appendages triangular, brownish; apical spine c. 4 mm, recurved. Florets yellow, the outer as long as the inner. Achenes 4-5 mm, puberulent; pappus 4-5 mm, white.{\i  Maritime rocks and walls. • W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ragusina}: Stems usually simple. Basal leaves pinnatifid, with 4-7 pairs of entire or pinnatifid segments.{\i  C. part of W. coast of Jugoslavia, mainly on the islands}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lungensis} (Ginzberger) Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 756 (1931) ({\i C. lungensis} Ginzberger): Stems usually branched. At least some basal leaves undivided, entire. {\i N.W. Jugoslavia} ({\i island of Dugi and adjacent islets}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. C. rechingeri} Phitos,{\i  Ann. Naturh. Mus. }({\i Wien}) {\b 67}: 165 (1964). Like {\b 38}({\b a}) but involucre 15-25 mm in diameter; appendages with apical mucro c. 1 mm and with sparse, short setae on the margin; florets brownish-purple. 2n = 22.{\i  Maritime limestone cliffs. • N. Aegean region} ({\i Skiros}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. C. graeca} Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 242 (1846) ({\i C. guicciardii} sensu Halácsy, non Boiss.). Stems 50-180 cm, paniculately branched. Leaves mostly in a basal rosette, pinnate, rarely undivided, arachnoid-tomentose, glabrescent; segments oblong to obovate, acute, entire, rarely dentate. Involucre 18-20 mm, ovoid; bracts glabrous; appendages narrowly semilunate, straw-yellow, shortly fimbriate-dentate, the apical spine 3-20 mm, patent, yellowish. Florets pinkish-purple, the outer as long as the inner. Achenes puberulent, about half as long as pappus. 2n = 20.{\i  Rocky places on mountains. • N. & C. Greece, Albania.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b graeca}: Appendages of involucral bracts with slender spine 3-10(-15) mm. {\i N. Greece, Albania.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ceccariniana} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 195 (1976) ({\i C. ceccariniana }Boiss. & Heldr.): Appendages of involucral bracts with stout spine 15-20 mm.{\i  C. Greece}.
\par

\par
266}
\par