{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 284 Involucre 9 mm in diameter; florets pink; achenes 
\par
    glabrous .................................................................................... {\b 96. tauscheri}
\par
270 Lower fimbriae neither confluent into a hyaline
\par
    margin nor forming auricles
\par
285 Bracts with slender or indistinct veins on dorsal surface
\par
286 Appendages unarmed, ± acuminate, or with a mucro not
\par
    more than 0·5 mm
\par
287 Pappus about as long as achene
\par
288 Involucre 10-14 mm in diameter; capitula solitary .... {\b 82. crithmifolia}
\par
288 Involucre 4-10 mm in diameter; capitula few ............. {\b 112. aristata}
\par
287 Pappus not more than ½ as long as achene
\par
289 Appendages mucronate
\par
290 Involucre 5 mm in diameter; pappus ½ as long as achene  {\b 113. paniculata}
\par
290 Involucre (5-)6-13 mm in diameter; pappus not more 
\par
    than 1/3 as long as achene
\par
291 Leaves tomentose, the lower usually 1-pinnatisect ..... {\b 115. leucophaea}
\par
291 Leaves glabrous, the lower 2-pinnatisect .............. {\b 123. glaberrima}
\par
289 Appendages acuminate
\par
292 Florets pink; involucre 9-10 mm in diameter ........... {\b 115. leucophaea}
\par
292 Florets purple; involucre 3-8 mm in diameter
\par
293 Involucre 3-5(-8) mm in diameter; stems much-branched . {\b 113. paniculata}
\par
293 Involucre 5-8 mm in diameter; stems sparingly branched . {\b 114. micrantha}
\par
286 Appendages with apical spine at least 0·5 mm
\par
294 Involucre 3-5 mm in diameter
\par
295 Pappus absent; appendages with apical spine 1-4 mm ....... {\b 143. aemulans}
\par
295 Pappus present; appendages with apical spine not more
\par
    than 1·5 mm
\par
296 Pappus c. ½ as long as achene ........................................... {\b 113. paniculata}
\par
296 Pappus not more than 1/3 as long as achene
\par
297 Apical spine 1-1·5 mm ........................................................... {\b 112. aristata}
\par
297 Apical spine 0·7-0·8 mm .................................................... {\b 113. paniculata}
\par
294 Involucre 5-9 mm in diameter
\par
298 Pappus as long as achene ................................................. {\b 107. schousboei}
\par
298 Pappus shorter than achene
\par
299 Appendages with apical spine recurved
\par
300 Apical spine 2-3 mm; fimbriae 2 mm ............................... {\b 108. spinabadia}
\par
300 Apical spine 0·5-1·5 mm; fimbriae not more than 1·2 mm
\par
301 Perennial; leaves grey-tomentose .......................................... {\b 109. limbata}
\par
301 Biennial; leaves green ............................................................ {\b 112. aristata}
\par
299 Appendages with apical spine erect or patent, not recurved
\par
302 Apical spine 0·5 mm; involucre 8-13 mm in diameter
\par
303 Appendages with 3-4 fimbriae on each side;
\par
    pappus c. 1/3 as long as achene ........................................... {\b 110. urgellensis}
\par
303 Appendages with 5-7 fimbriae on each side;
\par
    pappus 1/6-1/3 as long as achene, or absent ....................... {\b 115. leucophaea}
\par
302 Apical spine 0·8-1·5 mm; involucre 5-8(-9) mm in diameter
\par
304 Apical spine 0·8-1 mm ........................................................... {\b 112. aristata}
\par
304 Apical spine 1·5 mm
\par
305 Capitula in clusters of 2-3(-6) ........................................... {\b 113. paniculata}
\par
305 Capitula solitary
\par
306 Appendages with 6-8 fimbriae on each side .................... {\b 108. spinabadia}
\par
306 Appendages with 4-6 fimbriae on each side ................ {\b 111. rothmalerana}
\par
285 Bracts with prominent raised veins on dorsal surface
\par
307 Pappus about as long as achene
\par
308 Involucre 18-20 mm ......................................................... {\b 117. corymbosa}
\par
308 Involucre (8-)12-15 mm
\par
309 Lower leaves 1-pinnatisect
\par
310 Leaf-segments 3-5 mm wide ..................................................... {\b 84. affinis}
\par
310 Leaf-segments 1-3 mm wide ................................................ {\b 86. parlatoris}
\par
309 Lower leaves 2-pinnatisect
\par
311 Appendages brown, with 4-5(-6) fimbriae on each side
\par
    ........................................................................................ {\b 127. peucedanifolia}
\par
311 Appendages brown or black, with 6-8 fimbriae on each side
\par
312 Biennial; involucre 8-10 mm in diameter; appendages
\par
    blackish, erect ........................................................................ {\b 124. triniifolia}
\par
312 Perennial; involucre 12-15 mm in diameter; appendages
\par
    reddish-brown, somewhat recurved ....................................... {\b 116. filiformis}
\par
307 Pappus shorter than achene, sometimes absent
\par
313 Pappus absent, or not more than 0·5(-1) mm
\par
314 Leaves glabrous or sparsely tomentose ............................. {\b 126. calvescens}
\par
314 Leaves arachnoid-hairy
\par
315 Pappus 1/5-1/2 as long as achene; appendages brown or
\par
    blackish-brown ....................................................................... {\b 120. maculosa}
\par
315 Pappus absent; appendages black ................................. {\b 125. reichenbachii}
\par
313 Pappus 1-3 mm
\par
316 Leaves glabrous or sparsely tomentose
\par
317 Appendages blackish
\par
318 Involucre 5-6 mm in diameter ............................................... {\b 122. rhenana}
\par
318 Involucre 7-8 mm in diameter
\par
319 Appendages large, semiorbicular, rounded at apex;
\par
    leaf-segments linear, acute ....................................................... {\b 86. parlatoris}
\par
319 Appendages small, shortly triangular, acuminate at 
\par
    apex; leaf-segments oblong, obtuse ........................................ {\b 78. cuneifolia}
\par
317 Appendages brown
\par
320 Lower leaves with narrowly linear segments; appen-
\par
    dages mucronate, with fimbriae 0·5 mm ............................. {\b 123. glaberrima}
\par
320 Lower leaves with linear to oblong segments; appendages
\par
    acute, with fimbriae 1-3 mm
\par
321 Appendages with fimbriae 1-2 mm, 4-6 on each side ........ {\b 95. grisebachii}
\par
321 Appendages with fimbriae 2·5-3 mm, 6-12 on each side ... {\b 120. maculosa}
\par
316 Leaves tomentose or arachnoid, at least when young
\par
322 Apical spine of appendages absent ................................... {\b 108. spinabadia}
\par
322 Apical spine of appendages present, sometimes reduced
\par
    to a mucro
\par
323 Apical spine of appendages more than 1 mm
\par
324 Pappus c. 1/3 as long as achene ...................................... {\b 128. biebersteinii}
\par
324 Pappus c. ½ as long as achene
\par
325 Leaves 2-pinnatisect .......................................................... {\b 108. spinabadia}
\par
325 Leaves entire ........................................................................... {\b 119. exarata}
\par
323 Apical spine or mucro of appendages not more than 1 mm
\par
326 Appendages with a black spot at base ................................. {\b 120. maculosa}
\par
326 Appendages without a black spot
\par
327 Involucre ovoid-conical, narrowed at base ........................ {\b 114. micrantha}
\par

\par
262}
\par