{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 florets pale yellow or purple, the outer longer than the inner. 2n = 20. •{\i  S.E. Alps}. It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Probably a hybrid between {\b 22} and {\b 54}({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. C. rupestris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1298 (1763). Stems 5-50(-70) cm, simple or sparingly branched above. Leaves sublanate, glabrescent, scabrid, (1-)2-pinnatisect, rarely undivided or lyrate; segments up to 2 mm wide, acute, numerous. Involucre 12-15 mm in diameter; bracts ovate; appendages brown, often with an apical spine. Florets pale yellow to orange, the outer slightly longer than the inner. Achenes c. 4 mm; pappus 1/3-1/2 as long as achene. 2n = 20. {\i Dry grassland and rocky places. • Italy; W. & C. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem leafy above; leaf-segments broadly linear to 
\par
  lanceolate; plant grey-tomentose ................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b ceratophylla} 
\par
1 Stems with few or no leaves above; leaf-segments narrowly
\par
  linear; plant subglabrous
\par
2 Appendages with 5-8 fimbriae on each side, the lower 
\par
  not confluent; basal leaves 2-pinnatisect .......................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b rupestris}
\par
2 Appendages with fewer than 5 fimbriae on each side,
\par
  the lower joined by a white or hyaline membrane
\par
3 Basal leaves ± regularly pinnatisect ................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b finazzeri}
\par
3 Basal leaves undivided or lyrate ........................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b athoa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rupestris}: Stems erect, simple. Capitula long-pedunculate. Appendages long-fimbriate, the apical fimbria stouter or replaced by a spine 5-20 mm.{\i  Italy, W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ceratophylla} (Ten.) Gugler, {\i Centaur. Ung. Nationalmus.} 194 (1907): Stems erect, sparingly branched. Capitula shortly pedunculate or sessile. Appendages long-fimbriate, spinulose at apex.{\i  N. & C. Appennini}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b finazzeri} (Adamovic) Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 754 (1931) ({\i C. finazzeri} Adamovic): Stems more or less simple, erect or ascending. Capitula shortly pedunculate. Involucral bracts hairy; appendages with few fimbriae. Achenes hairy. {\i S. Jugoslavia, W. Bulgaria, N. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b athoa} (DC.) Gugler, {\i Centaur. Ung. Nationalmus.} 194 (1907) ({\i C. athoa }DC.): Stems procumbent or erect, branched. Capitula long-pedunculate. Involucral bracts glabrous; appendages with few or no fimbriae. Achenes glabrous.{\i  N. Greece} ({\i Athos}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. C. kosaninii} Hayek, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.} {\b 64}: 359 (1914). Stems up to 70 cm, sparingly branched above. Leaves glabrous, usually 2-pinnatifid; segments not more than 1 mm wide, narrowly linear. Involucre c. 15 mm in diameter; appendages narrow, shortly fimbriate-denticulate, yellowish. Florets violet or dark red. Achenes 3·5 mm, ½ as long as pappus.{\i  Mountain pastures and rocks; calcicole. • Albania.} Al.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. ORIENTALES (Hayek) Tzvelev. Involucre ovoid to globose;
\par
bracts coriaceous, ovate to oblong; appendages large, usually covering the bracts, shortly decurrent, mucronulate to shortly spinose at apex, yellow, brown or black, the margin fimbriate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. C. clementei} Boiss. ex DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  7}: 303 (1838). Stems 30-50 cm, simple or sparingly branched at apex, lanate. Leaves white-tomentose, pinnatisect; lower with broadly ovate, irregularly lobed and denticulate segments, petiolate; upper sessile, often simple, lobed. Involucre c. 25 mm in diameter, globose; bracts broadly ovate, glabrous to sparsely lanate; appendages ovate-triangular, the fimbriae 3-5 mm. Florets yellow, the outer as long as the inner. Achenes c. 5 mm; pappus c. 5 mm.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • Mountains of S.W. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. C. orientalis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 913 (1753). Stems 80-120 cm, sparingly branched. Leaves glabrescent, scabrid; basal undivided; lower cauline pinnatisect, with narrowly oblong to linear, entire to lobed segments. Involucre 20-25 mm in diameter, globose; bracts broadly ovate, glabrous; appendages ovate, with a brown central spot, mucronate at apex; marginal florets patent; fimbriae 1-3 mm. Florets cream, the outer longer than the inner, radiate. Achenes 4-5 mm, appressed-hairy, black; pappus 4-5 mm. 2n = 20. {\i Dry pastures. S.E. Europe.} Bu Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. C. neiceffii} Degen & H. Wagner,{\i  Period. Spis. Balg. Kniz. Druz.}{\b  49}: 4 (1908). Stems up to 100 cm, branched above. Leaves glabrescent, scabrid; basal pinnate with lanceolate, entire to lobed segments; cauline pinnatisect with long terminal segment; upper leaves entire. Involucre 10-15(-20) mm in diameter, globose to ovoid-globose; bracts covered by the appendages; appendages ovate to orbicular, pale brown; fimbriae c. 4 mm. Florets yellow, the outer longer than the inner. Achenes 3-4 mm; pappus c. 5 mm. •{\i  Romania, Bulgaria.} Bu Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Perhaps a hybrid between {\b 25} and {\b 55}({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. C. tauromenitana} Guss., {\i Fl. Sic. Syn.}{\b  2}: 512 (1844). Stems 50-100 cm, branched above. Leaves arachnoid-floccose, glabrescent; lower lyrate-pinnatisect, with oblong to lanceolate, entire to dentate segments; upper pinnatisect, with linear-lanceolate segments. Involucre 30-40 mm in diameter, globose; bracts orbicular; appendages suborbicular, reddish-brown. mucronate; fimbriae c. 3 mm. Florets pale yellow. Achenes 5-6 mm, white-villous; pappus 10-12 mm, brownish.{\i  Maritime rocks. • Sicilia.} Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. C. chrysolepis} Vis.,{\i  Mem. Ist. Veneto}{\b  9}: 172 (1860). Stems 30-60 cm, simple, or with few short branches. Leaves glabrous; basal lanceolate, entire; lower cauline pinnatisect with narrowly oblong to lanceolate, entire segments. Involucre 25-40 mm in diameter, globose; bracts ovate, fully covered by the appendages; appendages c. 13 mm, triangular-lanceolate, straw-yellow, gradually attenuate into an apical spine; fimbriae c. 3 mm. Florets pale yellow, the outer as long as the inner. Achenes puberulent; pappus about as long as achene, brownish.{\i  Mountain rocks. • C. & S. Jugoslavia, S.W. Bulgaria.} Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. C. prolongi} Boiss. ex DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  7}: 303 (1838). Stems 20-50 cm, simple or sparingly branched. Leaves subglabrous; basal lanceolate, entire; lower cauline lyrate-pinnatifid, acute, long-petiolate, with few linear-lanceolate, mucronulate, entire segments. Involucre 15-18 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages broadly triangular, semilunate at base, not completely covering the broadly ovate bracts, with a brown apical spine up to 4 mm; fimbriae c. 2 mm. Florets deep golden or orange. Achenes c. 3 mm, sericeous, rarely glabrous; pappus 2-5 mm, white.{\i  Rocky ground and heaths. • S.W. Spain, S.Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 30. C. polymorpha} Lag., {\i Gen. Sp. Nov.} 32 (1816). Stems 20-40 cm, branched. Leaves lanate to pubescent; lower lyrate, upper pinnatifid, with oblong-lanceolate to lanceolate, entire segments. Involucre 15-25 mm in diameter; bracts ovate, floccose-arachnoid; appendages triangular, dark brown, with a short apical spine. Florets purple. Achenes sericeous, slightly longer than pappus. 2n = 40.{\i  Vineyards. • N.E. Spain} ({\i prov. Zaragoza}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. C. atropurpurea} Waldst. & Kit., {\i Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  2}: 121 (1802-1803). Stems (30-)100-150(-200) cm, sparingly branched
\par

\par
265}
\par