{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. leucomelaena} Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 758 (1931), described from Albania, is like {\b 74} but has arachnoid-hairy leaves, triangular-ovate, non-spiny appendages, and pappus 1/3-1/2 as long as the achene. Its status requires confirmation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 75. C. argentea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 912 (1753). Whitish-tomentose perennial. Stems 10-45 cm, erect or ascending, with few, short branches. Lower leaves lyrate, with oblong segments. Capitula solitary. Involucre 8-10 × 5-7 mm, ovoid; appendages unarmed, pale brown. Florets yellow. Pappus about as long as achene. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S. Aegean region} ({\i Kriti, Kithira}).Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 76. C. pannosa} DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 582 (1838). Perennial. Stems up to 60 cm, erect, corymbosely branched above. Leaves densely appressed-white-tomentose; lower pinnatisect to sublyrate; cauline mostly pinnatisect. Capitula 3-5 on each branch. Involucre 12 × 6 mm, ovoid; bracts with prominent veins; appendages not covering the bracts, with 3-4(-5) fimbriae on each side, pale brown, the apical spine c. 2 mm, stout. Florets pink to white, rarely becoming yellow. Pappus about as long as achene.{\i  Mountain rocks. • N. Greece }({\i Athos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 77. C. nicopolitana} Bornm., {\i Feddes Repert.} {\b 40}: 374 (1936). Caespitose perennial. Stems 20-40 cm. Leaves appressed yellow-tomentose; lower lyrate; upper pinnatisect. Capitula in clusters of 2-4. Involucre c. 8 × 4 mm, ovoid or ovoid-conical; appendages yellow, with pale brown fimbriae, the apex mucronulate. Florets yellow or pink. Achene unknown.{\i  Mountain rocks. • N.W. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 78. C. cuneifolia} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.} {\b 2}: 198 (1813). Biennial. Stems 30-60 cm, erect. Leaves appressed-grey-tomentose, sometimes glabrescent. Involucre 10-14 × 6-8 mm, usually ovoid-oblong; bracts oblong, with prominent veins; appendages shortly triangular, not covering the bracts, brown or blackish, with (4-)5-8(-9) fimbriae on each side. Florets pink, rarely white, the outer radiate. Pappus 1/4-2/3 as long as achene.{\i  Maritime sands and other dry, open habitats. S. & E. parts of Balkan peninsula, E. Romania.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Tu [Hu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems simple or branched at base; leaves lyrate, with 
\par
  broadly ovate terminal segment ...................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b sublanata}
\par
1 Stems branched at middle; leaves lyrate-pinnatifid or
\par
  bipinnatisect, with oblong terminal segment
\par
2 Appendages spinose at apex .............................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b pallida}
\par
2 Appendages not spinose at apex ................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b cuneifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cuneifolia} ({\i C. oviceps }Bornm.): Stems branched at the middle. Leaves white-tomentose, sometimes glabrescent; lower lyrate-pinnatifid. Involucre 12-14 × 7-8 mm; appendages brown, not spinose at apex.{\i  Stony hillsides. • Bulgaria, N. Greece, Turkey-in-Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pallida} (Friv.) Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 763 (1931): Stems branched at the middle. Leaves scabrid, appressed-white-tomentose, sometimes glabrescent; lower lyrate. Involucre 10-12 × 6-7 mm; appendages pale brown, with an apical spine c. 2·5 mm. •{\i  From N. & E. Greece to E. Romania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b sublanata} (DC.) Hayek,{\i  loc. cit. }(1931): Stems simple or branched at the base. Leaves arachnoid-lanate, sometimes glabrescent; lower lyrate. Involucre 12-14 × 7-8 mm; appendages black, the apex shortly spinose. {\i Throughout the range of the species except Romania, but in some regions only casual}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 79. C. ipsaria} Stoj. & Kitanov,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Bulg.}{\b  9}: 102(1943). Like {\b 78}({\b c}) but stems 8-20 cm; involucre c. 10 mm; appendages yellowish- or purplish-brown, with hyaline auricles at base; pappus as long as achene.{\i  Rock-crevices. • N. Aegean region} ({\i Thasos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Further information is required about the specific status of this plant, and it may be better placed as a further subspecies of {\b 78}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 80. C. rutifolia} Sibth. & Sm., {\i Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  2}: 205 (1813). Perennial. Stems 20-80 cm, branched above. Leaves white-tomentose; lower 1- or 2-pinnatisect, the lowermost sometimes lyrate. Capitula solitary. Involucre 10-13 × 6-7 mm; bracts ovate-oblong, with prominent veins; appendages shortly triangular, pale brown, the fimbriae up to 0·5 mm. Florets pink, the outer radiate. Pappus not more than ¼ as long as achene, or absent. •{\i  S.E. Europe.} Bu Gr Rm ?Rs (W) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems not more than 40 cm; appendages with 2-3 fimbriae
\par
  on each side, the apical not pungent .................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b rutifolia}
\par
1 Stems up to 80 cm; appendages with 3-7 fimbriae on each
\par
  side, the apical pungent
\par
2 Involucre 12-13 mm; fimbriae 3-5 on each side .......... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b jurineifolia}
\par
2 Involucre 10 mm; fimbriae 5-7 on each side ........... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b pseudobovina}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rutifolia}: Stems 20-40 cm, corymbosely branched. Lower leaves 1-pinnatisect; cauline with sessile, spathulate segments. Involucre c. 12 × 6 mm, ovoid-cylindrical; bracts subtomentose; appendages pale brown, with 3-5 fimbriae on each side, the apex not pungent. Pappus ¼ as long as achene.{\i  Stony slopes. E. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b jurineifolia} (Boiss.) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 425 (1879) ({\i C. jurineifolia} Boiss.): Stems 30-80 cm, paniculately branched. Lower leaves 2-pinnatisect; cauline with shortly petiolate, spathulate segments. Involucre 12-13 × 6-7 mm, oblong-ovoid; bracts glabrous; appendages rather dark brown, with 3-6 fimbriae on each side, the apex pungent. Pappus very short or absent. {\i Scrub slopes. Bulgaria and Romania.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b pseudobovina} (Hayek) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 196 (1976) ({\i C. pseudobovina} Hayek): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but cauline leaves with linear-lanceolate segments; involucre c. 10 × 6 mm, narrowly ovoid; bracts sometimes sparsely tomentose; appendages pale brown, with 5-7 fimbriae on each side; pappus absent.{\i  Grassy slopes. N. Bulgaria}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 81. C. varnensis} Velen., {\i Fl. Bulg. }313 (1891). Biennial. Stems 30-80 cm, paniculately branched from middle. Leaves with white arachnoid indumentum; lower 2-pinnatifid with lanceolate, dentate or divided segments. Capitula in clusters of 2-3. Involucre 8-10 × 4-5 mm, ovoid-oblong; bracts with prominent veins; appendages with 4-7 fimbriae on each side and a long, patent apical spine. Florets pink. Pappus about 1/2 as long as achene.{\i  Calcareous hillsides. • C. & E. Bulgaria, S.E. Romania.} Bu Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b C. inermis} Velen.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  52}: 154 (1902), from Bulgaria, is a variant with mucronate, not spiny, appendages.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 82. C. crithmifolia} Vis.,{\i  Fl. Dalm.}{\b  2}: 40 (1847). Perennial. Stems 30-40 cm, shortly paniculately branched above. Leaves glabrous, green; lower 2-pinnatisect. Capitula solitary. Involucre 14-17 × 10-14 mm, ovoid-globose; bracts with 5 indistinct veins; appendages with 3-4 fimbriae on each side, without an apical spine. Florets pink. Pappus about as long as achene.{\i  Rocky ground. • W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 83. C. friderici} Vis., {\i loc. cit.} (1847). Perennial. Stems 30-40 cm, paniculately branched. Leaves white-tomentose- lower 2-pinnatisect. Capitula solitary. Involucre 12-17 × 9-14 mm;
\par

\par
271}
\par