{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 18-20 × 8-10(-15) mm, ovoid; appendages with a blackish centre and a recurved apex c. 1·5 mm, the fimbriae 2-2·2 mm, c. 6 on each side. Florets purple. Pappus 3-3·5 mm, as long as achene.{\i  Hillsides. • S. France} ({\i near Narbonne}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 118. C. subtilis} Bertol.,{\i  Fl. Ital.}{\b  9}: 451 (1853). Perennial. Stems 10-30 cm, sparingly branched. Leaves white-tomentose; lower 1-pinnatisect. Capitula solitary. Involucre 7-11 mm in diameter; appendages with an appressed apical spine 0·5-1 mm, the fimbriae 0·5 mm. Florets purple. Pappus 1-2 mm, 1/3-1/2 as long as achene.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • S.E. Italy }({\i Mte. Gargano}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 119. C. exarata} Boiss. ex Cosson, {\i Not. Pl. Crit. }116 (1851). Perennial. Stems 30-40 cm, erect, simple or sparingly branched. Lower leaves undivided, oblong-lanceolate, arachnoid; upper linear-lanceolate. Capitula solitary. Involucre 14-18 × 8-13 mm, ovoid; bracts appressed; appendages narrowly triangular, reddish-brown, erect, long-fimbriate, the apex c. 2 mm, not spinose. Florets purple. Pappus 1·5-2 mm, c. ½ as long as achene. •{\i  Portugal, S.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 120. C. maculosa} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 669 (1785). Biennial. Stems 20-60 cm, erect, paniculately branched. Leaves greenish, with arachnoid indumentum or glabrous; lower 2-pinnatisect, with lanceolate segments. Capitula solitary. Involucre 9-15 × 8-15 mm; bracts with prominent veins on dorsal surface; appendages pale brown, sometimes with a black spot at the base; fimbriae 2-3 mm, 6-12 on each side. Florets pink. Pappus 0·5-2 mm, 1/5-1/2 as long as achene. 2n = 18. •{\i  From C. France eastwards to S. Germany and N. Italy.} Au Ga Ge He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Appendages with apical mucro 0·7-1 mm, the fimbriae
\par
  2-3 mm ................................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b albida}
\par
1 Appendages acute, or with apical mucro not more than
\par
  0·5 mm the fimbriae 1·5-2·5 mm
\par
2 Involucre 8-13 mm in diameter, rounded at base .......... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b maculosa}
\par
2 Involucre 5-8 mm in diameter, narrowed at base
\par
3 Appendages dark brown with a blackish spot ............. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b chaubardii} 
\par
3 Appendages yellow-brown, not spotted ....................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b subalbida}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b maculosa} ({\i C. stoebe} subsp. {\i maculosa }(Lam.) Hayek): Leaves with arachnoid indumentum. Involucre 8-13 mm in diameter, ovoid, rounded at base. Appendages with apical mucro up to 0·5 mm, the fimbriae 1·5-2 mm. Achenes 3-3·5 mm; pappus c. 1 mm. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b chaubardii} (Reichenb. fil.) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 200 (1976) ({\i C. chaubardii} Reichenb. fil.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but involucre 6-8 mm in diameter, ovoid-conical or -cylindrical, narrowed at base; appendages with fimbriae 2-2·5 mm.{\i  N.W. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b albida} (Lecoq & Lamotte) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. maculosa} var. {\i albida }Lecoq & Lamotte): Leaves green, glabrous or sparsely tomentose. Involucre 8-10 mm in diameter, rounded at base; appendages with apical mucro 0·7-1 mm, the fimbriae 2·5-3 mm. Achenes 3-4 mm; pappus 1-2 mm. {\i S.C. France} ({\i Dept. Ardèche}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b subalbida} (Jordan) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. subalbida} Jordan): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but involucre 5-7 mm in diameter, narrowed at base; appendages with apical mucro 0·5 mm; achenes c. 2·5 mm; pappus 0·5 mm or absent.{\i  S.C. France }({\i Dept. Ardèche}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C. muretii} Jordan, {\i Pug. Pl. Nov. }108 (1852) ({\i C. maculosa} subsp.{\i  muretii} (Jordan) Janchen), described from Switzerland (Grisons), has white-tomentose leaves, involucre c. 13 mm in diameter and black appendages; it is intermediate between {\b 120} and {\b 122} and its status is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 121. C. vallesiaca} (DC.) Jordan,{\i  Pug. Pl. Nov.} 111 (1852). Biennial. Stems 25-70 cm, much-branched from the middle. Leaves greyish-green; lower 2-pinnatisect, with oblong to linear segments. Involucre 8-10 mm in diameter; appendages not covering the bracts, pale brown, sometimes with a small black centre, with an apical mucro up to 0·5 mm, the fimbriae 1-2 mm, 3-5 on each side, the lower forming a large auricle. Florets pink. Pappus c. 1 mm, c. 1/3 as long as achene. •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 122. C. rhenana} Boreau,{\i  Fl. Centre Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 2}: 355 (1857) ({\i C. stoebe} L. pro parte). Usually biennial. Stems 30-80(-100) cm, corymbosely branched at about the middle. Leaves usually green, glabrescent, sometimes lanate; lower (1-)2-pinnatisect, with lanceolate segments; cauline pinnatisect. Capitula solitary. Involucre 12-15 × 5-13 mm; bracts with prominent veins on dorsal surface; appendages pale brown, with blackish-brown centre and with mucro 0·3-0·5 mm. Florets pink.{\i  Grassland and stony places. C. & S.E. Europe, extending to N. Italy and C. Russia.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) [Da Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Appendages with c. 12 fimbriae on each side .................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b tartarea} 
\par
1 Appendages with 5-9(-10) fimbriae on each side
\par
2 Involucre 5-6 mm in diameter; bracts with 3(-5) veins . ({\b d}) subsp. {\b savranica}
\par
2 Involucre 7-12 mm in diameter; bracts with 5-7 veins
\par
3 Inflorescence distinctly corymbose; appendages with 
\par
  blackish centre ................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b rhenana}
\par
3 Inflorescence not or scarcely corymbose; appendages 
\par
  with brown or blackish centre .............................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b pseudomaculosa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rhenana}: Inflorescence distinctly corymbose. Involucre c. 13 × 8(-10) mm; bracts with 5(-7) veins; appendages with blackish centre, with mucro c. 0·5 mm, the fimbriae 6-8 on each side. Pappus 1·5-1·8 mm, c. ½ as long as achene. 2n = 18+0-2B. {\i Throughout the range of the species except S.E. Russia and E. & C. Ukraine}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tartarea} (Velen.) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 200 (1976) ({\i C. tartarea} Velen.): Perennial. Involucre 14 × 12 mm appendages with mucro c. 0·3 mm, the fimbriae c. 12 on each side. Pappus c. 1 mm, c. 1/3 as long as achene. •{\i  Mountains of Bulgaria.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b pseudomaculosa} (Dobrocz.) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. pseudomaculosa} Dobrocz.): Lower leaves 2-pinnatisect. Inflorescence broadly paniculate, not or scarcely corymbose. Involucre 12-14 × 10-13 mm; bracts with 5(-7) veins; appendages with brown centre, the fimbriae 6-9(-10) on each side. Outer florets c. 15 mm. Achenes brown; pappus 1-1·5 mm, 1/3-1/2 as long as achene.{\i  S. part of U.S.S.R}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b savranica} (Klokov) Dostál,{\i  loc. cit. }(1976) ({\i C. savranica} Klokov): Lower leaves whitish-lanate. Involucre 12-15 × 5-6 mm; bracts with 3(-5) veins; appendages with 6-8 fimbriae on each side, the lower confluent with the hyaline margin. Achenes c. 3 mm; pappus 2-2·5 mm. •{\i  W. Ukraine} ({\i E. of Balta}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   C. coziensis} E. I. Nyárády,{\i  Bul. Sti. Acad. Rep. Pop. Române} ({\i Sect. Biol}.){\b  7}: 230 (1955), described from Romania, has leaves pinnatisect into elliptical segments 20 × 10 mm, involucre 12-13 × 11-12 mm, glabrous, pappus 3·5-4 mm and achenes c. 3 mm. It requires further investigation and is probably only a variety of {\b 122}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 123. C. glaberrima} Tausch, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 10}: 249 (1827). Biennial or perennial. Stems c. 40 cm, erect, branched below.
\par

\par
278}
\par