{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 branched. Leaves green; lower 2-pinnatisect, the segments c. 1 mm wide, linear. Capitula solitary. Involucre 10-12 × 5-8 mm; appendages usually auriculate, usually with a patent apical spine 1-3(-6) mm. Florets pink. Pappus absent or very short. •{\i  N.E. Italy, W. Jugoslavia.} It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Appendages denticulate-fimbriate, the fimbriae 0·2-0·5 mm
\par
  ........................................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b tommasinii}
\par
1 Appendages pectinate-fimbriate, the fimbriae 1-3 mm
\par
2 Appendages with apical spine 2-3 mm .................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b spinosociliata}
\par
2 Appendages with apical spine 1 mm .................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b cristata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cristata} (Bartl.) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 198 (1976) ({\i C. cristata} Bartl.): Appendages almost covering the bracts, pectinate-fimbriate with apical spine 1 mm; fimbriae 1·8 mm. Pappus absent.{\i  Stony places. N.W. Jugoslavia.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b spinosociliata}: Appendages not covering the bracts, pectinate-fimbriate with apical spine 2-3 mm; fimbriae 1-2 mm. Pappus absent or very short.{\i  Maritime rocks. W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b tommasinii} (A. Kerner) Dostál,{\i  loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. tommasinii} A. Kerner): Appendages not covering the bracts, denticulate-fimbriate, without an apical spine; fimbriae 0·2-0·5 mm. Pappus absent.{\i  Maritime rocks. N.E. Italy, Istra.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C. cristata} subsp. {\b curictana} Lovric,{\i  Acta Bot. Croat.}{\b  26-27}: 267 (1968), described from W. Jugoslavia (island of Krk), is like subsp. ({\b b}) but perennial, with stems 5-25 cm, branched at the base, and appendages with fimbriae 1·5-3 mm and an apical spine c. 6 mm; its status is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 93. C. incompta} Vis.,{\i  Fl. Dalm.}{\b  2}: 38 (1847). Perennial. Stems up to 50 cm, erect, simple or sparingly branched. Leaves green; lower lyrate-pinnatifid. Capitula solitary. Involucre 12-14 × 6-11 mm; appendages with 2-3 fimbriae on each side, auriculate, without an apical spine. Florets purple. {\i Rocky places. • S. & W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b incompta}: Stems 30-50 cm, with long branches. Involucre 14 × 10(-11) mm; appendages blackish. Pappus c. 1/3 as long as achene.{\i  Mainly in the north and west parts of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b derventana} (Vis. & Pancic) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 198 (1976) ({\i C. derventana} Vis. & Pancic): Stems 10-30 cm, with short branches. Involucre 12 × 6-7 mm; appendages brown. Pappus about as long as achene.{\i  Mainly in the south and east parts of the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 94. C. chalcidicaea} Hayek,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  64}: 359 (1914). Perennial. Stems up to 30 cm, ascending, simple or branched. Leaves white-tomentose; lower pinnatisect. Capitula solitary. Involucre 12 × 6-7(-9) mm, ovoid; appendages with 4-6 fimbriae on each side, auriculate, without an apical spine. Florets pink. Pappus 1/3-1/2 as long as achene.{\i  Mountain rocks. • N.E. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 95. C. grisebachii} (Nyman) Form., {\i Verh. Naturf. Ver. Brünn}{\b  34}: 300 (1896). Perennial, rarely biennial. Stems up to 50 cm, erect, paniculately branched. Leaves scabrid and with arachnoid indumentum or appressed-pubescent, grey-green; lower pinnatisect with narrowly oblong to linear segments. Capitula usually in clusters. Involucre 10-11(-14) × 5-7 mm; appendages dark brown, acute, with 4-6 fimbriae 1·5 mm on each side, auriculate. Florets purple. Achenes puberulent; pappus ¼-½ as long as achene.{\i  Stony slopes. • S. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lower leaves with more than 5 pairs of segments;
\par
  involucre 6-7 mm in diameter ...................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b grisebachii}
\par
1 Lower leaves with 3-5 pairs of segments; involucre 
\par
  5-6 mm in diameter
\par
2 Stems 30-50 cm, branched above; involucral appendages
\par
  with narrow auricles .......................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b confusa}
\par
2 Stems not more than 20 cm, branched at base; involucral
\par
   appendages with wide aurides ....................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b paucijuga}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b grisebachii}: Stems 30-50 cm, branched at about the middle. Lower leaves with more than 5 pairs of segments. Involucre 6-7 mm in diameter; appendages with wide auricles. {\i Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b confusa} (Halácsy) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 198 (1976) ({\i C. confusa} Halácsy): Stems 30-50 cm, branched above. Lower leaves with 3-5 pairs of segments. Involucre 5-6 mm in diameter; appendages with narrow auricles.{\i  N.W. & C. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b paucijuga} (Halácsy) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. paucijuga} Halácsy): Stems not more than 20 cm, branched at base. Lower leaves with 2-3 pairs of segments. Involucre 5-6 mm in diameter; appendages with wide auricles. {\i C. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. vermia} Rech. fil.,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  69}: 526 (1939), from N. Greece (Vermion Oros), is like {\b 95}({\b a}) but is puberulent throughout, has solitary capitula, involucre up to 8 mm in diameter and appendages with c. 1 fimbriae up to 1·8 mm long on each side; it is perhaps another subspecies of {\b 95}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 96. C. tauscheri} A. Kerner, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  22}: 119 (1812). Like {\b 95}({\b a}) but stems with long branches; leaves arachnoid-lanate, the lower with linear-lanceolate segments; involucre 12 × 9 mm; appendages blackish, the fimbriae 3-4 on each side; florets pink; achenes glabrous; pappus 1/3-1/2 as long as achene.{\i  Sandy places. • Hungary, N.E. Jugoslavia.} Hu Ju ?Rm.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28  Probably originated as a result of hybridization between {\b 89} and {\b 128}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 97. C. biokovensis} Teyber,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  63}: 27 (1913). Perennial. Stems 20-40 cm. Leaves glabrescent, glandular-punctate, green, smooth; lower pinnatisect. Capitula in panicles. Involucre 12-14 × 7-12 mm; appendages dark brown, acute to acuminate, auriculate, the fimbriae 2-3 mm, 4-6 on each side. Florets pink. Pappus c. ½ as long as achene. {\i Rocky places in mountains. • N.W.Jugoslavia} ({\i Biokovo}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 98. C. gracilenta} Velen.,{\i  Fl. Bulg.} 321 (1891) ({\i C. kanitziana} Janka). Biennial. Stems up to 40 cm, with many long branches. Leaves scabrid, grey-green; lower pinnatisect with linear segments 0·5 mm wide. Capitula solitary. Involucre 9-11 × 4-6 mm; appendages brown, auriculate, with 4-6 fimbriae on each side and an apical spine c. 2 mm. Florets pink. Pappus c. ½ as long as achene.{\i  Stony slopes. E. Bulgaria, E. Romania.} Bu Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 99. C. kalambakensis} Freyn & Sint.,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  5}: 784 (1897). Perennial. Stems 25-50 cm, erect, branched above. Leaves somewhat scabrid, green, glabrous; lower lyrate, with segments c. 2 mm wide. Capitula solitary. Involucre 14 × 8-10 mm; appendages pale brown, auriculate, with 4-6 fimbriae on each side and an apical spine c. 3 mm. Florets pink. Pappus as long as or longer than achene.{\i  Rocky places. • C. Greece }({\i near Kalabaka}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 100. C. transiens} Halácsy,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  6}: 587 (1898). Perennial. Stems 15-30(-50) cm, erect, paniculately branched at about the middle. Leaves scabrid, pubescent; lower lyrate with segments 2-3 mm wide. Capitula solitary. Involucre 12 × 6-8 mm; appendages pale brown, auriculate, With an apical spine 3-4 mm. Florets purple. Pappus c. ¼ as long as achene. {\i Mountain rocks. • E. Greece} ({\i Olimbos}). Gr.
\par

\par
274}
\par