{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 101. C. subsericans} Halácsy,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  11}: 164 (1912). Perennial. Stems 10-35 cm, ascending, simple or with one short branch. Leaves appressed-white-tomentose; lower pinnatisect with segments 1-2 mm wide. Capitula solitary. Involucre 12-14 × 7 mm; appendages blackish, auriculate, with 2-3 fimbriae on each side and an apical spine 2-3 mm. Florets pink. Pappus c. 1/3 as long as achene.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S.E. Greece} ({\i Pateras Oros, near Megara}). Gr.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 102. C. attica} Nyman,{\i  Syll.} 33 (1854-1855) ({\i C. graeca} sensu Boiss. & Spruner, non Griseb.,{\i  C. boissieri} Walpers, non DC.). Perennial. Stems 5-30 cm, erect or ascending, usually branched below the middle. Leaves usually more or less whitish-tomentose, rarely glabrescent; lower 1(-2)-pinnatisect, the segments 1 mm wide or more; upper undivided. Capitula solitary. Involucre 10-16 × 5-10 mm; bracts with 3 veins; appendages with a long apical spine, sometimes auriculate. Florets pink or purple. Pappus 1/3 as long to as long as achene.{\i  Mountain rocks. • N. & E. Greece.} Gr.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucral appendages without auricles
\par 2 Pappus c. 1/3 as long as achene; leaf-segments oblong-
\par  lanceolate ....................................................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b drakiensis}
\par 2 Pappus c. 1/2 as long as achene; leaf-segments narrowly
\par  lanceolate .......................................................................... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b pentelica}
\par 1 Involucral appendages auriculate
\par 3 Involucral appendages with recurved apical spine 2-3 mm ({\b a}) subsp. {\b ossaea}
\par 3 Involucral appendages with erect to patent apical spine
\par  up to 7 mm
\par 4 Pappus about as long as achene; involucral appendages
\par  covering bracts .................................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b asperula}
\par 4 Pappus c. 1/2 as long as achene; involucral appendages 
\par  not covering bracts
\par 5 Leaf-segments linear; involucral appendages with apical
\par  spine 2-3(-6) mm ................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b attica}
\par 5 Leaf-segments ovate-lanceolate; involucral appendages
\par  with apical spine 3-5(-7) mm ....................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b megarensis}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ossaea} (Halácsy) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 198 (1916) ({\i C. ossaea} Halácsy): Stems ascending. Leaves white-tomentose. Involucre c. 11 × 6 mm; appendages black, auriculate, with recurved apical spine 2-3 mm. Florets pale purple. Pappus c. 1/2 as long as achene. {\i E. Greece} ({\i Oros Ossa}).
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b asperula} (Halácsy) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. asperula} Halácsy): Stems erect. Leaves with sparse arachnoid indumentum. Involucre 10-12 × 6-8 mm; appendages covering the bracts, brown, auriculate, with erect or erecto-patent apical spine 3-4 mm. Florets pink. Pappus about as long as achene. {\i Stony places. S.E. Greece} ({\i Attiki}).
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b attica}: Stems branched below. Leaves white-tomentose, scabrid; segments linear. Involucre 10-12 × 5-6(-7) mm; appendages not covering the bracts, blackish, auriculate, with erect or patent apical spine 2-3(-6) mm. Florets pink or purple. Pappus c. 1/2 as long as achene.{\i  N. & E. Greece}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b megarensis} (Halácsy & Hayek) Dostál,{\i  loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. megarensis} Halácsy & Hayek): Stems with short branches above. Leaves with appressed arachnoid indumentum, scabrid; segments ovate-lanceolate. Involucre 14-16 × 8-9 mm; appendages not covering the bracts, rather dark brown, auriculate, with erect or erecto-patent apical spine 3-5(-7) mm. Florets pink. Pappus c. 1/2 as long as achene.{\i  S.E. Greece} ({\i near Megara}).
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b drakiensis} (Freyn & Sint.) Dostál,{\i  loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. drakiensis }Freyn & Sint.): Leaves greenish, with more or less arachnoid indumentum; segments oblong-lanceolate. Involucre 10-15 × 6-10 mm; appendages with recurved apical spine 2-5 mm, without auricles. Pappus c. 1/3 as long as achene.{\i  E. Greece} ({\i Thessalia}).
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b pentelica} (Hausskn.) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. pentelica} Hausskn.): Leaves greenish, with somewhat arachnoid indumentum; segments narrowly lanceolate. Involucre 12 × 6-7 mm; appendages with erect apical spine 3 mm, without auricles. Pappus c. 1/2 as long as achene. {\i S.E. Greece} ({\i mountains around Athinai}).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C. poculatoris} W. Greuter,{\i  Bauhinia}{\b  3}: 252 (1967), from crevices of calcareous rocks in W. Kriti (Aspéndos), has not been collected in flower or fruit but appears to be a distinct species related to {\b 102}; it is a perennial, with procumbent stems 5-10 cm, leaves white-floccose-tomentose at least beneath but more or less glabrescent, the basal sinuate-pinnatifid to pinnatisect with ovate to suborbicular segments and the upper subentire, solitary capitula with involucre 12-16 × 6-8 mm, and pectinate-ciliate appendages with a slender, erect apical spine.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 103. C. soskae} Hayek ex Kosanin,{\i  Glas Srpske Kralj. Akad.}{\b  119}: 275 (1926). Perennial. Stems erect, paniculately branched. Leaves whitish-tomentose; lower pinnatisect, with linear-lanceolate segments 1-2 mm wide. Capitula solitary. Involucre 15 × 8-10 mm, ovoid; appendages pale brown, auriculate, with more or less erect apical spine 3-4 mm. Florets yellow. Pappus about as long as achene.{\i  Rocky places. • S. & E. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 104. C. kartschiana} Scop., {\i Fl. Carn.} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 140 (1772). Perennial. Stems 30-40 cm, erect, with long, paniculate branches. Leaves glabrous, scabrid; lower pinnate. Capitula solitary. Involucre 11 × 9 mm, ovoid-globose; appendages yellowish, with patent apical spine 1-1·5 mm, without auricles. Florets pink. Pappus as long as or longer than achene. •{\i  N.E. Italy, N.W. Jugoslavia}. It Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 105. C. dalmatica} A. Kerner, {\i Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung}.{\b  1}: 87 (1881). Perennial. Stems 20-30 cm, ascending, branched at base. Leaves glabrous, smooth; lower pinnatisect. Capitula solitary. Involucre 11 × 9 mm, ovoid-globose; appendages pale brown, with recurved apical spine 2-3 mm, without auricles. Florets pink. Pappus c. 1/2 as long as achene. {\i Maritime rocks. •N.W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 106. C. brachtii} Reichenb. fil.,{\i  Icon. Fl. Germ. }{\b 15}: 35 (1852). Biennial. Stems 10-50 cm, much-branched from the middle. Leaves green; lower 1(-2)-pinnatisect. Capitula solitary. Involucre 12 × 8 mm, cylindric-ovoid; appendages brown with a black centre, mucronulate, with broad hyaline membrane below, without auricles. Florets pink. Pappus c. 1/2 as long as achene. • {\i Coasts of N. Italy and N.W. Jugoslavia.} It Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. PANICULATAE (Hayek) Dostál. Stems herbaceous, often paniculately branched, the branches not spiny. Leaf-segments not rigid or spiny. Involucre usually ovoid; lower bracts usually without prominent veins on dorsal surface; appendages usually spiny, not filiform and plumose-fimbriate at apex, the lower fimbriae free, without auricles or hyaline margin. Florets purple, rarely pink or lilac.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 107. C. schousboei} Lange, {\i Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kjøbenhavn}{\b  1861}: 85 (1861). Perennial. Stems 30-50 cm, erect, corymbosely branched. Leaves lanate to tomentose, grey; lower pinnatisect, with few, linear to lanceolate, mucronate segments. Capitula solitary. Involucre ovoid-oblong. Florets pink. Pappus about as long as achene.{\i  Grassland. • W. Spain, E.C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par
\par 275}
\par