{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 87. C. horrida} Badaro,{\i  Gior. Fis.} ({\i Brugnat.}) ser. 2,{\b  7}: 363 (1824). Perennial. Stems 10-30 cm, much-branched. Leaves pinnatisect, the terminal segments with a single apical spine. Capitula solitary. Involucre 3-4 mm in diameter, ovoid-cylindrical; appendages mucronate, shortly fimbriate. Florets pale pink. Pappus somewhat shorter than achene.{\i  Maritime rocks. • Sardegna} ({\i islets of Asinara and Tavolara}). Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 88. C. balearica} Rodr.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  16}: 237 (1869). Dwarf shrub. Stems c. 100 cm, much-branched. Leaves small; spring leaves undivided, linear; summer leaves pinnatisect, the terminal segment with 3 apical spines. Capitula solitary. Involucre c. 4 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages spinose at apex, fimbriate-dentate. Florets yellow. Pappus 1/3-1/2 as long as achene. {\i Limestone rocks. • Islas Baleares.} Bl.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ARENARLAE (Hayek) Dostál. Stems herbaceous, the branches not spiny. Leaf-segments not rigid or spiny. Involucre usually ovoid; appendages usually spiny, not filiform and plumose-fimbriate at apex, the lower fimbriae confluent into a hyaline margin or forming auricles. Florets pink or purple, rarely yellow or lilac.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 89. C. arenaria} Bieb. ex Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 2278 (1803). Biennial or perennial. Stems 30-120 cm, erect, paniculately branched in lower half. Leaves greenish- or whitish-tomentose; lower 2-pinnatisect. Capitula in clusters. Involucre 9-12 × 4-8 mm; appendages yellow or pale brown, mucronate, auriculate. Florets pink to lilac. Pappus usually about as long as achene.{\i  Sandy ground. S.E. & E.C. Europe, from Hungary southwards to Bulgaria and eastwards to W. Kazakhstan.} Bu Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Appendages with regularly fimbriate margin, brownish at centre
\par
2 Leaves white-tomentose; pappus c. ½ as long as achene ({\b d}) subsp. {\b odessana}
\par
2 Leaves lanate; pappus about as long as achene ........ ({\b e}) subsp. {\b borysthenica} 
\par
1 Appendages with irregularly dentate or lacerate-
\par
  fimbriate margin, often yellowish at centre
\par
3 Involucre 6-8 mm in diameter ....................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b majorovii}
\par
3 Involucre 4-6 mm in diameter
\par
4 Stem ± glabrescent, with long branches; leaf-margin 
\par
  smooth ............................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b arenaria}
\par
4 Stem densely arachnoid, with short branches; leaf-
\par
  margin scabrid ................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b sophiae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b arenaria}: Perennial. Stems glabrescent above, with long branches. Leaves greenish. Involucre 9-11 × 4-6 mm, oblong-ovoid; appendages yellow at centre, with lacerate-fimbriate or denticulate margin. S.E Russia (lower Volga valley).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sophiae} (Klokov) Dostál, Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. 71: 197 (1976) (C. sophiae Klokov): Biennial. Stems with arachnoid indumentum, with short branches. Leaves greenish. Involucre 9-12 × 5-6 mm, oblong-ovoid; appendages yellowish at centre, with lacerate-denticulate margin. Sandy river-banks. S.E. Russia (lower Don valley).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b majorovii} (Dumbadze) Dostál, loc. cit. (1976) (C. majorovii Dumbadze): Biennial. Stems scabrid and densely lanate. Leaves whitish-lanate. Involucre 9-11 × 6-8 mm, ovoid-conical; appendages brownish at centre, with dentate margin. From E. Ukraine to W. Kazakhstan.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b odessana} (Prodan) Dostál, loc. cit. (1976) (C. odessana Prodan):Biennial. Stems arachnoid-pubescent. Leaves white-tomentose. Involucre 10-12 × 4·5-6·5 mm, oblong-ovoid; appendages brownish at centre, regularly fimbriate. Florets pink. Pappus c. 1/2 as long as achene. Coast of Ukraine.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b borysthenica} (Gruner) Dostál, loc. cit. (1976) (C. borysthenica Gruner): Biennial. Stems lanate. Leaves scabrid and lanate. Involucre 9-12 × 5-6 mm, oblong-ovoid; appendages brownish at centre, pectinate-fimbriate. Florets lilac. From Hungary and Jugoslavia eastwards to C. Ukraine.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 90. C. ovina} Pallas ex Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.} 3: 2292 (1803). Biennial. Stems 20-80 cm, paniculately branched. Leaves arachnoid-hairy, glabrescent, greenish; lower 2-pinnatisect. Involucre 8-12 × 3-6 mm; appendages yellow or pale brown, with apical spine c. 1 mm; auricles small or indistinct. Florets lilac. From Ukraine to Bulgaria. Bu Rm Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp. ovina is endemic to the Caucasus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Pappus 1·5-2·5 mm; bracts with 3 veins
\par
2 Involucre 5-6 mm in diameter; plant sparsely pubescent 
   ..........................................................................................({\b a}) subsp. {\b besserana}
\par
2 Involucre 3-5 mm in diameter; plant densely pubescent
   ..................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b lavrenkoana}
\par
1 Pappus not more than 0·5 mm; bracts with 3-7 veins
\par
3 Involucre 10-12 × 5-6 mm; capitula pedunculate ......... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b steveniana}
\par
3 Involucre 9 × 3·5-4 mm; capitula sessile .................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b koktebelica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b besserana} (DC.) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 197 (1976) ({\i C. besserana} DC.): Plant sparsely pubescent. Involucre 10-12 × 5-6 mm, ovoid-cylindrical; bracts with 3 veins, the lower fimbriae forming denticulate auricles. Pappus c. 2·5 mm.{\i  Stony slopes. • From Bulgaria to W. Ukraine.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lavrenkoana} (Klokov) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. lavrenkoana} Klokov): Plant densely pubescent. Involucre 8-11 × 3-5 mm, oblong-cylindrical; bracts with 3 veins, the lower fimbriae forming small auricles. Pappus 1·5-2 mm.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • S.E. Ukraine}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b steveniana} (Klokov) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. steveniana} Klokov): Capitula pedunculate. Involucre 10-12 × 5-6 mm, oblong-ovoid; bracts with 3-7 veins, the lower fimbriae forming auricles. Pappus absent or very short.{\i  Sandy and gravelly places. • Moldavia; Krym}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b koktebelica} (Klokov) Dostál, {\i op. cit.} 198 (1976) ({\i C. koktebelica }Klokov): Capitula sessile. Involucre 9 × 3·5-4 mm, oblong-ovoid; bracts with 3 veins, the lower fimbriae forming indistinct auricles. Pappus very short.{\i  Steppes. • E. Krym}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. jankeana} Simonkai, {\i Term. Füz.}{\b  1}: 168 (1877), from Romania (Iasi), is like {\b 90} but has the involucre 6-8 × 3-4 mm; {\b C. pseudotenuiflora} Prodan, {\i Centaur. Român. }158 (1930), from Ukraine to Bulgaria, is intermediate between {\b 91} and {\b 90}({\b a}); the status of both these taxa is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 91. C. tenuiflora} DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 584 (1838) ({\i C. ovina} sensu Bieb., non Pallas ex Willd.). Biennial. Stems 30-50 cm, erect, corymbosely branched. Leaves greenish, appressed-arachnoid-tomentose; lower 2-pinnatisect, the segments c. 1 mm wide, linear. Capitula in clusters. Involucre 7-8 × 3-4 mm, oblong-cylindrical; appendages dark brown, with white fimbriae, auriculate, with an apical spine 2-3 mm. Florets pink. Pappus about as long as achene. {\i Open hillsides. • From Bulgaria and Romania to Krym.} Bu Rm Rs (W, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   C. codruensis} Prodan, {\i Centaur. Român.} 155 (1930), from Romania (Galati), is like {\b 91} but has the involucre 11-12 × 6 mm and appendages with very large auricles; its status is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 92. C. spinosociliata} Seenus,{\i  Beschr. Reise Istr. Dalm.} 65 (1805). Annual or biennial. Stems 30-40 cm, erect, paniculately
\par

\par
273}
\par