{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b schousboei}: Involucre 6-9 mm in diameter, tapering at base; appendages with 6-9 brown fimbriae on each side, the apical spine 1 mm.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b septentrionalis} (J. Arènes) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 198 (1976) ({\i C. paniculata} var. {\i septentrionalis} J. Arènes): Involucre 5-7 mm in diameter, rounded at base; appendages with 4-5 whitish fimbriae on each side, the apical spine 0·7 mm.{\i  N.W. Spain.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 108. C. spinabadia} Bubani ex Timb.-Lagr.,{\i  Mém. Acad. Sci. Toulouse} ser. 8, {\b 1}({\b 2}): 187 (1879) ({\i C. coerulescens} auct., ?an Willd.). Biennial or perennial. Stems 20-50 cm. Leaves whitish or greenish, rather rigid; lower 2-pinnatisect with linear to narrowly oblong-lanceolate segments, the terminal segment ovate. Capitula in a lax corymb. Appendages reddish-black, with 6-8 fimbriae on each side. Florets purple. 2n = 18. •{\i  E. Spain, S. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Pappus 2-2·5 mm ..................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b shuttleworthii} 
\par
1 Pappus not more than 1·5 mm
\par
2 Involucre 5-7 mm in diameter; bracts ± recurved, purplish;
\par
  appendages not spiny at apex .............................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b hanryi}
\par
2 Involucre 7-10 mm in diameter; bracts appressed, pale 
\par
  green; appendages with apical spine
\par
3 Appendages with recurved apical spine 2-3 mm; pappus
\par
  1-1·5 mm ....................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b spinabadia}
\par
3 Appendages with patent apical spine 1·5 mm; pappus c.
\par
  0·5 mm ................................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b isernii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b shuttleworthii} (Rouy) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 198 (1976) ({\i C. paniculata} subsp. {\i shuttleworthii} Rouy): Perennial. Stems 20-50 cm. Leaves white-tomentose to greyish-green. Involucre 8-12 × 6-11 mm; bracts with prominent veins; appendages with recurved apical spine 1·5-2 mm. Pappus 2-4 mm, as long or as long as achene. {\i S.E. France} ({\i foothills of l'Esterel}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b spinabadia}: Biennial. Stems 30-50 cm. Leaves green. Involucre 10-12 × 7-10 mm; bracts with indistinct veins, appressed, pale green; appendages with recurved apical spine 2-3 mm, the fimbriae c. 2 mm, brownish. Pappus 1-1·5 mm, 1/3-1/2 as long as achene.{\i  E. Spain, just extending into S. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b isernii} (Willk.) Dostál, {\i op. cit.} 199 (1976) ({\i C. isernii} Willk.): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but involucre 14 × 9 mm; appendages with patent apical spine 1·5 mm, the fimbriae c. 1 mm, pale brown.{\i  N.E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b hanryi} (Jordan) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. hanryi} Jordan): Biennial. Stems 30-50 cm. Leaves grey-green. Involucre 10-12 × 5-7 mm; bracts recurved, purplish, with prominent veins; appendages not spiny at apex. Pappus c. 1·5 mm, ½ as long as achene.{\i  S. France, N.E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 109. C. limbata} Hoffmanns. & Link,{\i  Fl. Port.}{\b  2}: 221 (1820-1828). Perennial. Stems 10-20 cm. Leaves greyish-tomentose; lower pinnatipartite. Capitula in a lax corymb. Involucre 5-8 mm in diameter; appendages with a recurved apical spine 0·5-1·5 mm, longer than fimbriae. Florets purple. Pappus 1/5-1/3 as long as achene. 2n = 18.{\i  Heaths and dry grassland. • N.W. Spain, N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 110. C. urgellensis} Sennen, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  75}: 447 (1928). Biennial. Stems c. 30 cm, branched from base. Leaves greyish-tomentose, glabrescent; lower 2-pinnatisect. Capitula solitary. Involucre c. 8 mm in diameter, ovoid-conical; appendages brownish, with an erecto-patent or patent apical spine 0·5 mm, shorter than fimbriae, the fimbriae 3-4 on each side. Florets purple. Pappus c. 1/3 as long as achene. •{\i  E. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 111. C. rothmalerana} (J. Arènes) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}:199 (1976) ({\i C. paniculata} subsp.{\i  rothmalerana} J. Arènes). Like {\b 110} but involucre 7-9 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages blackish, the apical spine 1·5 mm, the fimbriae 4-6 on each side.{\i  Mountain pastures. • N.C. Portugal }({\i Serra da Estrela}). Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 112. C. aristata} Hoffmanns. & Link,{\i  Fl. Port.}{\b  2}: 226 (1820-1828). Biennial. Stems 30-80 cm, erect, with lax paniculate branching. Leaves green, scabrid; lower pinnatisect. Capitula few. Appendages acuminate or with an erect to recurved apical spine 0·8-1·5 mm. Florets purple. Pappus 0·5-1·5 mm, 1/5 as long to as long as achene. •{\i  Portugal, N.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucre narrowed at base
\par
2 Entire part of appendages wider than long, the apical 
\par
  spine 1-1·5 mm ....................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b exilis}
\par
2 Entire part of appendages longer than wide, the apical
\par
  spine c. 0·8 mm ................................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b langeana} 
\par
1 Involucre rounded at base
\par
3 Involucre 6-9 mm in diameter; fimbriae brown;
\par
  pappus 1-1·5 mm ............................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b geresensis}
\par
3 Involucre 4-7(-8) mm in diameter; fimbriae white;
\par
  pappus 1·5-3 mm ................................................................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b aristata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b exilis} (J. Arènes) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 199 (1916) ({\i C.paniculata} subsp. {\i exilis} J. Arènes): Involucre 4-7 mm in diameter, narrowed at base; entire part of appendages broadly triangular, wider than long, the apical spine 1-1·5 mm, the fimbriae 1·5 mm.{\i  E.C. Portugal} ({\i Monfortinho}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b langeana} (Willk.) Dostál,{\i  loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. langeana} Willk.): Involucre 5-10 mm in diameter, narrowed at base; entire part of appendages triangular, longer than wide, the apex 0·8 mm, acuminate, not spiny. Pappus about as long as achene.{\i  N.W. Spain.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b geresensis} (J. Arènes) Dostál,{\i  loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. paniculata} subsp. {\i geresensis} J. Arènes): Involucre 6-9 mm in diameter, more or less rounded at base; entire part of appendages broadly triangular, as long as wide, the apical spine 0·8-1 mm, the fimbriae 1-1·2 mm. Pappus 1-1·5 mm.{\i  N. Portugal} ({\i Serra do Gerez}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b aristata}: Involucre 4-7(-8) mm in diameter, rounded at base; entire part of appendages narrowly triangular, longer than wide, the apical spine 0·8-1 mm, the fimbriae c. 1 mm. Pappus 1·5-3 mm.{\i  Portugal, N.W. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 113. C. paniculata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 912 (1753). Biennial. Stems 40-80 cm, erect, much-branched from middle or below. Leaves green, pubescent to arachnoid-lanate and scabrid; lower 1- to 2-pinnatisect. Involucre 5-10 × 3-6 mm, narrowed at base; bracts appressed; appendages shortly triangular, acuminate or with an apical spine 1-2 mm, the fimbriae 1-2 mm, 3-6 on each side. Florets purple. Pappus 0·5-1·5 mm. 2n = 18(19). • {\i S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Appendages not spiny at apex ...................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b paniculata} 
\par
1 Appendages with an apical spine
\par
2 Appendages with fimbriae 1·8-2 mm
\par
3 Appendages 3·5 mm, pale brown, the apical spine 
\par
   usually 2-3 mm .............................................................. ({\b e}) subsp. {\b castellana}
\par
3 Appendages 1·5 mm, dark brown, the apical spine 0·7-0·8 mm
\par
  ........................................................................................ ({\b f}) subsp. {\b cossoniana}
\par
2 Appendages with fimbriae 1-1·2 mm
\par
4 Appendages with apical spine shorter than lateral 
\par
  fimbriae ....................................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b esterellensis}
\par
4 Appendages with apical spine as long as or longer than
\par
  lateral fimbriae
\par
5 Involucre 4-6(-8) mm in diameter; appendages with erect
\par
  apical spine ......................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b rigidula}
\par
5 Involucre 3-4 mm in diameter; appendages with recurved
\par
  apical spine .................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b polycephala}
\par

\par
276}
\par