{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b paniculata}: Capitula solitary. Involucre 3-5 mm in diameter; appendages with acuminate apex 1 mm, the fimbriae 1 mm. Pappus 1/3-1/2 as long as achene.{\i  S. France, S. & E. Spain, N.W. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b rigidula} (Jordan) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 199 (1976) ({\i C. rigidula }Jordan): Leaves green, arachnoid, glabrescent. Capitula in a lax corymb, in clusters of 2-3(-6). Involucre 4-6(-8) mm in diameter; appendages with erect apical spine 1·5 mm, the fimbriae 1-1·2 mm. Pappus 1/3-1/2 as long as achene.{\i  S.E. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b polycephala} (Jordan) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 426 (1879) ({\i C. polycephala }Jordan): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but leaves arachnoid-lanate; capitula numerous, in a dense corymb; involucre 3-4 mm in diameter; appendages with recurved apical spine, the fimbriae c. 1 mm.{\i  S.E. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b esterellensis} (Burnat) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 199 (1976) ({\i C. paniculata} var. {\i esterellensis} Burnat): Capitula solitary, in a lax corymb. Involucre 3-4 mm in diameter; appendages dark brown, with a somewhat recurved apical spine 0·7-1 mm, the fimbriae 1·2 mm. Pappus c. ½ as long as achene.{\i  S.E. France} ({\i l'Esterel}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b castellana} (Boiss. & Reuter) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. castellana} Boiss. & Reuter): Branches long. Involucre 10 × 5 mm; appendages 3·5 mm, pale brown, with an erect apical spine 2-3 mm, rarely very short, the fimbriae c. 2 mm. Pappus c. ½ as long as achene. {\i C., E. & S. Spain, C. Portugal.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b cossoniana} (J. Arènes) Dostál,{\i  loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. paniculata} var. {\i cossoniana} J. Arènes): Branches short. Involucre c. 7 × 5 mm; appendages dark brown, with an apical spine 0·7-0·8 mm, the fimbriae c. 2 mm. Pappus c. 1/3 as long as achene. {\i Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 114. C. micrantha} Hoffmanns. & Link,{\i  Fl. Port.}{\b  2}: 220 (1820-1828) ({\i C. hoffmannseggii} Hayek). Biennial 40-90 cm. Stem erect, much-branched, forming a lax panicle. Leaves green above, lanate beneath; lower 2-pinnatifid. Capitula solitary. Involucre 5-8 mm in diameter, narrowed at base; appendages acuminate at apex. Florets purple. •{\i  N.W. Spain, N. & C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Appendages black, the fimbriae c. 0·5 mm .............. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b melanosticta}
\par
1 Appendages brown, the fimbriae c. 1 mm
\par
2 Appendages reddish-brown, the apex 1-1·2 mm; involucre
\par
  7-8 mm in diameter .......................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b helminii}
\par
2 Appendages dark brown, the apex 0·5-1 mm; involucre 5-6
\par
  mm in diameter .............................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b micrantha}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b micrantha}: Involucre 5-6 mm in diameter; appendages dark brown, the apex 0·5-1 mm, the fimbriae c. 1 mm. Pappus 1/3-1/2 as long as achene. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b herminii} (Rouy) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.} {\b 71}: 199 (1976) ({\i C. herminii} Rouy): Involucre 7-8 mm in diameter; appendages reddish-brown, the apex 1-1·2 mm, the fimbriae c. 1 mm. Pappus 1/3-1/2 as long as achene. {\i N.C. Portugal} ({\i Serra da Estrela}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b melanosticta} (Lange) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. limbata} var. {\i melanosticta} Lange): Involucre 5-6 mm in diameter appendages black, the apex 0·5-0·7 mm, the fimbriae c. 0·5 mm. Pappus c. 1/5 as long as achene. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 115. C. leucophaea} Jordan, {\i Obs. Pl. Crit.}{\b  5}: 64 (1847). Biennial. Stems 30-50 cm, much-branched. Leaves greyish- or whitish-tomentose, glabrescent; lower usually pinnatisect. Capitula in a corymb. Involucre 7-13 × 5-13 mm, usually ovoid-globose; appendages mucronate or acute, sometimes with a short apical spine, fimbriate. Florets usually lilac. Pappus 1/6-1/3 as long as achene, or absent. 2n = 18. •{\i  From N.E. Spain to N.W. Italy.} Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Pappus absent or very short ............................................. ({\b e}) subsp. {\b biformis}
\par
1 Pappus at least 1/6 as long as achene
\par
2 Appendages yellow, covering the bracts ..................... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b ochrolopha}
\par
2 Appendages brown, not covering the bracts
\par
3 Appendages pale brown; involucre not spotted
\par
4 Bracts ovate; involucre rounded at base .................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b brunnescens}
\par
4 Bracts oblong; involucre narrowed at base ........................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b reuteri}
\par
3 Appendages dark brown; involucre spotted
\par
5 Appendages mucronate at apex, with c. 6 fimbriae on 
\par
  each side ....................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b leucophaea}
\par
5 Appendages with an apical spine and 8-9 fimbriae on 
\par
  each side ......................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b pseudocoerulescens}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b brunnescens} (Briq.) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 200 (1976) ({\i C. paniculata} subsp.{\i  leucophaea} var.{\i  brunnescens} Briq.): Involucre 7-10 × 6-9 mm, ovoid, rounded at base, not spotted: bracts ovate, smooth; appendages small, pale brown, with mucronate apex and a narrow, brown margin, the fimbriae c. 1 mm, c. 6 on each side. Pappus c. 1/3 as long as achene.{\i  N.W. Italy, just extending into S.E. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b reuteri} (Reichenb. fil.) Dostál,{\i  loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. reuteri} Reichenb. fil.,{\i  C. cineraria} var. {\i saratoi} Briq.): Involucre 5-8 mm in diameter, ovoid-oblong, narrowed at base, not spotted; bracts oblong, lanate; appendages small, pale brown, with acuminate apex c. 0·5 mm, and a hyaline margin, the fimbriae c. 1 mm. Pappus 1/4-1/3 as long as achene.{\i  N.W. Italy, S.E. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b leucophaea} (incl. {\i C. paniculata} subsp.{\i  pallidula }Rouy): Involucre 6-9 mm in diameter, rounded at base, spotted; appendages not covering the bracts, brown, rarely pale, with mucronate apex, the fimbriae c. 6 on each side. Florets pinkish-purple. Pappus c. 1/3 as long as achene. 2n = 18.{\i  From E. Pyrenees to N.W. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b pseudocoerulescens} (Briq.) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. paniculata} var.{\i  pseudocoerulescens} Briq.,{\i  C. pseudocineraria} (Fiori) Rouy): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but involucre 10-13 × 8-12 mm; appendages with a short apical spine, the fimbriae 8-9 on each side. Florets lilac. 2n = 18. {\i S.E. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b biformis} (Timb.-Lagr.) Dostál,{\i  loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. biformis} Timb.-Lagr.): Involucre 10-13 mm in diameter, rounded at base; appendages yellow, with mucronate apex, the fimbriae c. 6 on each side. Pappus absent or very short.{\i  Foothills of E. Pyrenees} ({\i W. of Perpignan}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b ochrolopha} (Costa) Dostál,{\i  loc. cit.} (1916) ({\i C. ochrolopha} Costa): Lower leaves sometimes undivided. Involucre 9-10 mm in diameter; appendages covering the bracts, yellow, with acuminate apex, the fimbriae 6-8 on each side. Florets pink. Pappus 1/3 as long as achene.{\i  N.E. Spain.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. MACULOSAE (Hayek) Dostál. Like Sect.{\i  Paniculatae} but stems usually laxly paniculately or corymbosely branched; bracts with prominent veins on dorsal surface; florets pink, rarely pinkish-yellow, purple or white.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 116. C. filiformis} Viv., {\i Fl. Cors., App. }{\b 1}: 6 (1825). Perennial. Stems 30-70 cm, woody and reddish-hairy below, corymbosely branched above. Leaves glabrous; lower 2-pinnatifid, with narrowly linear mucronulate segments. Involucre 12-15 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; appendages reddish-brown, acute, with c. 6 fimbriae on each side. Florets pinkish-purple, rarely white. the outer radiate. Pappus about as long as achene.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • Sardegna. }Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 117. C. corymbosa} Pourret, {\i Mém. Acad. Sci. Toulouse}{\b  3}: 310 (1788). Biennial. Stems 10-30 cm, erect, paniculately branched. Leaves green, glandular-punctate; lower 2-pinnatisect. Involucre
\par

\par
277}
\par