{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. G. glaucophyllum} E. Schmid, {\i Viert. Naturf. Ges. Zürich}{\b  78}: 253 (1933). Stolons absent. Stems obscurely 4-angled, glabrous. Leaves (10-)15-20(-25) × (2·5-)3-4·5(-5) mm, in whorls of up to 6(-8), oblanceolate, membranous; margin with very few teeth, usually subrevolute. Inflorescence ovoid to broadly pyramidal; partial inflorescences corymbiform; pedicels shorter than diameter of corolla. Corolla 4-5 mm in diameter, broadly infundibuliform; tube c. 1/3 as long as lobes. {\i Cliffs and screes. • Sardegna.} Sa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. G. murcicum} Boiss. & Reuter in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 3}({\b 2}): 114 (1856). Stolons present. Stems 40-90 cm, glabrous. Leaves 10-25 × 0·5-2 mm, in whorls of 6-7, linear, glabrous; margin slightly scabrid with 1 to 2 rows of teeth, revolute to the midrib. Inflorescence broadly ovoid, distinctly interrupted; flowers in dense clusters; pedicels much shorter than diameter of corolla. Corolla 3-4 mm in diameter, infundibuliform; tube shorter than lobes.{\i  Calcareous, stony ground. • S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. G. octonarium} (Klokov) Pobed.,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 7}: 278 (1971) ({\i Asperula octonaria} Klokov). Stolons absent. Stems 25-90 cm, more or less 4-angled throughout, usually glabrous. Leaves 20-45 × 0·5-1 mm, in whorls of (6-)7-8(-10), linear to filiform, usually erect; margin very scabrid with many rows of teeth, revolute to the midrib. Inflorescence broadly ovoid, lax; partial inflorescences corymbiform; pedicels shorter than diameter of corolla. Corolla 2-3 mm in diameter, infundibuliform; tube usually longer than lobes. 2n = 22.{\i  Dry grassland and steppes. S.E. Europe, extending northwards to} 55°{\i  N. in C. Russia.} Bu ?Gr ?Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E). ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 63. G. glaucum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }107 (1753) ({\i Asperula glauca} (L.) Besser, {\i A. galioides} Bieb. pro parte). Stolons present or absent. Stems 40-80 cm, usually rounded, with 4 ridges, stout, glabrous or hairy. Leaves 20-40 × 0·5-2 mm, in whorls of (6-)8-10(-11), linear to acicular, glabrous or rarely hairy; margin weakly scabrid, with 1-2 rows of teeth, revolute to the midrib. Inflorescence ovoid, somewhat lax to dense; partial inflorescences corymbiform, usually many-flowered; pedicels usually shorter than diameter of corolla. Corolla 4-6 mm in diameter, broadly cup-shaped; tube usually much shorter than lobes. 2n = 22, 44.{\i  Forest-margins, dry grassland and stony places. • From Belgium and Czechoslovakia southwards to N. Portugal, S. Italy and Bulgaria; casual in S. Scandinavia and perhaps becoming naturalized}. Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Lu ?Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   In E. Europe the plants are predominantly without stolons; in W.C. Europe, most plants have stolons, with the stem rooting at the base. Many of the former have been shown to be tetraploid, and of the latter diploid. The eastern plants appear in Poland and elsewhere to be connected with {\b 62} by intermediates; the exact boundary between {\b 62} and{\b  63} has yet to be established. The plants from the Iberian peninsula may represent a distinct taxon.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. G. biebersteinii} Ehrend.,{\i  Pl. Syst. Evol.}{\b  124}: 174 (1975) ({\i Asperula galioides} Bieb. pro parte). Stolons present. Stems 20-60 cm, weakly 4-angled, ascending, glabrous. Leaves 7-20(-25) × 0·3-1·5 mm, in whorls of 6-8, linear to acicular margin scabrid, with many rows of teeth, usually revolute to the midrib. Inflorescence ovoid, lax; partial inflorescences corymbiform, usually few-flowered; pedicels shorter than diameter of corolla. Corolla 3-4 mm in diameter, broadly infundibuliform; tube as long as or shorter than lobes.{\i  Stony slopes. Krym.} Rs (K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. G. xeroticum} (Klokov) Pobed.,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  7}: 278 (1971) ({\i Asperula xerotica} Klokov). Like {\b 64} but stems densely hairy at least below; leaves glabrous or hairy, the margin usually revolute but not to the midrib.{\i  Rocks and stony steppes. • Krym. }Rs (K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    Doubtfully specifically distinct from{\b  64}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 66. G. volhynicum} Pobed.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1971) ({\i Asperula tyraica} Besser). Stolons present. Stems (20-)40-80(-100) cm, rounded below, with 4 ridges, stout, usually densely hairy at the base, glabrescent above. Leaves 20-40 × 0·5-1·5 mm, in whorls of 6-8, linear to acicular; margin scabrid with 1-2(-3) rows of teeth, revolute. Inflorescence ovoid to broadly pyramidal, rather dense; partial inflorescences pyramidal; pedicels shorter than diameter of corolla. Corolla 3-4 mm in diameter, cup-shaped; tube much shorter than lobes; apex of lobes more or less incurved. {\i Steppes. • S.E. Europe from E. Jugoslavia to C. Ukraine.} Bu Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 67. G. moldavicum} (Dobrescu) Franco,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 71}: 50 (1975) ({\i Asperula moldavica }Dobrescu). Like {\b 66} but stems glabrous at the base, pubescent above and on inflorescence-axes; leaves 20-30(-35) × 0·4-0·5 mm, in whorls of 6-10, filiform; margin scabrid, with 3(-4) rows of teeth; corolla c. 2 mm in diameter.{\i  Dry grassland. • Moldavia, N.E. Romania.} Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Ser. {\i Nemoralia} M. Popov. Young shoots green or glaucous and pruinose. Stems terete to 4-angled. Leaves elliptical to linear-lanceolate, usually 25-75 mm; lower surface paler green than the upper and often bluish. Inflorescence broadly ovoid, lax, with long lower branches; partial inflorescences corymbiform; pedicels often capillary, not divaricate after anthesis. Corolla white, cup-shaped to rotate; tube shorter than lobes; lobes acute to apiculate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    With the possible exception of {\b 68}, the species of this Series are connected by critical intermediates, and form a closely knit polyploid complex which has differentiated in the deciduous woodlands of S. & C. Europe.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 68. G. kitaibelianum} Schultes & Schultes fil.,{\i  Mantissa}{\b  3}: 163 (1827). Stolons absent. Stems 50-100 cm, much branched, 4-angled, usually glabrous, rarely hairy. Leaves 25-70 × 0·5-3 mm, linear-lanceolate, somewhat falcate, widest at the middle very gradually narrowing to the apex, bright green, membranous; margin slightly revolute, scabrid with 1-2 rows of papilliform teeth; veins conspicuous. Inflorescence very lax, broadly ovoid; branches very slender, patent and usually pendent; bracts 3-10 mm, capillary, usually extending to the ultimate branches; pedicels usually much longer than diameter of corolla. Corolla 2-3 mm in diameter, subrotate; lobes shortly apiculate. 2n = 22. {\i Open woods, especially on rocky ground. • S.W. & C. Romania.} ?Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 69. G. pseudaristatum} Schur, {\i Enum. Pl. Transs.} 282 (1866) (incl.{\i  G. matteji} (Bald.) Hayek). Stolons absent. Stems usually 70-100 cm, 4-angled, glabrous to densely hairy below, often rough with short hairs above. Leaves (25-)30-50(-60) × 2-4(-6) mm, linear-lanceolate, often falcate, usually widest at the middle narrowing gradually to a point, bright green, membranous, margin scabrid with several rows of teeth. Inflorescence relatively lax, ovoid to broadly pyramidal; flowers crowded towards the end of the branches; pedicels usually about as long as diameter of corolla. Corolla 2-3 mm in diameter, cup-shaped; lobes acute. Fruit glabrous (very rarely hairy). 2n = 22. {\i Dry and open} Quercus{\i -woods. • From S.E. Czechoslovakia to Macedonia.} Al Bu Cz ?Gr Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 
27}
\par