{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 appendages orbicular, cartilaginous, pale brown, with 3-4 fimbriae on each side, acute at apex. Florets purple, rarely white. {\i Calcareous maritime rocks. • Islands of C. Adriatic.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b friderici}: Involucre 12-15 × 9-12 mm, ovoid-oblong; bracts oblong. Pappus ¼-½ as long as achene, asymmetrical.{\i  Palagruza.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b jabukensis} (Ginzberger & Teyber) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 71}: 196(1976) ({\i C. jabukensis} Ginzberger & Teyber): Involucre 14-17 × 10-14 mm, ovoid; bracts ovate. Pappus about as long as achene, symmetrical.{\i  Jabuka}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 84. C. affinis} Friv., {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 19}: 435 (1836). Perennial. Stems 30-80 cm, erect. Leaves scabrid, white-tomentose or with greyish-arachnoid indumentum; lower 1-pinnatisect, the segments 3-5 mm wide, oblong; cauline usually lyrate or pinnatifid. Capitula solitary. Involucre 12-15 × 8-12 mm, ovoid-globose; bracts ovate-oblong, with prominent veins; appendages dark brown or black, rarely yellow with a brown centre, not or scarcely spinose at apex. Florets pink. Pappus about as long as achene.{\i  Rocky places, mainly in the mountains. Balkan peninsula, S. Romania.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Cauline leaves undivided or with 1 pair of segments at
\par
  base ......................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b peloponnesiaca}
\par
1 Cauline leaves pinnatifid or lyrate
\par
2 Cauline leaves pinnatifid
\par
3 Leaf-segments ovate or elliptical ...................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b candida}
\par
3 Leaf-segments linear, mucronate ....................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b lacerata}
\par
2 Cauline leaves lyrate
\par
4 Appendages 1 mm wide, with 5-6 fimbriae, on each side
  .......................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b balcanica}
\par
4 Appendages 2-3 mm wide, with 6-8 fimbriae on each side  ({\b a}) subsp. {\b affinis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b affinis}: Stems paniculately branched. Leaves grey-green; cauline lyrate, the terminal segment and the uppermost leaves oblong, c. 3 mm wide, the lateral segments 3 mm wide. Appendages 2-3 mm wide, broadly triangular, black, with 6-8 fimbriae on each side. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b balcanica} (Urum. & H. Wagner) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 196 (1976) ({\i C. balcanica }Urum. & H. Wagner): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but cauline leaves with terminal segment up to 10 mm wide, broadly ovate, the lateral segments 4-5 mm wide; appendages 1 mm wide, narrowly triangular, with 5-6 fimbriae on each side. •{\i  N. Bulgaria}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b peloponnesiaca} (Halácsy) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. affinis }var.{\i  peloponnesiaca} Halácsy): Stems divaricately branched from the base, rarely very short and unbranched. Leaves pubescent, green, scabrid; cauline undivided or with one pair of segments at the base. Appendages dark brown, with 6-7 fimbriae on each side. •{\i  S. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b candida} (Velen.) Dostál, {\i op. cit.} 197 (1976) ({\i C. candida }Velen.): Stems paniculately branched above. Leaves whitish-tomentose; cauline pinnatifid, the terminal segment and the uppermost leaves 5-10 mm wide. Involucre 15 × 11 mm; appendages yellow with a brown centre and with 6-9 fimbriae on each side. •{\i  S. Bulgaria}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b lacerata} (Hausskn.) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1916) ({\i C. affinis }var.{\i  lacerata} Hausskn.): Leaves pinnatisect, the segments linear, mucronate. Appendages orbicular, very shortly fimbriate. •{\i  Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   C. thasia} Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 762 (1931), described from Macedonia and Thasos, is very like {\b 84}({\b d}) but the leaves are lyrate; the type is not known and further information is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 85. C. pallidior} Halácsy, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  6}: 594 (1898). Perennial. Stems branched. Leaves arachnoid-lanate; lower pinnatisect. Involucre 12-13 × 7-9 mm, ovoid; appendages black or brown, the fimbriae at least 2 mm, the apex not spinose. Florets pink. Pappus ¼-½ as long as achene.{\i  Dry places. • Mountains of Bulgaria and Greece.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Appendages black; stems sparingly branched .................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b vatevii}
\par
1 Appendages brown; stems much-branched
\par
2 Appendages with 4-6 white fimbriae on each side ......... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b denudata}
\par
2 Appendages with 5-8 brown fimbriae on each side ......... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b pallidior}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pallidior} ({\i C. affinis }subsp. {\i pallidior} (Halácsy) Hayek): Stems much-branched. Capitula solitary. Involucre 8-9 mm in diameter; appendages brown, with 5-8 brown fimbriae on each side. Pappus c. 2 mm.{\i  N. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b denudata} (Halácsy) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 71}: 197 (1976) ({\i C. affinis} var.{\i  denudata} Halácsy): Stems much-branched. Capitula solitary or in clusters of 2-3. Involucre 7-8 mm in diameter; appendages brown, with 4-6 white fimbriae on each side. Pappus c. 1·5 mm.{\i  C. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b vatevii} (Degen, Urum. & H. Wagner) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1916) ({\i C. vatevii} Degen, Urum. & H. Wagner): Stems sparingly branched. Capitula solitary. Involucre 7-9 mm in diameter; appendages black, with 6-10 fimbriae on each side.{\i  Bulgaria}.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. DISSECTAE (Hayek) Dostál. Like Sect.{\i  Pannophyllum} but leaf-segments linear; florets purple.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 86. C. parlatoris} Heldr., {\i Ann. Accad. Aspir. Nat.} ({\i Napoli}) {\b 1}: 287 (1843). Perennial. Stem  10-40 cm, erect or ascending, corymbosely branched. Leaves whitish-tomentose, glabrescent, scabrid; lower 1- to 2-pinnatisect, with more or less linear segments 1-3 mm wide. Capitula solitary. Involucre 12-20 × (6-)10-20 mm, ovoid. Florets purple. Pappus about as long as achene.{\i  Mountain rocks. S. & C. Italy, Sicilia.} It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucre 15-20 mm in diameter; appendages covering 
\par
  bracts ...................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b nigra}
\par
1 Involucre 6-15 mm in diameter; appendages not covering
\par
  bracts
\par
2 Leaves whitish-tomentose, not glabrescent ........................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b tenorei}
\par
2 Leaves floccose, glabrescent .......................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b parlatoris}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tenorei} (Guss. ex Lacaita) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 197 (1976) ({\i C. tenorei} Guss. ex Lacaita,{\i  C.dissecta} Ten., non Hill): Leaves whitish-tomentose, not glabrescent. Involucre 7-15 mm in diameter; appendages not covering the bracts.{\i  S. Italy, Sicilia.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  nigra} (Fiori) Dostál,{\i  loc cit.} (1976) ({\i C. dissecta} var.{\i  nigra }Fiori & var.{\i  montium} Gugler): Leaves whitish-tomentose, not glabrescent. Involucre 15-20 mm in diameter; appendages covering the bracts. •{\i  C. Appennini}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b parlatoris}: Leaves floccose, glabrescent. Involucre 8-10 × 6-8 mm; appendages not covering the bracts. •{\i  Sicilia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   C. ambigua} Guss.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horto Boccad.}{\b  1826}: 3 (1826) (incl. subsp. {\i laciniata} (Guss.) Arcangeli), described from Sicilia, is probably the hybrid{\b  86} × {\b 178}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. HORRIDAE Dostál. Stems herbaceous or woody at base, the branches spiny. Leaf-segments rigid, the terminal spiny. Involucre ovoid or cylindrical; appendages mucronate or spiny, not filiform and plumose-fimbriate at apex, the lower fimbriae free. Florets pink or yellow.
\par

\par
272}
\par