{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves green, glabrous; lower 2-pinnatisect with numerous linear segments not more than 1 mm wide. Capitula solitary. Involucre c. 10 × 6 mm, ovoid-conical; appendages brown, the apex 0·5 mm, mucronate, the fimbriae 0·5 mm, 3-5 on each side. Florets pink. Pappus c. 1 mm, c. 1/3 as long as achene. {\i Fields and waste places. • W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 124. C. triniifolia} Heuffel,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  8}: 27 (1858). Biennial. Stems 80-120 cm, much-branched from middle. Leaves green; lower 2-pinnatisect, the segments c. 1 mm wide, linear. Capitula solitary. Involucre c. 14 × 8-10 mm; bracts with 5 veins; appendages blackish, with apex up to 2 mm, erect, sometimes spinose, the fimbriae 6-8 on each side, more or less confluent with the hyaline margin. Florets pinkish-yellow. Pappus c. 4 mm, about as long as achene. •{\i  S. & E. Jugoslavia, S.W. Romania.} Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 125. C. reichenbachii} DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 583 (1838) ({\i C. reichenbachioides} Schur). Biennial. Stems 30-50 cm, branched from middle. Leaves arachnoid-hairy, greenish; lower pinnatisect; segments oblong-lanceolate. Capitula solitary. Involucre c. 13 × 10 mm; appendages black, with a spinose apex 0·5 mm, the fimbriae 1·5 mm, 4-6 on each side. Florets pink. Achenes 3·5 mm; pappus absent. •{\i  From W.C. Romania to W. Ukraine.} Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 126. C. calvescens} Pancic,{\i  Fl. Princ. Serb.} 442 (1874). Biennial. Stems 60-150 cm, much-branched. Leaves green, glabrous or sparsely tomentose, somewhat rigid; lower pinnatisect; segments linear, c. 1 mm wide. Capitula in clusters of 2-3. Involucre 10-13 × 6-8 mm; appendages brown, with apical spine 1·5 mm. Florets pale pink. Achenes 2·5 mm; pappus 0-1 mm.{\i  Rocks; usually calcicole. • N. part of Balkan peninsula, S.W. Romania.} Bu Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 127. C. peucedanifolia} Boiss. & Orph. in Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  3}: 647 (1875). Biennial. Stems 40-60 cm, branched about middle. Leaves green, scabrid-pubescent, glandular-punctate; lower 2-pinnatisect, the lobes up to 2 mm wide, narrowly lanceolate. Capitula solitary. Involucre 12-14 × 7-9 mm; appendages brown, with slender apical spine 1·5 mm, the fimbriae 4-5(-6) on each side, as long as the spine. Florets pinkish-yellow. Pappus about as long as achene.{\i  Rocky places. • N.E. Greece }({\i Athos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 128. C. biebersteinii} DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  6}: 583 (1838). Biennial or perennial. Stems 20-70 cm, with long branches from near the base. Leaves 1- to 2-pinnatisect. Capitula solitary. Appendages mucronate or spinulose at apex. Florets pink. Pappus c. 1/3 as long as achene. 2n = 36.{\i  Cultivated and waste places. • E.C. & S.E. Europe, extending north-eastwards to N.C. Ukraine.} Al Bu Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucre 15 mm ...................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b radoslavoffii}
\par
1 Involucre 10-11 mm
\par
2 Leaf-segments 3-5 mm wide, oblong ........................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b rhodopaea}
\par
2 Leaf-segments 1-1·5 mm wide, linear
\par
3 Involucral appendages mucronate ............................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b biebersteinii}
\par
3 Involucral appendages spinulose at apex
\par
4 Lower leaves 2-pinnatisect; involucre 7-8 mm in 
\par
  diameter, ovoid ................................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b australis}
\par
4 Lower leaves 1-pinnatisect; involucre c. 5 mm in 
\par
  diameter, ovoid-conical ........................................ ({\b e}) subsp. {\b cylindrocephala}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b biebersteinii} ({\i C. micranthos} S.G. Gmelin ex Hayek): Lower leaves 2-pinnatisect, more or less glabrescent; segments 1-1·5 mm wide, narrowly linear. Involucre 11 × 7 mm, ovoid; appendages mucronate.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except C.& S. Bulgaria}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b australis} (Pancic) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 200 (1916) ({\i C. australis} Pancic): Leaves grey-tomentose segments 1-1·5 mm wide, narrowly linear. Involucre 11 × 7-8 mm appendages with an apical spine 0·5-1·5 mm.{\i  Bulgaria, E. Jugoslavia.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b rhodopaea} (Hayek & H. Wagner) Dostál,{\i  op. cit. }201 (1976) ({\i C. maculosa} forma{\i  rhodopaea }Hayek & H. Wagner): Leaves grey-tomentose; segments 3-5 mm wide, oblong to oblong-lanceolate. Involucre 10 × 7 mm; appendages covering bracts.{\i  S. Bulgaria}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b radoslavoffii} (Urum.) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1916) ({\i C. radoslavoffii} Urum.): Leaves more or less glabrescent. Involucre 15 × 5-7 mm, more or less cylindrical; appendages dark brown, mucronulate.{\i  W. & C. Bulgaria}.
\par
  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b cylindrocephala} (Bornm.) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1916) ({\i C. cylindrocephala} Bornm.): Lower leaves 1-pinnatisect, grey-lanate; segments linear, entire. Involucre 10 × 5 mm, ovoid-conical; appendages pale brown, spinulose at apex.{\i  S. Jugoslavia} ({\i near Skopje}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ACROCENTROIDES (DC.) Dostál. Stems herbaceous, woody at base, usually procumbent, the branches not spiny. Leaves or leaf-segments not rigid or spiny. Involucre usually ovoid; bracts with prominent veins; appendages long-cuspidate or with a long apical spine, spiny or fimbriate at the base, the lower fimbriae usually free and not forming auricles. Florets pink, purple or red.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 129. C. boissieri} DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  7}: 303 (1838). Perennial. Stems 10-30 cm. Leaves glabrous to lanate. Capitula usually solitary. Florets pink or purple. Pappus ¼-½ as long as achene.{\i  S. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems ± erect
\par
2 Leaves whitish-tomentose or -lanate above ...................... ({\b k}) subsp. {\b spachii}
\par
2 Leaves green above ................................................................ ({\b i}) subsp. {\b paui}
\par
1 Stems procumbent or ascending
\par
3 Leaves green above
\par
4 Leaves green beneath ................................................. ({\b g}) subsp. {\b mariolensis}
\par
4 Leaves grey-tomentose beneath ................................... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b pomeliana}
\par
3 Leaves white- or grey-tomentose on both surfaces
\par
5 Leaves white-tomentose
\par
6 Involucre ovoid-cylindrical .............................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b dufourii}
\par
6 Involucre ovoid to ovoid-globose
\par
7 Leaf-segments lanceolate; appendages triangular-lanceolate
\par
  ...................................................................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b willkommii}
\par
7 Leaf-segments linear; appendages ovate ...................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b jaennensis}
\par
5 Leaves grey-tomentose or -arachnoid
\par
8 Involucre ovoid-cylindrical
\par
9 Appendages long pectinate-fimbriate ........................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b resupinata}
\par
9 Appendages very shortly fimbriate-dentate ..................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b prostrata}
\par
8 Involucre ovoid or ovoid-globose
\par
10 Stems decumbent; involucre ovoid ..................................... ({\b h}) subsp. {\b pinae}
\par
10 Stems ascending; involucre ovoid-globose ................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b boissieri}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b dufourii} Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 201 (1976) ({\i C. tenuifolia} Dufour, non Salisb.): Stems 10-30 cm, procumbent or ascending, rarely suberect. Leaves white-tomentose on both surfaces; lower pinnatifid. Involucre ovoid-cylindrical; appendages with a long, recurved apical spine. Florets pink. Pappus 1/4-1/3 as long as achene. {\i Calcareous hillsides. • E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b resupinata} (Cosson) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. resupinata }Cosson): Stems 10-20 cm, procumbent. Leaves grey-arachnoid-lanate; lower pinnatisect. Involucre ovoid-
\par

\par
279}
\par