{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Microlophus} (Cass.) Dostál. Perennial or biennial. Lower leaves lyrately lobed. Appendages of middle bracts with a patent, deciduous apical spine. Pappus present.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 68. C. thracica} (Janka) Hayek in Stoj. & Stefanov,{\i  Fl. Balg. }1194 (1925) ({\i Serratula thracica} Janka). Stems up to 50 cm, simple or sparingly branched. Leaves coriaceous, decurrent; lower runcinate-lyrate, with few triangular lobes, the terminal one hastate; upper oblong-lanceolate, with auriculate base, the uppermost surrounding the capitula. Involucre c. 20 mm in diameter; outer bracts ovate, the inner oblong-lanceolate; appendages fimbriate, with patent apical spine 2-5 mm. Florets yellow. Achenes 3 mm; pappus as long as or slightly longer than achene.{\i  E.part of Balkan peninsula, S.E. Romania.} Bu Gr Rm Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Cynaroides} Dostál. Biennial, rarely perennial. Leaves undivided, rarely the basal lyrate-pinnatipartite. Appendages of middle bracts with a persistent, rigid apical spine. Pappus present.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 69. C. charrelii} Halácsy & Dörfler,{\i  Jahres-Kat. Wien. Bot. Tauschver.}{\b  1894}: 6 (1894). Stems 50-70 cm, erect, with short branches, broadly winged. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, the upper decurrent, surrounding the capitula. Involucre 40-55 mm in diameter; bracts coriaceous, the middle with ovate-lanceolate, stramineous appendages with a short, rigid, apical spine. Florets yellow. Achenes 3·5 mm, glabrous; pappus about twice as long as achene.{\i  Rocks. • N. Greece} ({\i near Edhessa}). Gr.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Acrolophus} (Cass.) Dobrocz. (Sect.{\i  Acrolophus} (Cass.) DC.; {\i Acosta} Adanson). Annual to perennial herbs, rarely dwarf shrubs; stems usually erect and much-branched. Leaves usually pinnatisect with narrow segments. Capitula comparatively small. Bracts usually with prominent veins on the back. Appendages, if present, shortly decurrent at base, usually fimbriate, usually spiny at apex. Pappus usually present.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   The species of this large subgenus all tend to have the same characteristic habit which enables them to be fairly readily recognized. The constituent species are, however, extremely difficult to separate, the diagnostic characters are slight and variable, and intermediates (often considered to be hybrids) are frequent. Identification is often only possible after many specimens of a population have been studied. Further experimental study of the subgenus is required.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. PANNOPHYLLUM Hayek. Stems herbaceous, the branches not spiny. Leaf-segments elliptical to lanceolate, not rigid or spiny. Involucre usually ovoid; appendages sometimes with a short spine, not filiform and plumose-fimbriate at apex, the lower fimbriae usually free. Florets pink, rarely purple, yellow or white.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 70. C. cineraria} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 912 (1753). Perennial. Stems up to 80 cm, erect, rarely procumbent, with few branches above. Leaves more or less tomentose, rarely glabrescent; lower lyrate to 2-pinnatisect. Capitula solitary. Bracts broadly ovate; appendages usually dark brown, the apex acuminate, not spinose; fimbriae 0·5-2 mm. Florets purple. Pappus 2/3 as long as achene, rarely absent. 2n = 18.{\i  Rocks, mainly near the sea. W. coast of Italy, Sicilia.} It Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   A polymorphic species. Many taxa intermediate between the following subspecies have been described.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant densely white-tomentose
\par 2 Lower leaves 1-(2-)pinnatisect with 8-12 ovate segments
\par  on each side; sinuses obtuse .............................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b cineraria}
\par 2 Lower leaves lyrate with 4-7 oblong segments on each
\par  side; sinuses acute .................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b busambarensis}
\par 1 Plant ± grey-tomentose or glabrescent
\par 3 Stems erect; leaves thin ...................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b cinerea}
\par 3 Stems procumbent; leaves fleshy ....................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b veneris}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cineraria}: Plant densely white-tomentose. Stems erect. Lower leaves 1-(2-)pinnatisect, with 8-12 segments on each side. Capitula sessile. Involucre 10-15 × 9-12 mm, ovoid-oblong; fimbriae 0·5-1·5 mm. 2n = 18. {\i W. coast of C. & S. Italy}; ?{\i Sicilia}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b busambarensis} (Guss.) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 196 (1976) ({\i C. cineraria} var.{\i  busambarensis} Guss.): Plant white-tomentose. Stems erect. Lower leaves lyrate, with 4-7 segments on each side. Capitula pedunculate. Involucre c. 18 mm in diameter, oblong-ovoid; appendages black; fimbriae up to 2 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Maritime rocks. W. & C. Sicilia; one station in W.C. Italy}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b cinerea} (Lam.) Dostál,{\i  loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. cinerea }Lam.): Plant grey-tomentose, rarely subglabrous. Stems erect. Lower leaves lyrate, with 3-5 segments on each side. Capitula long-pedunculate. Involucre up to 30 mm in diameter, ovoid.{\i  Sicilia} ({\i near Palermo}), ?{\i S. Italy}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b veneris} (Sommier) Dostál, {\i loc. cit. }(1976) ({\i C. veneris }Sommier): Plant sparsely grey-tomentose, sometimes glabrescent. Stems procumbent. Lower leaves pinnatifid, with 4-7 segments on each side. Capitula subsessile. Involucre 10-30 × 10-25 mm, ovoid. 2n = 18.{\i  Coast of N.W. Italy}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 71. C. cuspidata} Vis., {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 12} (Erganz. 1): 22 (1829). Perennial. Stems 15-30 cm, erect or ascending, simple or with 2-3 branches above. Leaves undivided, ovate-lanceolate, entire or dentate at base, usually green on upper surface, grey-tomentose beneath. Capitula solitary. Involucre c. 14 × 12 mm, ovoid-globose. Bracts 5-veined; appendages triangular-lanceolate, blackish, whitish-fimbriate, the apex 1·5 mm, subulate, recurved; lower fimbriae confluent with the hyaline margin. Florets pink. Pappus somewhat longer than the achene.{\i  Mountain rocks. • W. Jugoslavia} ({\i Biokovo Planina, S. of Split}). Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 72. C. niederi} Heldr., {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 4, {\b 13}: 380 (1860). Perennial. Stems 30-50 cm, numerous, erect or ascending, sparingly paniculately branched, whitish-tomentose. Leaves whitish-tomentose; lower 2-pinnatisect, the lateral segments oblong to broadly linear, acute; upper 1-pinnatisect. Capitula solitary. Involucre 18-20 mm, ovoid-globose; appendages covering the bracts, pale brown, the apical spine 2-2*5 mm, longer than the fimbriae. Florets purple. Pappus 11/2 times as long as achene.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • W. Greece} ({\i N. of Mesolongion}). Gr.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 73. C. kilaea} Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  3}: 643 (1875). Perennial. Stems up to 80 cm, ascending, branched above, appressed-white-tomentose. Leaves whitish-tomentose; lower lyrate, rarely undivided with lanceolate segments. Capitula in corymbs. Involucre 14 × 7 mm, ovoid-oblong; bracts appressed; appendages small, pale brown, the fimbriae and apical spine 1-1·5 mm. Florets pale pink. Pappus about as long as achene.{\i  Maritime sands. Turkey-in-Europe.} Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 74. C. wettsteinii} Degen & Dörfler, {\i Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 64}: 726 (1897). Perennial. Stems ascending, with few branches. Leaves appressed-white-tomentose; lower pinnatisect, the segments ovate. Capitula solitary. Involucre 14 × 10 mm, ovoid; appendages lanceolate, blackish, the apical spine 2 mm. Florets pink. Pappus slightly longer than achene. •{\i  S. Jugoslavia} ({\i Makedonija}). Ju.
\par
\par 270}
\par