{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 6-8 mm in diameter, ovoid-cylindrical; bracts coriaceous, ovate, indistinctly veined, with scarious margin; appendages with slender, patent apical spine 10-18 mm, strongly thickened at base, and usually 1-3 basal spines 3-5 mm. Florets pale purple, glandular, equal. Achenes c. 3 mm; pappus absent. 2n = 20.{\i  Waste places and disturbed ground. S. & S.C. Europe; naturalized elsewhere in W. & C. Europe, but less widely than formerly.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si [Au Be Br Ge Ho].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. torreana} Ten.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Neap.}{\b  1829}: 15 (1830), described from S.E. Italy (Mte. Gargano), is said to be like {\b 148} but has the stems erect with erect branches and the appendages with more slender spines; further investigation is required. Plants of hybrid origin between {\b 148} and {\b 153} (referred to as {\i C. asperocalcitrapa} Gren. & Godron, {\i C. calcitrapaspera} Gren. & Godron, {\i C. arrectispina} Bertol. and{\i  C. calcitrapoides} auct., non L.) occur commonly where the species grow together.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 149. C. pontica} Prodan & E. I. Nyárády in Prodan, {\i Centaur. Român}. 57 (1930). Like {\b 148} but with long-pedunculate capitula; involucre c. 12 mm in diameter; apical spine of the appendages up to 30 mm, stout, the basal spines up to 15 mm; achenes c. 4 mm; pappus present.{\i  Maritime sands. • E. Romania} ({\i near Sulina}). Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Seridia }(Juss.) Czerep. Annual or perennial. Lower leaves entire to pinnatisect; upper entire to lobed, usually decurrent. Appendages not decurrent at base, palmately spiny at apex, the apical spine not or slightly longer than the others. Pappus usually present.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 150. C. sonchifolia} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 915 (1753) (incl.{\i  C. jacobi} Dufour). Perennial. Stems 30-40 cm, erect, corymbosely branched, scabrid-puberulent, with wide dentate wings. Leaves hispidulous; lower ovate to lyrate, spinulose-dentate, petiolate; upper entire to lyrate, lanceolate. Capitula solitary, surrounded by upper leaves. Involucre c. 20 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages as long as or longer than bract, deflexed, yellowish-brown, the spines 3-5 mm, 5-7, the apical slightly longer. Florets purple, the outer scarcely patent. Achenes 4-4·5 mm; pappus c. 2 mm, reddish. {\i Maritime sands. • Mediterranean region.} ?Cr Gr Hs It Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 151. C. seridis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 915 (1753). Perennial. Stems 30-80 cm, erect, simple or branched, winged. Leaves hispidulous; lower petiolate. Capitula solitary, surrounded by upper leaves. Involucre 15-25 mm in diameter, ovoid to subglobose; appendages slightly deflexed, the spines 3-5 mm, (5-)7-11, the apical somewhat longer, 1½ times as long as bract. Florets purple, the outer patent. Achenes 4-5 mm; pappus absent in outer and short in inner achenes. •{\i  S. & S.E. Spain.} ?Bl Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lower leaves lyrate-pinnatifid .......................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b maritima}
\par 
1 Lower leaves sinuately lobed to entire
\par 
2 Appendages with stout spines at apex, the central one
\par 
  longer than the others ........................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b seridis}
\par 
2 Appendages with slender spines at apex, the central one
\par 
  not longer than the others .................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b cruenta}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b seridis}: Lower leaves oblong-ovate in outline, sinuately lobed; upper oblong-lanceolate, pinnately lobed, the segments spinulose-mucronate. Involucre 20-25 mm in diameter subglobose; appendages with stout apical spines, the central spine longer than the others.{\i  Dry, open habitats. S. Spain}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cruenta} (Willd.) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 203 (1976)({\i C. cruenta} Willd.): Lower leaves broadly ovate; upper ovate-lanceolate, mucronate, spinulose-denticulate. Involucre 17-22 mm in diameter, subglobose; appendages with slender apical spines, the central spine not longer than the others.{\i  Rocky ground. S.E. Spain} ({\i near Jativa}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b maritima} (Dufour) Dostál,{\i  loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. maritima} Dufour): Leaves dentate, mucronate; lower lyrate pinnatifid; upper auriculate-semiamplexicaul. Involucre c. 25 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages ovate-lanceolate, strongly deflexed, the apical spines subequal.{\i  Maritime sands. S. & S.E. Spain.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 152. C. sphaerocephala} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 916 (1753). Perennial. Stems 5-70 cm, procumbent to erect, simple or branched, leafy up to capitulum, not winged. Leaves spinulose-mucronate, hispidulous to arachnoid-tomentose, viscid; lower usually lyrate; upper usually entire or dentate, sometimes auriculate-semiamplexicaul. Capitula solitary; involucre 12-35 mm in diameter; bracts not distinctly veined; appendages reddish-brown, deflexed, with 5-13 slender spines 3-5 mm, the apical usually somewhat longer. Florets purple or sometimes the inner whitish, the outer patent. Achenes c. 5 mm, shiny; pappus absent in outer and short in inner achenes.{\i  Sandy ground, mainly by the sea. W. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Co ?Cr ?Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems up to 60 cm, corymbosely branched; involucre
\par 
  8-20 mm in diameter, the appendages with yellowish-
\par 
  orange spines .................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b lusitanica}
\par 
1 Stems 5-30 cm; simple or sparingly branched; involucre 
\par 
  (15-)20-35 mm in diameter, the appendages with yellow spines
\par 
2 Stems 5-15 cm; involucre 30-35 mm in diameter, truncate
\par 
  at base .......................................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b polyacantha}
\par 
2 Stems 10-30 cm; involucre c. 20 mm in diameter, rounded
\par 
  at base
\par 
3 Leaves arachnoid-hairy, mucronate-dentate .......... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b sphaerocephala}
\par 
3 Leaves tomentose, somewhat viscid, spiny-dentate ...... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b malacitana}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sphaerocephala}: Stems 5-15(-50) cm, simple or sparingly branched. Leaves arachnoid-hairy, mucronate-dentate, sessile; lower lyrate; upper entire, auriculate-semiamplexicaul at base. Involucre (15-)25-30 mm in diameter; appendages with 5-9(-13) yellow spines. Achenes reddish-brown; pappus white, half as long as achene.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lusitanica} (Boiss. & Reuter) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 432 (1879) ({\i C. lusitanica }Boiss. & Reuter): Stems up to 60 cm, corymbosely branched. Leaves tomentose, scabrid; lower lyrate; upper obovate-oblong, lyrate to sinuately lobed or serrate. Involucre 8-15(-20) mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages with 5-7 yellowish-orange spines. Achenes whitish; pappus white. 2n = 20, 22.{\i  C. & S. Portugal}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b malacitana} (Boiss.) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 203 (1976) ({\i C. malacitana} Boiss.): Stems up to 30 cm, simple or sparingly branched. Leaves tomentose, somewhat viscid, spiny-dentate; lower lyrately lobed; upper obovate to elliptic-lanceolate, shortly petiolate, auriculate at base; upper indistinctly auriculate, semiamplexicaul. Involucre c. 20 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; appendages with divaricate spines. Pappus short. •{\i  S. Spain}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b polyacantha} (Willd.) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. polyacantha} Willd.): Stems 5-15(-30) cm, simple or rarely branched. Leaves arachnoid-hairy; lower lyrate to pinnatifid; upper pinnatilobed to irregularly mucronate-dentate. Involucre 30-35 mm in diameter, ovoid, truncate at base; appendages with equal divaricate spines all over the back. Achenes whitish; pappus short. 2n = 22.{\i  Sandy or rocky places. • Portugal, S.Spain.}
\par 

\par 
283}
\par