{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 16 Leaves setulose-puberulent and sparsely lanate, the 
\par 
   lower with linear-filiform segments; involucre 12-16 mm
\par 
   in diameter, subglobose; appendages with greyish-brown
\par 
   centre, the apex aristate; pappus somewhat longer than
\par 
   achene; stem up to 20 cm ................................................ ({\b h}) subsp. {\b albanica}
\par 
13 Appendages with brown or black centre
\par 
17 Mature leaves white-tomentose, the lower with linear-
\par 
   oblong segments ............................................................ ({\b r}) subsp. {\b heldreichii}
\par 
17 Mature leaves green, glabrescent, the lower with 
\par 
   linear or linear-lanceolate segments
\par 
18 Leaves puberulent, the lower pinnatisect with linear 
\par 
   segments; involucre 17-20 mm in diameter; appendages 
\par 
   with a triangular-lanceolate central spot .......................... ({\b i}) subsp. {\b ipecensis}
\par 
18 Leaves tomentose, the lower 2-pinnatifid with lanceolate
\par 
   segments; involucre 12-14 mm in diameter; appendages
\par 
   with a broadly ovate or orbicular central spot
\par 
19 Leaves soft, the segments oblong-lanceolate; appendages
\par 
   with black central spot .......................................................... ({\b j}) subsp. {\b deusta}
\par 
19 Leaves coriaceous, the segments linear to lanceolate;
\par 
   appendages with brown or pale brown central spot
\par 
20 Segments of leaves linear-filiform; appendages with
\par 
   pale brown centre, aristate ............................................... ({\b h}) subsp. {\b albanica}
\par 
20 Segments of leaves linear-lanceolate; appendages with
\par 
   brown centre ..................................................................... ({\b k}) subsp. {\b brunnea}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b costae} (Willk.) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.} {\b 71}: 205 (1976) ({\i C. costae} Willk.): Perennial, woody at base. Stems c. 10 cm, with simple branches. Leaves green above, arachnoid-hairy beneath; lower pinnatisect with narrowly linear, entire or mucronate-dentate segments. Involucre 8-10 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages small, not covering bracts, semilunate, bilobed, lacerate, with triangular, blackish-brown central spot, the margin wide, hyaline, the apex emarginate, mucronulate. Florets pink. Achenes c. 3 mm, pale; pappus c. 1·5 mm. {\i Lowland. • N.E. Spain}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b latronum} (Pau) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1916) ({\i C. latronum} Pau): Biennial. Stems up to 60 cm, paniculately branched, with virgate branches from the middle. Leaves green; lower pinnatisect with linear segments. Involucre (6-)7-8(-10) mm in diameter, ovoid-cylindrical; appendages broadly ovate, not covering bracts with triangular-lanceolate, reddish-brown, obscurely. striate central spot, the margin hyaline, lacerate, the apex emarginate, with rigid mucro. Florets pink. Achenes c. 3 mm; pappus c. 1 mm. •{\i  N.C. Spain}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b alba} ({\i C. strepens} Hoffmanns. & Link): Biennial. Stems 10-40 cm, corymbosely branched, with patent branches above the middle. Leaves lanate, greyish-green; lower pinnatipartite or 2-pinnatisect, with linear-lanceolate, sometimes mucronate-dentate segments. Involucre 12-15 mm wide, ovoid-globose; appendages covering bracts, white, pellucid, cucullate, shining, entire, the apex emarginate, aristate. Florets pale purple. Achenes 2·5-3 mm; pappus ¼-½ as long as achene. •{\i  Spain, Italy}; ?{\i France}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b splendens} (L.) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} 387 (1882) ({\i C. splendens} L., {\i C. deusta} subsp.{\i  concolor} (DC.) Hayek): Biennial. Stems up to 60 cm, paniculately branched from the middle. Leaves green, puberulent; lower 2-pinnatisect, with lanceolate, mucronate segments. Involucre 11-12 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages covering bracts, orbicular, white, with yellow centre, the margin wide, membranous, pellucid, convolute above, the apex emarginate, muticous. Florets pale pink to white. Achenes c. 3 mm; pappus 1/3 as long as achene. 2n = 20. • {\i Italy, Sicilia, S. Switzerland, Balkan peninsula}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b tenoreana} (Willk.) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.} {\b 71}: 205 (1976) ({\i C. tenoreana} Willk.,{\i  C. incana} Ten., non Burm. fil.): Perennial. Stems 30-50 cm, simple or with few branches. Leaves white- or silvery-tomentose; lower undivided and broadly elliptical or lyrately lobed, the lobes ovate to lanceolate, entire, obtuse mucronate. Involucre 20-25 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose appendages orbicular, not completely covering bracts, with blackish-brown central spot, the margin wide, hyaline, erose-lacerate, the apex muticous. Florets purple. Achenes c. 4 mm, black; pappus very short or almost absent.{\i  Mountain pastures and calcareous rocks. • C. Appennini}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b pestalottii} (De Not.) Arcangeli, {\i Comp. Fl. Ital.} 387 (1882): Biennial. Stems 50-80 cm, corymbosely branched with erect branches. Leaves greyish-green; lower 2-pinnatisect, with linear, acute segments. Involucre 7-10 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; appendages broadly ovate, not covering bracts, with small, semilunate, blackish-brown central spot, the margin wide hyaline, long-fimbriate, the apex emarginate, mucronate. Florets pink. Achenes c. 4 mm; pappus absent.{\i  Dry, rocky pastures. N. Italy.} ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b g}) Subsp. {\b diomedea} (Gasparr.) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 205 (1976) ({\i C. diomedea} Gasparr.): Perennial, woody at base. Stems 40-50 cm, paniculately branched from the middle. Leaves densely appressed-white-tomentose; lower 2-pinnatisect. Involucre c. 10 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages suborbicular, not completely covering bracts, with triangular, brown central spot, the margin entire, sometimes somewhat lacerate, the apex obtuse, muticous. Florets purple. Achenes c. 4 mm; pappus very short.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • Italy }({\i Isole Tremiti}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b h}) Subsp. {\b albanica} (Halácsy) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. albanica} Halácsy): Perennial. Stems 10-20 cm, sparingly branched below. Leaves setulose-puberulent and sparsely lanate; lower 2-pinnatisect, with linear-filiform, remotely dentate segments. Involucre 12-16 mm in diameter, subglobose; appendages orbicular, white, scarious, with pale blackish-brown centre, the margin white, hyaline, pellucid, lacerate or denticulate, the apex aristate. Florets purple. Achenes 3 mm; pappus somewhat longer than achene.{\i  Mountain rocks. • N.W. Greece}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b i}) Subsp. {\b ipecensis} (Rech. fil.) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. ipecensis} Rech. fil.): Perennial, woody at base. Stems c. 30 cm, sparingly branched at middle. Leaves green, puberulent, glabrescent; lower pinnatisect, with remote, linear, remotely dentate repand segments. Involucre 17-20 mm in diameter, subglobose appendages 10 × 8 mm, ovate-orbicular, covering bracts, with triangular-lanceolate, black central spot, the margin wide, hyaline, membranous, indistinctly denticulate, the apex mucronate. Florets pink. Achenes c. 3 mm; pappus 1 mm.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • S.W. Jugoslavia} ({\i near Pec}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b j}) Subsp. {\b deusta} (Ten.) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 420 (1879) ({\i C. deusta} Ten.): Biennial. Stems 20-40 cm, erect, paniculately branched with long branches. Leaves soft, tomentose, becoming green and subglabrous; lower 2-pinnatifid with oblong-lanceolate segments. Involucre 12-14 mm wide, subglobose to ovoid-globose; appendages covering bracts, orbicular, convex, scarious, with large broadly ovate to orbicular black central spot, the apex mucronate. Florets pink. Achenes 3 mm; pappus 1/4-1/3 as long as achene. 2n = 18. •{\i  Italy, Balkan peninsula}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b k}) Subsp. {\b brunnea} (Halácsy) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 205 (1976) ({\i C. deusta }var.{\i  brunnea} Halácsy): Like subsp. ({\b j}) but leaves coriaceous, the lower with linear-lanceolate segments appendages with brown central spot. •{\i  N.W. Greece}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b l}) Subsp. {\b epapposa} (Velen.) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. epapposa} Velen.): Like subsp. ({\b j}) but stems 10-20 cm; leaves arachnoid-hairy, the lower 2-pinnatisect with linear segments; involucre 7-8 mm wide; appendages ovate-orbicular, with triangular, brown central spot; pappus absent.{\i  Dry hillsides. • Bulgaria, E. Jugoslavia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b m}) Subsp. {\b caliacrae} (Prodan) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. caliacrae} Prodan): Like subsp. ({\b j}) but stems procumbent; invo
\par 

\par 
288}
\par