{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 cylindrical; appendages with a patent apical spine 3-4 mm. Florets purple. Pappus c. 1/3 as long as achene.{\i  Waste places. • S.E. Spain.}
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b prostrata} (Cosson) Dostál,{\i  loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. prostrata} Cosson, ?{\i C. amoi} Amo): Stems 20-30 cm, procumbent. Leaves grey-tomentose on both surfaces; lower lyrate or undivided. Involucre 6-7 mm in diameter, ovoid-cylindrical; appendages with a short apical spine, the lateral fimbriae 0·5 mm. Florets purple.{\i  Mountain grassland. • S.E. Spain}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b boissieri}: Stems 10-30 cm, ascending. Leaves grey-tomentose on both surfaces; lower undivided or pinnatifid. Involucre c. 11 × 8 mm, ovoid-globose; appendages triangular-lanceolate, with recurved apical spine 3-5 mm, the lateral fimbriae confluent with the hyaline margin. Florets pink.{\i  Rocky places on mountains. • S. & E. Spain.}
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b willkommii} (Schultz Bip.) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. willkommii }Schultz Bip.): Stems 10-30 cm, ascending. Leaves white-tomentose on both surfaces; lower pinnatisect. Involucre c. 7 × 5 mm, ovoid-globose; appendages triangular-lanceolate, with a recurved apical spine 4-5 mm, the lateral fimbriae long. Florets pale pink.{\i  Dry grassland and calcareous rocks. •S.E. Spain.}
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b pomeliana} (Batt. & Trabut) Dostál,{\i  loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. pomeliana} Batt. & Trabut): Stems 30-50 cm, ascending. Leaves green above, grey-tomentose beneath; lower undivided. Involucre 15-17 mm, globose; appendages with lower fimbriae confluent with the hyaline margin. Florets pink. {\i Stony slopes. E. Spain} ({\i S.E. of Valencia}). ({\i Algeria.})
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b g}) Subsp. {\b mariolensis} (Rouy) Dostál,{\i  loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. mariolensis }Rouy): Stems 10-20 cm, procumbent or ascending. Leaves green on both surfaces; lower pinnatisect. Involucre large; appendages with a slender, patent apical spine. Florets purple.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S.E. Spain} ({\i Sierra Mariola}).
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b h}) Subsp. {\b pinae} (Pau) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. pinae} Pau): Stems decumbent. Leaves lanate on both surfaces; lower pinnatisect. Involucre 16-20 mm, ovoid; appendages with a short, recurved apical spine. Florets pink. •{\i  E. Spain} ({\i provs. Castellon, Teruel}).
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b i}) Subsp. {\b paui} (Loscos ex Willk.) Dostál, {\i op. cit.} 202 (1976) ({\i C. paui} Loscos ex Willk.): Stems 10-30 cm, erect; branches patent. Leaves usually green above, whitish-tomentose beneath; lower pinnatisect. Involucre 15-20 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages large, with a recurved apical spine, the lower fimbriae confluent with the hyaline margin. Florets purple. {\i Calcareous mountain rocks. • E. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Espedan, N. of Valencia}).
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b j}) Subsp. {\b jaennensis} (Degen & Debeaux) Dostál,{\i  loc. cit.} (1916) ({\i C. jaennensis} Degen & Debeaux): Stems 10-20 cm, procumbent or ascending. Leaves white-tomentose on both surfaces; lower pinnatisect. Involucre ovoid; appendages with a recurved apical spine 5 mm. Florets pink.{\i  Rocky and open places. • Spain} ({\i prov. Jaen}).
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b k}) Subsp. {\b spachii} (Schultz Bip. ex Willk.) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. spachii} Schultz Bip. ex Willk.): Stems 10-20 cm, usually erect. Leaves whitish-tomentose or -lanate on both surfaces; lower 1(-2)-pinnatisect. Involucre 12 mm, ovoid-oblong; appendages with a patent apical spine 5 mm. Florets pale pink.{\i  Hillsides. • S.E. Spain }({\i provs. Albacete, Valencia}).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. cordubensis} Font Quer, {\i Collect. Bot.} ({\i Barcelona}) {\b 1}: 310 (1941), described from S. Spain (near Cordoba), is said to be like {\b 129}({\b a}) but has the appendages with erect apical spines and the pappus slightly longer than the achene; further information is required.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 130. C. lagascae} Nyman, {\i Syll.} 33 (1854-1855) ({\i C. incana} Lag., non Ten.). Perennial 10-20 cm. Stems erect, branched at about the middle. Leaves arachnoid-tomentose, sometimes glabrescent; lower lyrate, with oblong segments; middle cauline pinnatifid, with linear segments. Capitula solitary. Involucre 12-15 × 7-9 mm, ovoid-oblong; appendages with a recurved apical spine 5 mm, the lower fimbriae confluent with the hyaline margin. Florets pale pink. Pappus about as long as achene. {\i Rock crevices and screes. • S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 131. C. bombycina} Boiss. ex DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  7}: 302 (1838). Caespitose perennial with basal rosettes of leaves. Stems 10-20(-40) cm, procumbent to ascending. Leaves white-tomentose; lower undivided or pinnatisect; middle cauline pinnatisect, with obovate segments. Capitula usually solitary, rarely in pairs. Florets pink to red. Involucre 10-12 × 7-9 mm, ovoid-oblong; appendages with apical spine 2-3 mm. Achenes 5 mm; pappus 0·7 mm. {\i Calcareous rocks and screes. • S. Spain }({\i prov. Granada}). Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b bombycina}: Densely caespitose. Involucral appendages with apical spine c. 2 mm, with a distinct hyaline margin. Florets pink to red.{\i  Sierra Tejeda}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b funkii} (Schultz Bip.) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 202 (1976) ({\i C. funkii }Schultz Bip., {\i C. boissieri }var.{\i  nevadensis} Boiss. & Reuter): Laxly caespitose. Involucral appendages with apical spine c. 3 mm, without a distinct hyaline margin. Florets red, becoming yellowish. {\i Sierra Nevada and hills around Granada}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 132. C. monticola} Boiss. ex DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  7}: 302 (1838). Perennial. Stems 20-30 cm, erect, with long branches. Leaves lanate, more or less glabrescent; lower pinnatisect; middle undivided. Capitula solitary. Involucre 12-15 × 7-9 mm, ovoid; appendages with apical spine 2-3 mm. Florets pink. Pappus c. 1/4 as long as achene.{\i  Dry screes. • S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 133. C. carratracensis} Lange, {\i Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kjøbenhavn}{\b  1881}: 94 (1882). Perennial. Stems 20-60 cm, erect, simple or with few branches. Leaves floccose-lanate, glabrescent; lower undivided or lyrate. Capitula solitary. Involucre 12-18 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; appendages shortly acuminate at apex, the fimbriae confluent with the distinct hyaline margin. Florets pink. Pappus shorter than achene.{\i  Dry rocks or scrub. • S. Spain} ({\i Carratraca, prov. Málaga}). Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. APLOLEPIDAE (J. Arènes) Dostál. Like Sect. {\i Acrocentroides} but bracts with indistinct veins, entire, without distinct appendages, or with denticulate to fimbriate appendages, the apex mucronate to spiny; florets pink.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 134. C. aplolepa} Moretti,{\i  Gior. Fis. }({\i Brugnat}.) ser. 2, {\b 9}: 154 (1826). Perennial. Stems 20-70 cm, erect or ascending. Leaves glabrous to tomentose; lower undivided to 2-pinnatisect. Capitula solitary or in clusters of 2-3. Florets pink.{\i  Dry, usually rocky places. • W. Italy and small islands of the Tyrrhenian sea.} It Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bracts entire; appendages absent
\par 2 Lower leaves 1(-2)-pinnatisect with linear segments;
\par  involucre 10-13 mm in diameter ........................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b aeolica}
\par 2 Lower leaves entire to sublyrate; involucre 8-10 mm in
\par  diameter .......................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b pandataria}
\par 1 Bracts denticulate to fimbriate; appendages present
\par 3 Pappus absent
\par 4 Achenes grey; appendages shortly fimbriate ............... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b carueliana} 
\par 4 Achenes black; appendages denticulate .................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b maremmana}
\par
\par 280}
\par