{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 very short, the others 10-15(-30) cm, more or less branched, very narrowly winged. Leaves greyish-green beneath, with arachnoid indumentum above; basal 10-13 cm, in a rosette, oblong in outline, lyrate-pinnatifid with ovate-triangular, dentate lobes, the apical 3 times as large as the others; upper linear. Capitula solitary. Involucre c. 10 mm in diameter, ovoid; bracts tomentose, yellowish; appendages not decurrent, with apical spine 15-30 mm and 1-2 short black lateral spines. Florets yellow, glandular. Achenes c. 2·5 mm; pappus absent in outer florets, as long as achene in inner. {\i Dry places. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 159. C. melitensis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 917 (1753). Annual or biennial. Stems up to 80 cm, erect, winged above, sparingly branched from the middle. Leaves green, crispate-puberulent, the margin scabrid; lower lanceolate, lyrate-pinnatifid to sinuately lobed; upper lanceolate. Capitula solitary or in groups of 2-3. Involucre 8-12 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; bracts glabrous or puberulent, veinless; appendages not decurrent, short, with patent apical spine 5-8 mm and 1-3 remote, short lateral spines on each side. Florets yellow, glandular, the outer patent. Achenes c. 2·5 mm; pappus as long as achene. 2n = 24.{\i  Dry places and disturbed ground. S. Europe.} Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 160. C. sulphurea} Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Horti Berol.} 930 (1809). Annual. Stems 30-50 cm, erect, divaricately branched above, narrowly winged, leafy almost to apex. Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate or the lower lyrate-pinnatifid, sparsely lanate; lower petiolate; upper sessile. Involucre (12-)15-20 mm in diameter, ovoid-conical; bracts ovate, sparsely lanate to subglabrous; appendages not decurrent, semiorbicular, with slender, patent, dark purple apical spine 15-20 mm and very slender lateral spines 5-6 mm; appendages of outer bracts with subequal, whitish spines 7-8 mm. Florets yellow, glandular. Achenes c. 4·5 mm; pappus c. 2 mm, brownish.{\i  Disturbed or rocky ground. S. & S.E. Spain}. Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 161. C. nicaeensis} All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem.}{\b  1}: 162 (1785). Biennial. Stems 30-60 cm, erect, virgately branched above, not winged. Lower leaves lyrate-pinnatifid; upper oblong, cordate, semiamplexicaul; uppermost oblong to lanceolate. Capitula solitary, surrounded by upper leaves. Involucre 12-18 mm in diameter, ovoid; bracts glabrous; appendages not decurrent, with apical spine 10-15 mm and 2-3 short lateral spines on each side. Florets yellow. Achenes c. 4·5 mm; pappus 1-1·5 mm.{\i  Cultivated or waste ground. W. & C. Mediterranean region eastwards to Malta.} Hs It Sa Si
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 162. C. eriophora} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 916 (1753). Annual. Stems 20-40 cm, erect, divaricately branched, the branches broadly winged. Lower leaves incise-dentate to pinnatifid; upper oblong-lanceolate, the uppermost linear, dentate, mucronate, sparsely lanate. Capitula solitary, surrounded by upper leaves. Involucre 15-20 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; bracts densely arachnoid; appendages not decurrent, with brownish, slender, patent apical spine 15-26 mm and 3 very short, remote lateral spines on each side less than 5 mm long. Florets yellow, glandular. Achenes c. 4·5 mm, shiny; pappus c. 2 mm, brownish. 2n = 24. {\i Roadsides and cultivated ground. S. & S.E. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 163. C. diluta} Aiton, {\i Hort. Kew.}{\b  3}: 261 (1789). Perennial. Stems up to 50 cm, erect, branched. Lower leaves incise-dentate, the lowermost lyrate; upper entire, semiamplexicaul. Capitula solitary, pedunculate. Involucre 8-12 mm in diameter, ovoid; bracts brown, appressed; appendages shortly decurrent, orbicular-ovate, with membranous margin, irregularly fimbriate-lacerate, the apex emarginate with a rigid, filiform spine in the notch. Florets purple, the marginal distinctly patent. Inner achenes with pappus as long as achene; outer with very short pappus.{\i  S.W. Spain; a frequent casual elsewhere.} Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen.{\b  Phalolepis} (Cass.) Dobrocz. Biennial or perennial. Lower and middle leaves pinnatisect. Appendages denticulate to fimbriate, with apex usually muticous or mucronulate. Pappus present or absent.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. PSEUDOPHALOLEPIS Klokov. Biennial. Appendages with or without a dark central spot, the margin scarcely distinct from the centre.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 164. C. margaritacea} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  4}, {\i Syll. App.}{\b  3}: 14 (1830) ({\i C. splendens} auct., non L.). Stems 15-120 cm, erect or ascending, branched from the middle, arachnoid-hairy. Leaves densely arachnoid-hairy or lanate; lower (1-)2-pinnatisect, with linear segments; middle pinnatisect; uppermost linear, undivided. Capitula solitary, rarely in groups of 2-3. Involucre 8-25 × 6-27 mm, ovoid or globose; bracts yellow; appendages 4-12 × 3·5-9 mm, orbicular or elliptical, concolorous or with dark basal spot, irregularly denticulate or lacerate, muticous or with apical spine. Florets pink, purple, white or yellow. Achenes 2-5 mm, white, brown or blackish, sometimes with white ribs; pappus shorter to longer than achene. {\i S. part of U.S.S.R.} Rs (C, W, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   The following subspecies apparently represent the localized remnants of a former species of more continuous distribution (cf. D. Dobroczova,{\i  Ukr. Bot. Zur.}{\b  6}({\b 2}): 63-65 (1949); M. Klokov, {\i Trav. Inst. Bot.} ({\i Charkov}) {\b 1}: 78-106 (1935); M. Iljin,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. URSS}{\b  26}: 31-38 (1927)).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucre 8-13 × 6-10 mm; appendages with apical spine;
\par 
  achenes 2-4 mm
\par 
2 Appendages not covering bracts, oblong-elliptical, with
\par 
  brownish-purple central spot ........................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b breviceps}
\par 
2 Appendages covering bracts, orbicular, with yellowish 
\par 
  centre .................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b pseudoleucolepis}
\par 
1 Involucre 11-25 × 9-27 mm; appendages muticous; achenes
\par 
  3-5 mm
\par 
3 Appendages not pellucid
\par 
4 Florets white or yellowish; achenes white or pale brown
\par 
  ..................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b margaritacea}
\par 
4 Florets pale pink to purple, rarely whitish; achenes 
\par 
  blackish when mature
\par 
5 Involucre 15-20 mm in diameter, globose; appendages 
\par 
  covering the bracts, white; florets purple ................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b margaritalba}
\par 
5 Involucre 11-15 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages not
\par 
  completely covering the bracts, yellow or pale orange;
\par 
  florets pink, rarely whitish ................................. ({\b e}) subsp. {\b protomargaritacea}
\par 
3 Appendages pellucid, shining
\par 
6 Appendages 10-12 mm, keeled, apiculate, coriaceous 
\par 
  along keel, the margin sometimes convolute
\par 
7 Florets whitish to pale yellow; involucre 22-27 mm in diameter;
  stem scabrid above ...................................................... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b appendicata}
\par 
7 Florets pink; involucre 16-17 mm in diameter; stem 
\par 
  smooth above ...................................................................... ({\b g}) subsp. {\b konkae}
\par 
6 Appendages 4-7 mm, indistinctly keeled, not distinctly
\par 
  apiculate, not coriaceous, the margin flat
\par 
8 Florets pink or pale purple, rarely white or yellowish;
\par 
  stem scabrid above
\par 
9 Appendages yellow, hard, convex ............................. ({\b h}) subsp. {\b protogerberi}
\par 
9 Appendages white with a dark basal spot, soft, not 
\par 
  distinctly convex
\par 
10 Involucre globose; achenes pale brown ........................ ({\b i}) subsp. {\b donetzica}
\par 
10 Involucre ovoid; achenes blackish ............................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b pineticola}
\par 

\par 
285}
\par