{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 lucre 6-7 mm wide; pappus 1-1·5 mm. •{\i  S.E. Romania, N.E. Bulgaria.}
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b n}) Subsp. {\b leucomalla} (Bornm.) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. leucomalla} Bornm.): Biennial. Stems up to 50 cm, paniculately branched. Leaves white-tomentose; lower lyrate-pinnatisect, with 1-3, oblong to lanceolate segments on each side. Involucre 10-12 mm in diameter, globose; appendages small, not covering bracts, triangular, white, with membranous centre, the margin wide, hyaline, pellucid, undulate, erose. Florets pink. Achenes c. 3 mm; pappus not more than 1 mm. {\i Stony slopes. • C. Macedonia} ({\i Alsar, S.E. of Prilep}).
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b o}) Subsp. {\b formanekii} (Halácsy) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. formanekii} Halácsy): Perennial. Stems up to 60 cm, divaricately branched. Leaves arachnoid-lanate; lower pinnatisect with small segments. Involucre 8 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages ovate-orbicular, not covering bracts, convex, scarious, white, the margin wide, pellucid, deeply lacerate-denticulate, the apex setaceous-acuminate. Florets pale pink. Achenes c. 3 mm; pappus c. 1 mm.{\i  Dry hills. • C. Macedonia} ({\i S.E. of Titov Veles}).
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b p}) Subsp. {\b vandasii} (Velen.) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. vandasii} Velen.): Biennial. Stems 30-50 cm, paniculately much-branched from the base with erect branches. Leaves greyish-tomentose or -puberulent; lower 2- to 3-pinnatisect, with small, linear, lobed segments. Involucre 10-12 mm in diameter, ovoid-conical or -globose; appendages small, not covering bracts, orbicular, brownish-black, with broadly ovate, blackish central spot, the margin hyaline-scarious, denticulate, slightly lacerate, the apex deeply emarginate, mucronate. Florets pink. Achenes c. 3·5 mm; pappus 0·5-1·5 mm.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S. Bulgaria} ({\i Rodopi}).
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b q}) Subsp. {\b euxina} (Velen.) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. euxina }Velen., {\i C. margaritacea} sensu Hayek, non Ten.): Biennial. Stems 40-50 cm, sparingly branched from the middle with erect branches. Leaves greyish-green or subglabrous; lower 2-pinnatisect, with remote, narrowly linear segments; upper pinnatisect. Involucre 7-8 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; appendages covering bracts, orbicular, with green centre, the margin wide, scarious, white, somewhat lacerate, the apex mucronate. Florets pink. Achenes c. 3 mm; pappus c. 3 mm. {\i Maritime sands. • N.E. Bulgaria}.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b r}) Subsp. {\b heldreichii} (Halácsy) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. heldreichii} Halácsy): Perennial. Stems 30-60 cm, caespitose, paniculately branched. Leaves appressed-white-tomentose; lower 2-pinnatisect, with linear-oblong segments. Involucre 13-20 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; appendages up to 8 mm in diameter, covering bracts, orbicular, white, semi-pellucid, with large, triangular, brownish-black or black central spot, the margin wide, pellucid, denticulate-fimbriate, the apex mucronate. Florets pale purple. Achenes c. 4 mm; pappus as long as or somewhat longer than achene.{\i  Maritime rocks. • W. Greece} ({\i E. of Mesolongion}).
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b s}) Subsp. {\b princeps} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Gugler,{\i  Centaur. Ungar. Nationalmus.} 31 (1907) ({\i C. princeps} Boiss. & Heldr.): Biennial. Stems 10-20 cm, much-branched from the base, with erect branches. Leaves viscid, glandular-punctate; lower 2-pinnatisect, with linear-lanceolate, entire or dentate segments. Involucre 20-25 mm in diameter, globose; appendages orbicular to ovate, covering bracts, up to 10 mm in diameter, cucullate-convex, with blackish-brown central spot, the margin wide, hyaline, white, denticulate, the apex aristate. Florets purplish-white. Achenes 3-4 mm; pappus c. 1 mm.{\i  Mountain rocks. •  S.C. Greece} ({\i Timfristos}).
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b t}) Subsp. {\b subciliaris} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.} {\b 71}: 205 (1976) ({\i C. subciliaris} Boiss. & Heldr.): Perennial. Stems 10-15 cm, sparingly and divaricately branched at the base. Leaves appressed arachnoid-hairy, green; lower oblong-spathulate, long-attenuate into the petiole, undivided or lyrately lobed with 2-4 minute lobes on each side. Involucre 6-10 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages covering bracts, large, orbicular, pale yellow, with large, pale brown central spot, the margin membranous, hyaline, denticulate, the apex aristate. Florets pink. Achenes c. 3 mm; pappus 1/4 as long as achene.{\i  Montane regions. W. Greece} ({\i Kefalinia}).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. huljakii} H. Wagner, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  38}: 287 (1935), from rocks at c. 600 m in N. Greece (Athos), is like subsp. ({\b q}) but is a perennial with white-tomentose 2- to 3-pinnatisect leaves and the involucre is c. 6 mm; it is perhaps another subspecies.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. sanctae-annae} H. Wagner, {\i op. cit.} 288 (1935), is probably the hybrid {\b 167} × {\b 141}.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. haynaldiformis} Prodan, {\i Anal. Acad. Rep. Pop. Române} {\b 3}({\b 18}): 691 (1950), from W. Romania (Arad region), with erect stems, lanceolate, entire leaves, involucre 20-22 mm in diameter and orbicular appendages with a black central spot and wide, yellowish, entire or weakly lacerate margin, requires further investigation.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 168. C. deustiformis} Adamovic, {\i Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}){\b  74}: 145 (1904). Perennial. Stems 10-20 cm, procumbent, the apex ascending, simple or sparingly branched. Leaves green, greyish or white, hirsute, floccose-lanate or white-tomentose, pinnatifid, with lanceolate to oblong segments. Capitula solitary. Involucre 15-16 × 8-15 mm, ovoid, ovoid-globose or -cylindrical; appendages ovate to orbicular, covering bracts, with a large, triangular to orbicular, black central spot, the margin white, hyaline, denticulate, lacerate or entire, the apex mucronate. Florets purple, the outer erecto-patent. Achenes 3-4 mm; pappus shorter than to somewhat longer than achene.{\i  Rocky slopes and cliffs in alpine and montane zones. • S. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr Ju.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves green, shortly hairy ........................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b deustiformis}
\par 1 Leaves greyish or white, floccose-lanate or white-
\par   tomentose
\par 2 Leaves floccose-lanate; involucre ovoid-globose; appen-
\par   dages not decurrent, with orbicular central spot ........({\b b}) subsp. {\b ptarmicifolia}
\par 2 Leaves white-tomentose; involucre ovoid; appendages 
\par   decurrent, with triangular central spot .................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b pseudocadmea}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b deustiformis}: Leaves green, shortly hairy. Involucre 8 mm in diameter, ovoid-cylindrical; appendages ovate, with a triangular central spot, the margin entire. Pappus shorter than achene.{\i  Albania and Macedonia}.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ptarmicifolia} (Halácsy ex Hayek) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 205 (1916) ({\i C. ptarmicifolia} Halácsy ex Hayek): Leaves greyish, floccose-lanate. Involucre 12-15 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; appendages orbicular, with an orbicular central spot, the margin lacerate. Pappus shorter than achene.{\i  S. Albania, N.W. Greece}.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b pseudocadmea} (Wagenitz) Dostál, {\i op. cit.} 206 (1976) ({\i C. pseudocadmea} Wagenitz, {\i C. cadmea} auct. eur., non Boiss.): Leaves appressed-white-tomentose. Involucre 8-10 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages broadly obovate, with a triangular central spot, the margin indistinctly decurrent, entire or denticulate below, truncate and fimbriate at the apex. Pappus about as long as achene.{\i  S.E. Greece }({\i N.W. of Athinai}).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 169. C. ferulacea} U. Martelli,{\i  Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.} nov. ser., {\b 3}: 370 (1896). Perennial. Stems 5-30 cm, the base covered with withered leaf-bases, sparingly corymbosely branched and almost leafless above. Leaves shiny, tomentose when young, glabrescent; lower in a basal rosette, with a short, reddish-brown-lanate petiole, the lamina more or less obovate, pectinate-pinnatisect, the segments numerous, setiform, acute, with cartilaginous apex;
\par 
\par 289}
\par