{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp. ({\b d}) is possibly worth specific rank, and further investigation is required.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 153. C. aspera} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 916 (1753) ({\i C. heterophylla} Willd.). Stems 20-50 cm, erect, much-branched, often white-tomentose below. Leaves green, scabrid; lower usually divided; upper entire to sinuate-dentate, mucronate, sometimes with auriculate base. Capitula solitary. Involucre (10-)15-25 mm in diameter, ovoid to globose; bracts pale reddish, indistinctly veined; appendages small, patent or deflexed, usually with 3-5 palmately arranged, divergent or parallel spines. Florets purple, the outer slightly patent. Achenes c. 4 mm, whitish, with reddish stripes; pappus 1-2 mm, reddish. 2n = 22.{\i  Dry, open habitats. • S.W. Europe, extending eastwards to C. Italy.} Bl Ga Hs It Lu Sa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems simple or sparingly branched; leaves entire or 
\par 
  serrate ........................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b scorpiurifolia}
\par 
1 Stems much-branched; lower leaves pinnatifid or lobed
\par 
2 Involucre 20-25 mm in diameter, globose; appendages 
\par 
  with parallel spines ..................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b pseudosphaerocephala}
\par 
2 Involucre 10-20 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages with
\par 
  divergent spines
\par 
3 Upper leaves oblong- to linear-lanceolate; involucre 
\par 
  c. 20 mm in diameter ............................................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b aspera}
\par 
3 Upper leaves narrowly linear to filiform; involucre
\par 
  6-15 mm in diameter ................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b stenophylla}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b aspera}: Stems up to 50 cm, erect or ascending, much-branched. Lower leaves oblong-lanceolate, pinnatifid to sinuate-dentate; upper linear-lanceolate. Involucre c. 20 mm in diameter, globose; appendages half as long as bract, with 3-5 divergent, yellow spines, the apical longer. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b stenophylla} (Dufour) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 432 (1879) ({\i C. stenophylla} Dufour): Stems up to 50 cm, erect, branched. Leaves green to grey-tomentose; lower pinnatifid to deeply dentate; upper narrowly linear to filiform, the margin revolute, entire or remotely dentate at base. Involucre 6-15 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages with 3 divergent, equal, palmate spines.{\i  E. Spain} ({\i S. of Valencia}),{\i  S. Portugal} ({\i Algarve}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b scorpiurifolia} (Dufour) Nyman, {\i loc. cit.} (1879) ({\i C. scorpiurifolia} Dufour): Stems c. 20 cm, simple or sparingly branched. Leaves undivided, entire to serrate; lower oblong-ovate, acuminate. Involucre 10-15 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages with 3-5 divergent spines.{\i  S. Spain}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b pseudosphaerocephala} (R. J. Shuttlew. ex Rouy) Gugler, {\i Centaur. Ung. Nationalmus.} 214 (1907): Stems up to 60 cm, erect, sparingly branched. Lower leaves oblong, pinnatifid to lobed; upper linear-lanceolate. Involucre 20-25 mm in diameter, globose; appendages with 3(-5) parallel spines. {\i S. France}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 154. C. napifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 916 (1753). Annual. Stems 30-50 cm, erect, branched, the branches narrowly winged. Leaves greyish-pubescent, sometimes lanate; lower broadly ovate to lyrate, with 1-2 segments on each side; upper broadly linear, entire, except near the apex. Capitula solitary. Involucre c. 10 mm in diameter, ovoid; bracts pale; appendages 3 times as wide as bracts, broadly semilunate, narrowed at the base, pectinate-spinose with 5-9(-11) slender, parallel spines. Florets purple, the outer distinctly patent. Achenes c. 3·5 mm, pale; pappus half as long as achene, pale pink.{\i  Cultivated and waste ground. W.C. Mediterranean region.} Co ?Cr ?Hs It Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 155. C. micracantha} Dufour, {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.}{\b  23}: 164 (1831). Annual. Stems 20-50 cm, erect, much-branched, the branches narrowly and interruptedly winged. Leaves lanate-puberulent, scabrid, glabrescent, denticulate; lower pinnately lobed; upper lanceolate, the uppermost linear-lanceolate. Capitula in corymbose clusters. Involucre c. 8 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages c. 3 times as wide as bracts, broadly semilunate, narrowed at the base, palmately spinose, with 4-6 parallel, rigid, yellow spines, the apical stouter and longer. Florets purple. Achenes c. 3·5 mm. •{\i  S. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 156. C. hermannii} F. Hermann,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Bulg.}{\b  4}: 27 (1931). Perennial. Stems 50-60 cm, erect, simple. Leaves greyish-tomentose; lower lyrate-pinnatifid; upper linear-lanceolate, entire, narrowly decurrent. Capitula solitary. Involucre c. 15 mm in diameter, ovoid; bracts broadly ovate; appendages c. 5 mm, palmately divided into 5-9 subulate, scarcely pungent spines, the apical scarcely larger than the laterals. Florets orange. Achenes c. ½ as long as the brownish-purple pappus.{\i  Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i near Çilingoz}). Tu. ({\i Anatolia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    Subgen.{\b  Solstitiaria} (Hill) Dobrocz. (Sect.{\i  Mesocentron} Hayek). Annual to perennial. Leaves usually decurrent; lower lobed to pinnatifid; upper entire to dentate. Appendages not or shortly decurrent at base, palmately spiny at apex, the apical spine usually much longer than the others. Pappus usually present.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 157. C. solstitialis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 917 (1753). Biennial. Stems 30-100 cm, erect, much branched from lower half, usually greyish-tomentose; branches long, winged. Leaves scabrid, and arachnoid or lanate, or greyish-tomentose; lower usually lyrate to pinnatifid, with triangular-oblong lobes; upper linear-lanceolate, entire, mucronate. Capitula solitary. Involucre 7-12(-15) mm in diameter, usually ovoid-globose; bracts broadly ovate; appendages not decurrent, short, the apical spine 10-15(-30) mm, with basal spines c. 3 mm. Florets usually yellow, eglandular, uniform. Achenes c. 2·5 mm, black; pappus up to 5 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry, open habitats. S. Europe; a frequent casual elsewhere and naturalized in parts of C. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju *Rm Rs (*W, K) Sa Si Tu [Au Br Cz Ge He *Hu po].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Appendages with stout apical spine and 1-2 short lateral spines
\par 
2 Upper leaves linear-lanceolate; appendages with yellow 
\par 
  apical spine ....................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b schouwii}
\par 
2 Upper leaves linear; appendages with reddish-brown 
\par 
  apical spine ................................................................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b erythracantha} 
\par 
1 Appendages with 3-7 spines
\par 
3 Spines yellowish, the apical stouter and much longer 
\par 
  than the others ................................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b solstitialis}
\par 
3 Spines brownish, subequal or the apical slightly 
\par 
  stouter and longer ................................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b adamii}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b solstitialis}: Appendages erect or slightly deflexed, with 3-5(-7) yellowish spines, the apical stouter and longer than the others. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b adamii} (Willd.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 430 (1879) ({\i C. adamii} Willd.): Appendages erect or slightly deflexed, with 5(-7) brownish spines, the apical not or only slightly stouter and longer than the others.{\i  C. & E. Mediterranean region; Krym}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b schouwii} (DC.) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 204 (1976) ({\i C. schouwii} DC.): Upper leaves linear-lanceolate. Appendages of outer and middle bracts with stout, yellow apical spine, and with 1-2 short lateral spines; spine of inner bracts erect, that of outer bracts deflexed. •{\i  Sicilia, Sardegna}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b erythracantha} (Halácsy) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. erythracantha} Halácsy): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but upper leaves narrowly linear; appendages of bracts with reddish-brown apical spine. •{\i  E. Greece }({\i Litokhoron, E. of Olimbos}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 158. C. idaea} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov}. {\b 2}({\b 10}): 119 (1849). Biennial. Stems numerous, the central one
\par 

\par 
284}
\par