{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}                                                                                                    

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3 Pappus present
\par 
5 Pappus at least 2/3 as long as achene .................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b aplolepa}
\par 
5 Pappus not more than ½ as long as achene
\par 
6 Involucral appendages very shortly fimbriate ................... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b subciliata}
\par 
6 Involucral appendages pectinate-fimbriate, at least at apex
\par 
7 Lower fimbriae 0·5-1·5 mm
\par 
8 Lower fimbriae 1-1·5 mm; stems 50-70 cm .................... ({\b k}) subsp. {\b gallinariae}
\par 
8 Lower fimbriae 0·5-1 mm; stems 30-50 cm ....................... ({\b g}) subsp. {\b ligustica} 
\par 
7 Lower fimbriae 0·2-0·5 mm
\par 
9 Achenes black; appendages dentate-fimbriate below ......... ({\b h}) subsp. {\b aetaliae}
\par 
9 Achenes grey; appendages shortly fimbriate below
\par 
10 Appendages mucronulate at apex ..................................... ({\b i}) subsp. {\b lunensis}
\par 
10 Appendages long-mucronate at apex .................................. ({\b j}) subsp. {\b cosana}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b aplolepa}: Stems 20-30 cm. Leaves grey-green, scabrid; lower pinnatisect. Involucre 10-12 × 8-10 mm, ovoid-globose; bracts subentire or denticulate; inner appendages irregularly serrate. Achenes black; pappus 2/3 as long to as long as achene. 2n = 18.{\i  Coast of N.W. Italy, from prov. Savona to prov. Livorno.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b aeolica} (Guss. ex Lojac.) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 202 (1976) ({\i C. aeolica} Guss. ex Lojac.): Stems 30-40 cm. Leaves grey-green; lower 1(-2)-pinnatisect. Involucre 10-13 mm in diameter, ovoid; bracts entire; appendages absent. 2n = 18.{\i  Isole Lipari.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b pandataria} (Fiori & Béguinot) Dostál,{\i  loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. cineraria }var.{\i  pandataria} Fiori & Béguinot): Stems 20-40 cm. Leaves grey-tomentose; lower undivided or sublyrate. Involucre 8-10 mm in diameter; bracts entire; appendages absent.{\i  Islands W. of Napoli} ({\i Ventotene, Ischia}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b carueliana} (Micheletti) Dostál,{\i  loc. cit.} (1916) ({\i C. paniculata }var.{\i  carueliana} Micheletti): Stems up to 60 cm. Lower leaves lyrate-pinnatisect. Capitula in clusters. Involucre 8 × 4 mm, ovoid; appendages very narrowly decurrent, shortly fimbriate. Achenes grey; pappus absent.{\i  W. Italy, from prov. Carrara to prov. Grossato, and inland to Firenze}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b maremmana} (Fiori) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. paniculata }var.{\i  aetalia} forma {\i maremmana} Fiori): Leaves glabrous; lower pinnatisect with filiform segments. Involucre 6-8 × 4-5 mm, ovoid-oblong; appendages very narrowly decurrent, denticulate. Achenes black; pappus absent. {\i W. Italy} ({\i prov. Livorno}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b subciliata} (DC.) Arcangeli, {\i Comp. Fl. Ital.} 391 (1882): Leaves grey-tomentose; lower 1- to 2-pinnatisect or undivided. Involucre 8-10 × 6-9 mm, ovoid-oblong; appendages very narrowly decurrent, irregularly and very shortly dentate-fimbriate. Achenes grey; pappus less than ½ as long as achene. {\i W. Italy, from prov. Genova to prov. Livorno}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b g}) Subsp. {\b ligustica} (Gremli ex Briq.) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 202 (1976) ({\i C. aplolepa} var. {\i ligustica} Gremli ex Briq.): Stems up to 50 cm. Leaves grey-green, the lower 1- to 2-pinnatisect. Involucre 6-9 × 4-7 mm, oblong; bracts not covered by the indistinctly fimbriate, shortly mucronate appendages; fimbriae 0·5-1 mm, 6 on each side. Achenes 2·5 mm; pappus 1 mm.{\i  N.W. Italy} ({\i near Pieve de Teco, prov. Imperia}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b h}) Subsp. {\b aetaliae} (Sommier) Dostál,{\i  op. cit.} 203 (1976) ({\i C. paniculata} var.{\i  aetaliae} Sommier): Stems up to 50 cm. Leaves glabrous, pinnatisect. Involucre 10-12 × 8-10 mm, ovoid; appendages dentate-fimbriate below; lower fimbriae 0·2-0·5 mm. Achenes black; pappus c. ½ as long as achene. {\i Elba}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b i}) Subsp. {\b lunensis} (Fiori) Dostál,{\i  loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. paniculata} var. {\i lunensis }Fiori): Stems herbaceous throughout. Leaves green, scabrid, pinnatisect with linear-lanceolate segments. Involucre 8-11 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages mucronulate, with lower fimbriae 0·2-0·5 mm. Achenes grey; pappus c. 1/2 as long as achene. {\i Coast of N. Italy from Genova to La Spezia, and adjacent part of N. Appennini}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b j}) Subsp. {\b cosana} (Fiori) Dostál,{\i  loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. paniculata} var. {\i cosana} Fiori): Stems 30-50 cm, woody at base. Leaves green, smooth, pinnatisect with filiform segments. Involucre 8-10 mm in diameter, ovoid-conical; appendages long-mucronate, with lower fimbriae 0·5-1 mm. Achenes grey; pappus c. ½ as long as achene. {\i Coast of C. Italy} ({\i Mte. Argentario, near Orbetello}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b k}) Subsp. {\b gallinariae} (Briq. & Cavillier) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. paniculata }var. {\i gallinariae} Briq. & Cavillier): Stems 50-70 cm. Leaves green, scabrid; lower pinnatisect. Capitula often in clusters of 2-3. Involucre 10-12 × 8-11 mm, ovoid; appendages with fimbriae 1-1·5 mm. Pappus 1/3-1/2 as long as achene. {\i N.W. Italy} ({\i Isola Gallinara, prov. Savona}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C. integrans} Naggi,{\i  Malpighia}{\b  19}: 79 (1905), described from N. Italy (Liguria) is like subsp. (i) but the lower leaves are entire and grey-tomentose; it is probably worth only varietal status.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ALBIFLORAE Dostál. Stems herbaceous, the branches not spiny. Leaf-segments not rigid or spiny. Involucre usually ovoid; appendages with a short apical spine. Florets white, cream or yellow.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 135. C. lactiflora} Halácsy,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss.} {\b 6}: 601 (1898). Biennial. Stems 30-40 cm, erect. Leaves with somewhat arachnoid indumentum and scabrid; lower pinnatisect. Capitula solitary. Involucre 10 × 5-6 mm, oblong-ovoid; appendages with an erecto-patent apical spine 2-3 mm. Florets white. Pappus c. ½ as long as achene.{\i  Hills. • C. Greece} ({\i Koniskos, N.E. of Kalabaka}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 136. C. laureotica} Heldr. ex Halácsy, {\i op. cit.} 590 (1898). Perennial. Stems 30-40 cm, erect. Leaves greyish-tomentose; lower pinnatisect. Capitula solitary. Involucre 12 × 6-7 mm, ovoid; appendages reddish-brown, with an erect apical spine 1-2 mm. Florets cream. Pappus about as long as achene. {\i Pinus woods. • S.E. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 137. C. pelia} DC.,{\i  Prodr.} {\b 6}: 586 (1838). Perennial. Stems 30-50 cm, erect. Leaves arachnoid-pubescent, scabrid; lower pinnatisect. Capitula solitary. Involucre 10 × 4-5 mm, ovoid-oblong or -cylindrical. Appendages pale brown, with a somewhat recurved apical spine 1·7-3 mm. Florets yellow. Pappus about as long as achene.{\i  Dry, rocky ground. • C. & E. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CYLINDRACEA (Hayek) Dostál. Stem herbaceous, the branches not spiny. Leaf-segments not rigid or spiny. Involucre cylindrical; appendages with an erect or patent apical spine which is not spiny or fimbriate at its base, the lower fimbriae free. Florets purple or pink, rarely white or cream.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 138. C. rufidula} Bornm., {\i Feddes Repert.} {\b 19}: 103 (1923). Biennial. Stems 30-50 cm, erect. Leaves scabrid, with sparse arachnoid indumentum; lower pinnatisect. Capitula solitary. Involucre c. 10 × 5-6 mm, ovoid-cylindrical; appendages covering the puberulent bracts, reddish-brown, with an erect or subpatent apical spine 1·5-2 mm. Florets purple. Pappus much shorter than achene.{\i  Rocky places. • S. Makedonija} ({\i N.W. of Dojran}). Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 139. C. tymphaea} Hausskn.,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver.} nov. ser., {\b 7}: 44 (1895). Biennial. Stems 20-40 cm. Leaves scabrid; lower
\par 

\par 
281}
\par