{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 8  Florets pale yellow; stem smooth above
\par 
11 Involucre 15-25 × 15-25 mm, subglobose; appendages
\par 
   8-9 mm wide, covering bracts ...................................... ({\b k}) subsp. {\b dubjanskyi}
\par 
11 Involucre 11-19 × 9-19 mm, ovoid or subglobose; appendages
\par 
   c. 6 mm wide, not covering bracts
\par 
12 Appendages yellow; achenes blackish ............................. ({\b 1}) subsp. {\b gerberi}
\par 
12 Appendages yellowish-brown, with dark purple central
\par 
   spot; achenes white ........................................................ ({\b m}) subsp. {\b paczoskii}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pseudoleucolepis} (Kleopow) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.} {\b 71}: 204 (1976) ({\i C. pseudoleucolepis} Kleopow): Stems smooth above. Leaf-segments linear-lanceolate. Involucre 8-10 × 7-8 mm, ovoid; appendages covering bracts, orbicular, convex, shiny, with short apical spine, with yellowish centre, the margin pellucid. Florets pale pink. Achenes 2-2·5 mm, brown, with white ribs; pappus 1-1·5 mm. {\i Granite rocks. • S.E. Ukraine} ({\i Volodarskoe, N.W. of Zdanov}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b breviceps} (Iljin) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. breviceps} Iljin): Stems scabrid above. Leaf-segments linear-filiform. Involucre 10-13 × 6-10 mm, ovoid; appendages 4-5 × 3·5 mm, not covering bracts, oblong-elliptical, convex, with oblong-triangular, reddish-brown-purple central spot, pellucid, entire or indistinctly denticulate. Florets purple. Achenes 3-4 mm, brown; pappus shorter than achene.{\i  Sandy steppes. • S. Ukraine} ({\i by the S.E. bank of the lower Dnepr}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b margaritacea}: Stems scabrid above. Leaf-segments linear. Involucre 15-18 × 20-22 mm, depressed-globose; appendages 6-7 × 7-9 mm, not completely covering the yellow bracts, orbicular, convex, keeled, not pellucid, irregularly denticulate, convolute, the apex muticous. Florets yellowish or white. Achenes 3·5-4·5 mm, pale brown; pappus as long as or somewhat longer than achene.{\i  Submaritime sands. • S. Ukraine }({\i W. side of estuary of R. Bug}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b margaritalba} (Klokov) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. margaritalba }Klokov): Stems scabrid above. Segments of cauline leaves linear-filiform. Involucre 15-20 mm in diameter, globose; appendages 6-8 × 8-10 mm, covering the yellow bracts, membranous, white, not pellucid, not keeled, with triangular, reddish-brown central spot, the margin denticulate, the apex convolute, muticous. Florets purple. Achenes 3·5-4 mm, blackish, with white ribs; pappus somewhat shorter than to as long as achene.{\i  Submaritime sands. • S. Ukraine }({\i E. side of estuary of R. Bug}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b protomargaritacea} (Klokov) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. protomargaritacea }Klokov): Stems smooth above. Leaf segments linear-filiform. Involucre 11-16 × 11-15 mm, ovoid; appendages 5-6 × 4-5 mm, not completely covering bracts, elliptic-orbicular, yellow or pale orange, membranous, not pellucid, the centre brown, convex, the margin lacerate, convolute, the apex muticous. Florets pink, to almost white. Achenes 3-4 mm, blackish, with white ribs, pappus c. 3 mm, somewhat shorter than achene.{\i  Submaritime sands. • S. Ukraine} ({\i E. side of estuary of R. Bug}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b appendicata} (Klokov) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. appendicata} Klokov): Stems scabrid above. Leaf-segments broadly linear. Involucre 22-27 mm in diameter, globose; appendages 10-12 × 6-11 mm, not covering bracts, orbicular-rhombic, yellow, keeled, coriaceous on keel, with oblong-triangular, dark purple central spot, the margin wide, pellucid, irregularly dentate, sometimes convolute, the apex muticous. Florets pale yellow. Achenes 4·5-5 mm, brown, with white ribs; pappus 5-7 mm. {\i River sands. • S.E. Ukraine} ({\i by west bank of R. Dnepr, below Zaporoz'e}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b g}) Subsp. {\b konkae} (Klokov) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. konkae} Klokov): Stems smooth above. Involucre 15-16 × 16-17 mm, subglobose; appendages 6-7 × 8-10 mm, covering bracts, reniform, keeled, coriaceous on keel, with oblong-triangular, reddish or  blackish-brown central spot, the margin denticulate, pellucid, sometimes convolute, the apex muticous. Florets pink. Achenes 3·5-5 mm, brown, with white ribs; pappus somewhat longer than achene.{\i  River sands. • S.E. Ukraine }({\i by east bank of R. Dnepr, above Zaporoz'e}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b h}) Subsp. {\b protogerberi} (Klokov) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. protogerberi} Klokov): Stems scabrid above. Involucre 14-15 × 12-14 mm, ovoid-globose; appendages 5 × 5-6 mm, not covering bracts, orbicular-ovate, yellow, hard, convex, indistinctly keeled, with triangular, subcoriaceous centre, the margin narrow, pellucid, flat, the apex muticous. Florets pale pink, yellowish or white. Achenes 4-5 mm, blackish-brown; pappus as long as achene.{\i  River sands. • Borders of S. Russia and E. Ukraine} ({\i by R. Donets}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b i}) Subsp. {\b donetzica} (Klokov) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1916) ({\i C. donetzica} Klokov): Stems scabrid above. Segments of basal leaves broadly linear, of upper leaves narrowly linear. Involucre 12-15 × 10-16 mm, globose; appendages 5-6 × 4-4·5 mm, not covering bracts, elliptical, soft, indistinctly keeled, with shortly triangular, reddish-brown basal spot, the margin white, pellucid, shining, flat, the apex muticous. Florets pink. Achenes 4-5 mm, pale brown; pappus as long as achene.{\i  River sands.• E. Ukraine and S. Russia} ({\i Donets valley}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b j}) Subsp. {\b pineticola} (Iljin) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. pineticola} Iljin): Stems scabrid above. Leaf-segments narrowly oblong. Involucre 15-18 × 10-14 mm, ovoid; appendages 4-6 mm, not covering bracts, orbicular, white, soft, indistinctly keeled, with triangular, dark blackish-brown central spot, the margin subdenticulate, pellucid, flat, the apex muticous. Florets pale purple. Achenes c. 4 mm, blackish; pappus as long as or somewhat longer than achene.{\i  Sandy pine woods. • S.C. Russia} ({\i S.E. of Voronez}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b k}) Subsp. {\b dubjanskyi} (Iljin) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. dubjanskyi} Iljin): Stems smooth above. Involucre 15-25 × 15-25 mm, subglobose; appendages 6-7 × 8-9 mm, covering bracts, orbicular, concolorous, pale yellow, shining, pellucid, indistinctly keeled, the margin subdenticulate, flat, the apex muticous. Florets yellow. Achenes 4·5-5 mm, blackish; pappus 3·5-5 mm. {\i Sandy hills. • S.C. Russia} ({\i near Borisoglebsk, Voronezskaja Obl.}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b l}) Subsp. {\b gerberi} (Steven) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. gerberi }Steven): Stems smooth above. Leaf-segments oblong. Involucre 11-16 × 9-14 mm, ovoid; appendages c. 6 mm in diameter, not covering bracts, orbicular, concolorous, pale yellow, shining, pellucid, indistinctly keeled, the margin subdenticulate, flat, the apex muticous. Florets pale yellow. Achenes 3·5-4·5 mm blackish; pappus as long as achene.{\i  Sandy steppes. • S.E. Russia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b m}) Subsp. {\b paczoskii} (Kotov ex Klokov) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. paczoskii} Kotov ex Klokov): Stems smooth above. Leaf-segments filiform. Involucre 15-19 × 15-19 mm, subglobose; appendages c. 6 mm in diameter, not covering bracts, orbicular, yellowish-brown, convex, shining, indistinctly keeled, with an elongate-triangular, dark purple central spot, the margin subdenticulate, pellucid, flat, the apex muticous. Florets pale yellow. Achenes 3·5-5 mm, white; pappus somewhat longer than achene.{\i  Sandy steppes. • S.C. Ukraine} ({\i by west bank of R. Dnepr, near Kherson}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. PHALOLEPIS. Biennial or perennial. Appendages often  the margin membranous, distinct from the centre.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 165. C. transcaucasica} D. Sosn. ex Grossh., {\i Fl. Kavk.}{\b  4}: 212 (1934) ({\i C. sarandinakiae} Illarionova). Biennial. Stems 40-70 cm or more, 1-4, erect or ascending, much-branched. Leaves lanate, scabrid; lower pinnatisect, with linear-lanceolate seg-
\par 

\par 
286}
\par