{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 pinnatisect. Capitula solitary. Involucre 5-10 × 3-5 mm, ovoid-cylindrical; appendages not covering the glabrous bracts, pale brown, with an apical spine 2 mm. Florets purple. Pappus c.1/3 as long as achene. {\i Stony scrub. • S. Jugoslavia, N. Greece.} Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tymphaea}: Leaves green; segments linear-lanceolate. Involucre 6-8 × 4-5 mm.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b brevispina} (Hausskn.) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 203 (1976) ({\i C. brevispina} Hausskn.): Leaves whitish, arachnoid-lanate; segments ovate-lanceolate. Involucre 8-10 × 5 mm.{\i  N.C. Greece }({\i Thessalia}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 140. C. orphanidea} Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 3}): 73 (1856). Biennial. Stems 20-50 cm, erect. Leaves arachnoid-tomentose or pubescent, scabrid; lower pinnatisect. Capitula solitary. Involucre 8-12 × 4-7 mm, ovoid-cylindrical; appendages with apical spine 2-5 mm. Florets purple. Pappus about as long as achene.{\i  Roadsides and cultivated ground. • N. & E. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b orphanidea}: Stems 20-30 cm, much-branched. Leaves grey-arachnoid-tomentose. Involucral appendages brown, with long fimbriae; apical spine 3-5 mm.{\i  Attiki, Makedhonia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b thessala} (Hausskn.) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.} {\b 71}: 203 (1976) ({\i C. thessala} Hausskn.): Stems 30-50 cm, sparingly branched. Leaves greenish-tomentose. Involucral appendages pale brown, with short fimbriae; apical spine 2-3 mm. {\i E. Greece} ({\i Thessalia}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 141. C. diffusa} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.} {\b 1}: 675 (1785) ({\i C. parviflora} Sibth. & Sm., non Lam.). Annual or biennial. Stems 10-50(-60) cm, erect, divaricately much-branched. Leaves green, with rather arachnoid indumentum; lower 2-pinnatisect. Capitula solitary. Involucre 7-10 × 4-5 mm, ovoid-cylindrical; appendages with an erect or patent apical spine 2-3(-5) mm. Florets pink. Pappus absent. {\i Waste places and maritime sands. S.E. Europe, northwards to N.C. Ukraine; naturalized elsewhere, mainly in C. Europe.} Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu [Au Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Po].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Records from Greece of {\i C. polyclada} DC., native of N.W. Anatolia, refer to {\b 141}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 142. C. bovina} Velen.,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ({\i Math.-Nat. Kl.}) {\b 1889}({\b 2}): 36 (1889). Biennial. Stems 30-40 cm, much-branched. Leaves scabrid, with somewhat arachnoid indumentum; lower pinnatisect. Capitula solitary or in clusters of 2-3. Involucre 6-7 × c. 3·5 mm, conical-cylindrical; appendages with an erecto-patent apical spine 3 mm. Florets purple. Pappus absent.{\i  Grassy slopes. • N.E. & S.C. Bulgaria.} Bu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 143. C. aemulans} Klokov in Bobrov & Czerep., {\i Fl. URSS} {\b 28}: 617 (1963). Biennial. Stems 30-60 cm, erect, much-branched at base. Leaves scabrid, very sparsely arachnoid-tomentose; lower 1(-2)-pinnatisect. Capitula solitary or in clusters. Involucre 10-12 × 3-3·5 mm, narrowly cylindrical; appendages with a somewhat recurved apical spine 1-4 mm. Florets purple, rarely white. Pappus absent.{\i  Grassy slopes. • Krym.} Rs (K).
\par 

\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. PSEUDOPLUMOSAE (Hayek) Dostál. Stems herbaceous, the branches not spiny. Leaf-segments not rigid or spiny. Involucre cylindrical; appendages filiform and plumose-fimbriate at apex, recurved. Florets pink.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 144. C. zuccariniana} DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  6}: 574 (1838). Biennial. Stems 20-30(-40) cm, erect, branched above. Leaves pubescent; lower pinnatisect or lyrate. Capitula in clusters of 2-4. Involucre 12-14 × 3-4 mm, cylindrical; appendages recurved, pale brown to yellowish. Florets pink. Pappus 1/3-1/2 as long as achene.{\i  Dry scrub. • Greece, S. Albania.} Al Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. DUMULOSAE (Hayek) Dostál. Dwarf shrub. Branches and leaf-segments spiny.. Involucre cylindrical; appendages mucronate or spinulose at apex. Florets pink, white or cream.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 145. C. spinosa} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 912 (1753). Dwarf shrub. Stems up to 20 cm, thick, much-branched, spiny. Leaves appressed-grey-tomentose or glabrescent; lower undivided to pinnatifid, the segments spiny. Capitula solitary. Involucre c. 8 × 3 mm. Florets pale pink or white, rarely cream. Pappus absent. 2n = 36.{\i  Maritime sands, rarely inland. Greece, Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b spinosa} ({\i C. spinosa} subsp.{\i  tomentosa} (Halácsy) Hayek): Stems and leaves white-tomentose. Florets pale pink. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cycladum} (Heldr.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 779 (1931): Stem and leaves green, sparsely hairy. Florets cream.{\i  Kikladhes}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Calcitrapa} (Heister ex Fabr.) Hayek. Biennial. Leaves pinnatisect, not decurrent. Appendages not decurrent at base, palmate- or pinnate-spiny at apex, the apical spine much longer than the others. Pappus usually present.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 146. C. hyalolepis} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 6}): 133 (1846) ({\i C. pallescens} auct. eur., non Delile). Stem 20-40 cm long, divaricately branched from the base. Basal leaves in a rosette, pinnatisect to lyrate, the segments narrow, crenate-dentate; upper broadly linear, dentate, not decurrent. Capitula solitary, shortly pedunculate. Involucre c. 15 mm in diameter, subglobose; bracts coriaceous, veinless, with wide scarious, entire margin, with apical spine simple or with 2-3 short basal spines. Florets yellow. Achenes c. 3 mm; pappus about as long as achene. {\i Waste places. S.E. Greece, Kriti.} Cr Gr. ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 147. C. iberica} Trev. ex Sprengel,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  3}: 406 (1826). Stems up to 100 cm, ascending to erect, divaricately branched in lower half. Leaves greenish, hispidulous, with denticulate, setulose margin; lower runcinate- to lyrate-pinnatisect, the lobes ovate to linear-lanceolate; upper lanceolate. Capitula subsessile, surrounded by upper leaves. Involucre 8-14 mm in diameter, ovoid; bracts indistinctly veined, with scarious margin; appendages scarious, the apical spine 15-30 mm, stout, patent, sulcate, usually with 1-3 basal spines c. 3 mm. Florets deep purple, glandular, the outer slightly patent. Achenes c. 3 mm; pappus 2-2·5 mm.{\i  S.E. Europe, extending to W. Romania.} Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b iberica}: Stem 30-100 cm, erect. Appendages of bracts with apical spine 15-20 mm.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b holzmanniana} (Boiss.) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 203 (1976) ({\i C. iberica} var.{\i  holzmanniana} Boiss.): Stem not more than 30 cm, ascending. Appendages of bracts with apical spine c. 30 mm. •{\i  C. & S. Greece}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 148. C. calcitrapa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 917 (1753). Stems 20-100 cm, ascending to erect, divaricately branched from the base. Young leaves grey-lanate, becoming greenish and crispate-pubescent, glandular; lower pinnatifid, with lanceolate, acute, remotely serrate lobes, withered at anthesis; upper pinnatifid, with linear-lanceolate segments, the uppermost lanceolate or somewhat hastate. Capitula sessile, surrounded by upper leaves. Involucre
\par 

\par 
282}
\par