{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min48}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min49}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords1016}{\nofchars5795}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 70. G. aristatum}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  ed. 2, 152 (1762). Stolons absent. Stems 50-80 cm, 4-angled, usually glabrous. Leaves 40-65 \'d7 3-5 mm, lanceolate, somewhat falcate, widest at or below the middle gradually narrowing to the apex, bright green, membranous, margin scabrid with few rows of teeth; veins inconspicuous. Inflorescence lax, ovoid; pedicels usually equalling diameter of corolla. Corolla 2-3(-4) mm in diameter, subrotate; lobes shortly apiculate. 2n =22.}{\i\fs28  Open deciduous woods. \bullet  From the Pyrenees to E. Alps.}{\fs28  Au Ga Ge ?He It.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 71. G. abaujense}{\fs28  Borb\'e1s,}{\i\fs28  Abauj-Torna V\'e1rmegye Fl.}{\fs28  444 (1896). Stolons present, sometimes very short. Stems up to 90 cm, 4-angled, stout, hairy or glabrous. Leaves 30-50 \'d7 2-9 mm, oblanceolate, often abruptly narrowed towards the apex, bright green; margin subscabrid, with few rows of teeth. Inflorescence lax to dense, broadly pyramidal; pedicels usually equalling diameter of corolla. Corolla (2\'b75-)3-4(-5) mm in diameter, rotate; lobes apiculate. 2n = 44.}{\i\fs28  Dry}{\fs28  Quercus}{\i\fs28  woods. From E. Czechoslovakia to C. Romania.}{\fs28  Cz Hu Rm Rs (W).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 72. G. polonicum}{\fs28  Blocki,}{\i\fs28  \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  37}{\fs28 : 189 (1887). Like }{\b\fs28 71}{\fs28  but stems up to 120 cm; leaves 15-40 \'d7 2-4 mm; inflorescence usually dense, narrowly to broadly pyramidal. Corolla usually 4-5 mm in diameter. 2n = 44. }{\i\fs28 Woods. \bullet  S.E. Poland, N.W. Ukraine.}{\fs28  Po Rs (W).
\par 
\par   This species is doubtfully distinct from }{\b\fs28 71}{\fs28  and further investigation is needed. }{\b\fs28 71}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 72}{\fs28  connect }{\b\fs28 69}{\fs28  with the }{\i\fs28 G. mollugo}{\fs28  group and hybridize readily with }{\b\fs28 39}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 73. G. laconicum}{\fs28  Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., }{\i\fs28 Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 6}{\fs28 ): 66 (1846-1847). Stolons present. Stems up to c. 80 cm, terete at the base, with 4 ridges, hairy especially below. Leaves 25-40 \'d7 3-7 mm, elliptical to broadly lanceolate, not falcate, widest at the middle, often rounded at the apex, rarely acute, bright green, membranous; margin scabrid with many rows of small papilliform teeth, also often hairy; veins conspicuous. Inflorescence lax, ovoid; flowers crowded towards the ends of the branches; pedicels often longer than diameter of corolla. Corolla 2-3 mm in diameter, cup-shaped; lobes acute. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Mountain woods. \bullet  S. part of Balkan peninsula}{\fs28  Bu Gr Ju ?Tu.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28    74. G.procurrens}{\fs28  Ehrend., }{\i\fs28 Pl. Syst. Evol.}{\b\fs28  124}{\fs28 : 1(1975). Stolons present, usually long. Stems 40-80 cm, rather slender, more or less terete at base, otherwise 4-angled, nearly always glabrous; young shoots strongly glaucous-pruinose. Leaves (25-)30-40(-50) \'d7 (2\'b75-)3\'b75-5\'b75(-7) mm, linear-oblanceolate, widest at or above the middle, gradually narrowed towards the base, somewhat more abruptly narrowed towards the acute apex, glaucous beneath, darker green above, remaining greenish when dry, membranous; margin subscabrid with 1-2 rows of small teeth venation inconspicuous. Inflorescence rather lax, ovoid; pedicels usually shorter than the diameter of the corolla. Corolla (2-)2\'b72-2\'b76(-3) mm in diameter, cup-shaped; lobes acute to shortly apiculate. Ovary and fruit more or less pruinose. 2n = 22. }{\i\fs28 Open deciduous mountain woods. \bullet  C. part of Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28  Al Bu Ju.
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 75. G. laevigatum}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  ed. 2, 1667 (1763). Stolons present, but often short. Stems 70-110 cm, stout, subterete at the base, with 4 weak ridges, usually glabrous; young shoots green or somewhat glaucous-pruinose. Leaves 40-75 \'d7 (3-)4-6(-11) mm, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, widest at the middle, gradually narrowed to the apex, bright green or somewhat glaucous usually remaining greenish when dry, membranous; margin with few rows of teeth. Inflorescence lax to dense, ovoid; pedicels usually equalling diameter of corolla. Corolla (2-)2\'b74-3\'b75(-4) mm in diameter, slightly cup-shaped to rotate; lobes almost always more or less apiculate. 2n = 44. }{\i\fs28 Mountain woods. \bullet  S. & S.W. Alps, Appennini, N.W. Jugoslavia.}{\fs28  Au Ga He ?Hs It Ju ?Lu.
\par 
\par    Often confused with }{\b\fs28 70}{\fs28  or }{\b\fs28 77}{\fs28 . It is quite variable, combining characters of}{\i\fs28  G. procurrens}{\fs28  and }{\i\fs28 G. aristatum}{\fs28 , sometimes also approaching }{\i\fs28 G. sylvaticum}{\fs28 . It is possible that populations described from the Pyrenees as }{\i\fs28 G. sylvaticum}{\fs28  var. }{\i\fs28 pyrenaicum}{\fs28  Gren. & Godron (}{\i\fs28 G. atrovirens}{\fs28  Lapeyr.), and extending to the mountains of N. Portugal, also belong to this taxon.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 76. G. schultesii}{\fs28  Vest, }{\i\fs28 Flora }{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 Regensb}{\fs28 .) }{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28 : 530 (1821). Stolons present. Stems 30-120 cm, stout, remote, subterete at the base, with 4 weak ridges, otherwise 4-angled, usually glabrous; young shoots glaucous-pruinose. Leaves 25-60 \'d7 (3-)4-8(-12) mm, broadly oblanceolate to elliptical, widest at or above the middle, narrowing abruptly at the apex, glaucous especially beneath, usually blackish when dry; margin with few rows of teeth. Inflorescence usually dense, broadly ovoid; pedicels usually longer than diameter of corolla. Corolla (3-)4-5 mm in diameter rotate; lobes distinctly apiculate. Ovary and fruit more or less pruinose. 2n = 44, 66. }{\i\fs28 Open woodland. \bullet  C. & S.E. Europe.}{\fs28  ?Al Au Bu Cz Ge Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Tu.
\par 
\par    A variable species; tetraploid and hexaploid plants are very similar and the former have so far been found only in W. Jugoslavia.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 77. G. sylvaticum}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  ed. 2, 155 (1762). Stolons absent. Stems 80-100 cm, stout, bushy, terete, often with faint ridges above, glabrous; young shoots glaucous-pruinose. Leaves 20-40 \'d7 3-10 mm, broadly oblanceolate to elliptical, widest at or above the middle, glaucous especially beneath, usually not blackish when dry, rather membranous; margin subscabrid with few rows of slender teeth. Inflorescence lax, broadly ovoid; pedicels often longer than diameter of corolla. Corolla 2-3 mm in diameter, cup-shaped, often nodding before anthesis; lobes acute. Ovary and fruit more or less pruinose. 2n = 22. }{\i\fs28 Woodland and scrub. \bullet  From the Netherlands, N. Germany and N.W. Poland southwards to S.E. France, N. Italy and N.W. Jugoslavia.}{\fs28  Au Be Cz \'86Da Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju Po.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 78. G. longifolium}{\fs28  (Sibth. & Sm.) Griseb., }{\i\fs28 Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 157 (1844) (}{\i\fs28 Asperula longifolia}{\fs28  Sibth. & Sm.). Stolons absent. Stems up to 100 cm, rounded at the base, with 4 faint ridges above, stout, glabrous; young shoots glaucous-pruinose. Leaves 30-50 \'d7 3-6 mm, linear-lanceolate, rather abruptly narrowed to the apex, glaucous especially beneath, usually not blackish when dry, somewhat coriaceous; margin scabrid with several rows of robust papilliform teeth. Inflorescence lax, broadly ovoid; pedicels often longer than diameter of corolla. Corolla (2-)3(-4) mm in diameter, cup-shaped; lobes acute. Ovary and fruit pruinose. 2n = 22. }{\i\fs28 Woods. Turkey-in-Europe}{\fs28 . ?Bu ?Gr Tu. (}{\i\fs28 W. & N. Anatolia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 79. G. bulgaricum}{\fs28  Velen.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Bulg.}{\fs28  231 (1891). Like }{\b\fs28 78}{\fs28  but stems with somewhat more prominent angles; young shoots green; leaves 30-50 \'d7 (2-)3-4(-5) mm, narrowed more gradually to the apex, dark-green above, pale bluish-green beneath; pedicels usually much longer than diameter of corolla; ovary and fruit green. 2n = 22. }{\i\fs28 Dry open woods. \bullet  E. Bulgaria.}{\fs28  Bu ?Tu.
\par 
\par    Sect. ORIENTIGALIUM Ehrend. Perennial herbs, often with filiform stolons. Stems 4-angled, glabrous or hairy but never
\par 
\par 28}
\par }