{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ments; middle pinnatisect; upper linear-lanceolate. Capitula  10-20, not in clusters. Involucre 10-16 mm in diameter, ovoid or ovoid-globose; appendages orbicular-obovate, usually covering the yellowish bracts, with a distinct, narrowly triangular, yellow central spot, the margin pellucid, often shining, the apex emarginate, muticous; outer bracts sometimes with soft mucro at apex. Florets purple. Achenes 4 mm; pappus 1/3-1/2 as long as achene.{\i  Rocks and screes. Hills of S.E. Krym} ({\i Sudak to Planerskoe}). Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 166. C. sterilis} Steven,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou} {\b 29}({\b 2}): 390  (1856). Biennial or perennial. Stems 20-100 cm, 2-20, procumbent, ascending from the base or erect, sparingly branched above the middle, scabrid above. Leaves arachnoid-tomentose or lanate; lower pinnatisect, with oblong- to linear-lanceolate segments, long-petiolate; middle pinnatisect or lyrate-pinnate; uppermost linear to narrowly oblong, with mucronate apex. Capitula solitary, or up to 10, not in clusters. Involucre 10-14 ×  6-10 mm, ovoid to subglobose; appendages shining, orbicular, covering bracts, with narrowly triangular to ovate-triangular, reddish-brown centre, the margin wide, white-membranous, pellucid, denticulate or denticulate-fimbriate, the apex emarginate and mucronate, or with a setaceous spine. Florets purple. Achenes 2·5-4 mm, sparsely puberulent; pappus shorter than achene. {\i Stony slopes. • Krym.} Rs(K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Frequently hybridizes with {\b 90}, {\b 122} and {\b 141}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucre 6-10 mm in diameter; appendages with narrowly
\par 
  triangular reddish-brown centre, the apex abruptly 
\par 
  contracted into a spine ......................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b sterilis}
\par 
1 Involucre 10-20 mm in diameter; appendages with pale or
\par 
  dark reddish-brown centre, oblong-lanceolate to ovate-
\par 
  triangular, the apex flat, emarginate, with a soft mucro
\par 
2 Involucre 12-20 mm in diameter, subglobose; appendages
\par 
  with pale reddish-brown centre ...................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b semijusta}
\par 
2 Involucre 10-14 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages with
\par 
  dark reddish-brown centre ............................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b vankovii}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sterilis} ({\i C. stankovii} Illarionova): Leaves arachnoid tomentose. Involucre 10-14 × 6-10 mm, ovoid-globose; appendages with narrowly triangular, reddish-brown centre, the apex abruptly contracted into a spine 0·5-2 mm. Achenes 2·5-3·5 mm; pappus 0·5-2 mm.{\i  S. & S.E. Krym}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b semijusta} (Juz.) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 204 (1976) ({\i C. semijusta} Juz.): Leaves lanate. Involucre 16-22 × 12-20 mm, subglobose; appendages with oblong-lanceolate, pale reddish-brown centre, the apex flat, emarginate, with a soft mucro up to 3 mm. Achenes c. 4·5 mm; pappus 1·5-2 mm.{\i  Mountains of Krym} ({\i above Alusta}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b vankovii} (Klokov) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. vankovii} Klokov): Leaves arachnoid-tomentose. Involucre 14-16 × 10-14 mm, ovoid; appendages with ovate-triangular, dark reddish-brown centre, the apex flat, emarginate, with a soft mucro 0·5 mm. Achenes c. 4 mm; pappus 1·5-2 mm.{\i  Mountains of Krym} ({\i above Jalta}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 167. C. alba} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 914 (1753). Biennial or perennial. Stems 10-80 cm, erect, rarely ascending from the base, branched from the lower half, rarely simple. Leaves arachnoid-lanate to subglabrous, rarely viscid; lower 1- to 2(-3)-pinnatisect to lyrately lobed, rarely undivided, the segments linear to ovate, entire to dentate; middle pinnately divided, rarely undivided, the segments linear, lanceolate to oblong; upper pinnately divided or lobed, the segments linear-filiform to -lanceolate; uppermost linear to lanceolate, undivided to 2- to 3-fid. Capitula usually more than 10, not in clusters. Involucre 8-22 × 6-25 mm, ovoid to globose  or ovoid-cylindrical; appendages mostly covering the bracts, orbicular or broadly ovate, concolorous or with a dark or paler centre, the margin entire or denticulate- or lacerate-fimbriate, the apex emarginate, with a soft mucro or arista, or muticous. Florets pink or purple, rarely white. Achenes 2·5-4 mm; pappus absent, or ¼ as long to somewhat longer than the achene. 2n = 18.{\i  Dry places. S. Europe}. Al Bu Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Rm Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28      This species contains many variants separable only on minute but distinctive characters; whilst these variants have usually been given specific status, they are here regarded as subspecies.    
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lower leaves undivided or lyrately lobed  
\par 
2 Involucre 20-25 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose ........... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b tenoreana}
\par 
2 Involucre 6-10 mm in diameter, ovoid .......................... ({\b t}) subsp. {\b subciliaris}
\par 
1 Lower leaves 1- to 3-pinnatisect or -partite  
\par 
3 Leaves viscid, glandular-punctate; involucre 20-25 mm in
\par 
  diameter ............................................................................ ({\b s}) subsp. {\b princeps}
\par 
3 Leaves not viscid; involucre not more than 20 mm in diameter
\par 
4 Involucre 7-12 mm in diameter  
\par 
5 Appendages white, often with green centre  
\par 
6 Perennial; stem divaricately branched; leaves arachnoid
\par 
  lanate; pappus 1/3 as long as achene ........................... ({\b o}) subsp. {\b formanekii}
\par 
6 Biennial; stem sparingly branched, the branches erect;
\par 
  leaves subglabrous or greyish-green; pappus as long as
\par 
  achene ................................................................................. ({\b q}) subsp. {\b euxina}
\par 
5 Appendages with brown to black centre  
\par 
7 Involucre 10-12 mm in diameter ..................................... ({\b p}) subsp. {\b vandasii}
\par 
7 Involucre 6-10 mm in diameter
\par 
8 Leaves arachnoid or white-tomentose; involucre ovoid;
\par 
  appendages entire or sometimes somewhat lacerate,
\par 
  with a brown centre
\par 
9 Leaves white-tomentose; involucre 10 mm in diameter;
\par 
  appendages entire or sometimes somewhat lacerate,
\par 
  the apex muticous ........................................................... ({\b g}) subsp. {\b diomedea}
\par 
9 Leaves arachnoid; involucre 7-8 mm in diameter;
  appendages entire, the apex mucronate
\par 
10 Pappus absent ................................................................ ({\b l}) subsp. {\b epapposa}
\par 
10 Pappus present .............................................................. ({\b m}) subsp. {\b caliacrae}
\par 
8 Leaves green or greyish-green; involucre ovoid-globose
\par 
  or ovoid-cylindrical; appendages lacerate- or fimbriate
\par 
  denticulate, with a blackish- or reddish-brown centre 
\par 
11 Stem with simple branches; pappus ½ as long as achene ..({\b a}) subsp. {\b costae}
\par 
11 Stem paniculately or corymbosely branched; pappus
\par 
   absent or 1/3 as long as achene  
\par 
12 Stem paniculately branched with virgate branches;
\par 
   leaves green; involucre ovoid-cylindrical; appendages
\par 
   with reddish-brown centre; pappus 1/3 as long as achene
\par 
   .......................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b latronum}
\par 
12 Stem corymbosely branched with erect branches; leaves
\par 
   greyish-green; involucre ovoid-globose; appendages 
\par 
   with blackish-brown centre; pappus absent ................... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b pestalottii}
\par 
4  Involucre 10-16 mm in diameter  
\par 
13 Appendages white, sometimes with yellow or greyish brown centre  
\par 
14 Leaves densely lanate or whitish-tomentose  
\par 
15 Stem corymbosely branched; leaves lanate, the lower with 
\par 
   linear-lanceolate segments; involucre 12-15 mm in
\par 
   diameter, ovoid-globose; appendages entire, covering 
\par 
   bracts ....................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b alba}
\par 
15 Stem paniculately branched; leaves white-tomentose,
\par 
   the lower with few, oblong to lanceolate segments;
\par 
   involucre 10-12 mm in diameter, globose; appendages 
\par 
   undulately erose, not covering bracts ........................... ({\b n}) subsp. {\b leucomalla}
\par 
14 Leaves puberulent, or setulose-puberulent and sparsely
\par 
   lanate  
\par 
16 Leaves puberulent, the lower with lanceolate segments;
\par 
   involucre 11-12 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages with
\par 
   yellow centre, the apex muticous; pappus 1/3 as long 
\par 
   as achene; stem up to 60 cm .......................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b splendens}
\par 

\par 
287}
\par