{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 appendages 8-10 mm, narrowly lanceolate-subulate, almost completely covering bracts, with recurved apex, yellowish-brown, or black at the base and dark brown at apex, densely pectinate-fimbriate, the fimbriae up to 3 mm, reddish-brown. Florets pink or purple, the outer sometimes radiate. Achenes c. 3 mm; pappus 0·5 mm. 2n = 22. {\i Dry, rocky places. • S. & S.C.  France, C. & E. Spain. }Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucre 18 mm in diameter; leaves acute ................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b acutifolia}
\par 
1 Involucre c. 15 mm in diameter; leaves obtuse  
\par 
2 Leaves greyish-tomentose or -lanate; stems short .............. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b supina}
\par 
2 Leaves green or greyish-green, glabrous or tomentose;
\par 
  stems long ........................................................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b pectinata}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pectinata}: Stems 20-40 cm. Leaves pale or greyish green, tomentose; upper cordate at the base, semiamplexicaul. Involucre 15 mm in diameter, ovoid.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b acutifolia} (Jordan) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 208 (1916) ({\i C. acutifolia} Jordan): Stems up to 40 cm. Leaves green, glabrous, lobed at base, acute. Involucre 18 mm in diameter, subglobose.{\i  S.C. France}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b supina} (Jordan) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. supina} Jordan): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but stems short; leaves greyish-tomentose or -lanate.{\i  S. France}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\i C. pectinata} var. {\i thuretii} Briq. & Cavillier, from S.E. France (N. of Nice), is known only from the original gathering; it is like subsp. (a) but the leaves are green and glabrous, the upper narrowed at the base. It may possibly represent another subspecies.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 194. C. antennata} Dufour, {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.}{\b  23}: 158 (1831). Perennial. Stems 5-10(-18) cm, procumbent, numerous, branched. Leaves spathulate-oblanceolate, entire; lower sometimes denticulate, obtuse; upper oblong, acute, surrounding capitulum. Capitula sessile. Involucre 8-10 mm in diameter, obovoid-obconical; appendages linear, brown, with recurved apex, long-pectinate-fimbriate, the fimbriae very shortly plumose. Florets pale purple, the outer scarcely radiate. Achenes c. 3-5 mm; pappus c. 1 mm.{\i  Dry places. • S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 195. C. trichocephala} Bieb. ex Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 2286 (1803). Perennial. Stems 40-60 cm, caespitose, numerous, erect, divaricately branched, densely leafy, thickened below the capitulum. Leaves linear to oblong-lanceolate, scabrid; lower entire, denticulate or lobed; upper linear-lanceolate. Capitula subsessile, solitary. Involucre 13-18 × 6-10 mm, ovoid-globose or ovoid-cylindrical, lanate; appendages 10 mm or more, pale or dark brown or yellow, attenuate into a narrowly linear-lanceolate, recurved acumen, pectinate-fimbriate, the fimbriae 3 mm, 10-14 on each side, equally spaced. Florets pink or purple, the outer radiate. Achenes c. 4 mm; pappus 1·5-2 mm.{\i  S. part of  U.S.S.R., Romania.} Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b trichocephala}: Leaves oblong-lanceolate, sinuately  lobed, pale or yellowish-green. Involucre c. 18 × 10 mm, ovoid-globose; appendages c. 10 mm, not covering bracts, dark brown.{\i  S. part of U.S.S.R}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b simonkaiana} (Hayek) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 208 (1976) ({\i C. simonkaiana} Hayek): Leaves linear-lanceolate, entire or denticulate, greyish-green. Involucre 13-16 × 6-8 mm, ovoid-cylindrical; appendages more than 10 mm, mostly completely covering bracts, yellow. •{\i  Romania}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 196. C. janeri} Graells,{\i  Mem. Real Acad. Ci. Madrid}{\b  2}: 466  (1859). Perennial. Stems 5-10 cm, numerous, ascending, simple. Leaves linear-lanceolate, entire, acute, greyish-white-lanate, the lower attenuate into a petiole. Capitula sessile, usually solitary, subtended by the uppermost leaves. Involucre 15 × c. 12 mm, ovoid-oblong; bracts conspicuously veined, tomentose; appendages short, linear, reddish-brown, somewhat recurved, pectinate-fimbriate, the fimbriae puberulent, with pale apex. Florets pink-violet, the outer slightly radiate. Achenes c. 5 mm, shining; pappus 2 mm, reddish. •{\i  Mountains of W.C. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Ávila}). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. emigrantis} Bubani,{\i  Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.}{\b  5}: 318 (1873), described from an unidentifiable locality in Spain, is like {\b 196} but has narrower leaves and blackish appendages. Its status requires investigation. 
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 197. C. linifolia} L., {\i Mantissa }117 (1767). Perennial. Stems 5-40 cm, procumbent, numerous, simple or sparingly branched. Leaves scabrid, linear, entire; lower obtuse; upper acute, the uppermost mucronate. Capitula solitary. Involucre 12-14 × 7-10 mm, subglobose; appendages narrowly linear-lanceolate, not completely covering the conspicuously veined bracts, dark brown at the base, reddish at the apex, pectinate-fimbriate, the fimbriae 4-6 on each side, remote, puberulent, with recurved apex. Florets purple, the outer somewhat radiate. Achenes c. 4 mm, pale; pappus 1·5 mm. 2n = 44.{\i  Dry hillsides and cultivated ground. • C., E. & S. Spain.} Hs. 
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 198. C. hyssopifolia} Vahl,{\i  Symb. Bot.}{\b  1}: 75 (1790). Perennial. Stems 10-30 cm, slender, erect, numerous, branched from the base. Leaves scabrid-puberulent, linear-lanceolate to linear, mucronate, entire. Capitula numerous, corymbose. Involucre 15-16 × 6-8 mm, ovoid-cylindrical; bracts conspicuously veined, tomentose; appendages 3-6 mm, linear, not covering bracts, pale brown, with recurved apex, remotely pectinate-fimbriate, the fimbriae plumose. Florets pink, the outer slightly radiate. Achenes c. 4 mm; pappus 2 mm.{\i  Dry or saline bare soils. • S.C. & S.E. Spain.} Hs. 
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 199. C. parilica} Stoj. & Stefanov, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  72}: 92 (1923). Perennial. Stems 5-20 cm, erect or ascending from the base, simple. Leaves 0·5-1·5 mm wide, linear-filiform, entire, acute, glabrous, the margin slightly revolute. Capitula solitary. Involucre 20 × 9-12 mm, ovoid-cylindrical; appendages narrowly lanceolate, not completely covering bracts, pale brown, attenuate into a filiform, recurved, pectinate-fimbriate acumen 8 mm, the fimbriae plumose, long. Florets purplish-red or white, the outer not distinctly radiate. Achenes c. 3·5 mm; pappus c. 1 mm.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S.W. Bulgaria, N. Greece.} Bu Gr. 
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 200. C. procumbens} Balbis, {\i Mem. Acad. Sci.} ({\i Turin}) {\b 16}: 229 (1809). Perennial. Stems 5-30 cm, arcuate-ascending, branched. Leaves entire, dentate or lobed, tomentose or lanate; lower obovate to oblong; upper ovate or oblong-elliptical, the uppermost amplexicaul, cuneate or rounded at the base. Capitula solitary. Involucre 14-22 × 12-20 mm, ovoid-globose or ovoid-cylindrical, white-tomentose when immature; appendages linear, narrowly semilunar-decurrent, pale- or blackish-brown, attenuate into a short, subulate, finally recurved, pectinate-fimbriate acumen 3-6 mm, the fimbriae 2-3 mm, pale brown, numerous. Florets pink-purple, the outer radiate. Achenes 3·5-4 mm; pappus 0·5-1·5 mm. {\i Dry rocky slopes,} 800-1500{\i  m. • Lower slopes of the S.W. Alps, N. & N.W. of Nice.} Ga ?Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves greyish-green, not tomentose ............................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b verguinii} 
\par 
1 Leaves white-tomentose at least beneath 
\par 
2 Upper leaves amplexicaul ......................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b procumbens} 
\par 
2 Upper leaves cuneate or rounded at the base, not 
\par 
  amplexicaul 
\par 

\par 
296}
\par