{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 5 Appendages of middle bracts triangular or broadly ovate,
\par 
  straight ................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b melanocalathia}
\par 
5 Appendages of middle bracts orbicular, recurved .......... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b nigriceps}
\par 
3 Inner involucral appendages not exserted, not exceeding
\par 
  the middle appendages
\par 
6 Involucre 14-18 mm in diameter; appendages of middle 
\par 
  bracts broadly lanceolate or ovate, abruptly attenuate 
\par 
  into a filiform acumen; upper leaves ovate-orbicular
\par 
7 Leaves green; involucre 17-18 mm in diameter; appendages
\par 
  broadly lanceolate, blackish-brown ................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b carpatica}
\par 
7 Leaves arachnoid-hairy; involucre 14 mm in diameter
\par 
  appendages ovate, black .................................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b moesiaca}
\par 
6 Involucre 12-20 mm in diameter; appendages of middle 
\par 
  bracts triangular-lanceolate, gradually attenuate into a
\par 
  filiform acumen; upper leaves ovate or ovate-lanceolate
\par 
8 Appendages of middle bracts with the apex lanceolate
\par 
  acuminate, erect ............................................................. ({\b g}) subsp. {\b abbreviata}
\par 
8 Appendages of middle bracts with the apex subulate or
\par 
  filiform
\par 
9 Appendages of middle bracts brown, narrowly lanceolate,
\par 
  the apex long-subulate-acuminate ............................ ({\b f}) subsp. {\b pseudophrygia}
\par 
9 Appendages of middle bracts black, ovate, abruptly 
\par 
  attenuate into a filiform acumen ....................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b moesiaca}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b phrygia} ({\i C. austriaca} Willd.): Stems up to 80 cm, sparingly branched. Leaves green, hairy when young. Capitula solitary. Involucre 15-18 × 14-16 mm, globose; appendages of middle bracts ovate, black, gradually attenuate into a filiform, shortly recurved apex; appendages of inner bracts exserted, distinctly exceeding those of the middle bracts. Florets purple, the outer radiate. 2n = 22.{\i  In the north and west parts of the range of the species, south-eastwards to Czechoslovakia and Romania.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b melanocalathia} (Borbás) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 207 (1976) ({\i C. melanocalathia} Borbás): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but appendages of middle bracts shorter, triangular or broadly ovate, abruptly attenuate into a short, subulate, black, straight apex; florets dark violet. •{\i  E.C. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b carpatica} (Porc.) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C.plumosa} var. {\i carpatica} Porc.): Stems up to 120 cm, simple or sparingly branched. Leaves green, broadly ovate. Capitula solitary. Involucre 18-20 × 17-18 mm, ovoid-globose; appendages of middle bracts blackish-brown, broadly lanceolate, abruptly attenuate into a filiform, recurved acumen; appendages of outer bracts imbricate, not exceeding those of the middle bracts. Florets purple, the outer radiate. •{\i  E. Carpathians}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b moesiaca} (Urum. & H. Wagner) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 789 (1931): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but leaves arachnoid-hairy; involucre 16 × 14 mm; appendages of middle bracts black, ovate; outer florets not radiate. •{\i  Bulgaria}.
\par 
 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b nigriceps} (Dobrocz.) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 207 (1976) ({\i C. nigriceps} Dobrocz.): Stems up to 100 cm, branched. Leaves glabrous above, puberulent beneath. Capitula solitary or in clusters of 3-4. Involucre 15-17 mm in diameter, globose; appendages of middle bracts orbicular, abruptly attenuate into a filiform, recurved apex; appendages of inner bracts exserted, distinctly exceeding those of the middle bracts. Florets pinkish-purple, the outer radiate. •{\i  Ukranian Carpathians.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b pseudophrygia} (C.A. Meyer) Gugler,{\i  Mitt. Bayer. Bot. Ges.}{\b  1}: 408 (1904) ({\i C. pseudophrygia} C.A. Meyer): Stems up to 100 cm, more or less branched. Leaves green, scabrid, rarely sparsely arachnoid-hairy beneath, oblong-lanceolate to ovate, acuminate. Capitula solitary or in clusters of 2-4. Involucre 15-20 × 12-20 mm, ovoid-globose; appendages more or less covering bracts, those of the middle bracts pale brown, narrowly lanceolate, gradually attenuate into a long-subulate, straight, brown or blackish-brown acumen, the lower fimbriae crowded, the upper remote; appendages of inner bracts not exceeding those of the middle bracts. Florets pinkish-purple, the outer radiate. 2n = 22. •{\i  C. Europe, Denmark and Norway, S. part of U.S.S.R.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b g}) Subsp. {\b abbreviata} (C. Koch) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 207 (1976) ({\i C. salicifolia} var. {\i abbreviata} C. Koch): Stems 30-60 cm, sparingly branched. Leaves green, puberulent, oblong-lanceolate. Capitula solitary. Involucre 17-20 × 12-15 mm, ovoid-globose; appendages not completely covering bracts, those of the middle bracts black or dark brown, broadly triangular-lanceolate, gradually attenuate into the lanceolate, erect apex; appendages of inner bracts not exceeding those of the middle bracts. Florets pinkish-purple, the outer radiate.{\i  Mountains of Krym.} ({\i Caucasus, N. Anatolia.})
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b h}) Subsp. {\b ratezatensis} (Prodan) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. ratezatensis} Prodan): Stems up to 100 cm, sparingly branched. Leaves green, subglabrous, ovate. Capitula solitary. Involucre 20 × 10 mm, ovoid; appendages completely covering bracts, those of the middle bracts triangular-lanceolate, dark brown, the apex subulate, erect. Florets pink.{\i  Steep, grassy, calcareous slopes. • S. Carpathians} ({\i Mtii. Retezatului}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b i}) Subsp. {\b rarauensis} (Prodan) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. rarauensis }Prodan): Stems 30-50 cm, simple, rarely branched. Leaves arachnoid-tomentose. Capitula solitary. Involucre 18 × 12 mm, ovoid-globose; appendages mostly covering bracts, those of the middle bracts dark brown, broadly triangular, attenuate into a filiform, subulate, erect or somewhat recurved acumen, appendages of inner bracts exserted. •{\i  N. & C. Romania.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\i  C. pectinata} var.{\i  fuscata} Rouy ({\i C. fuscata} Jordan, non Desf.), from S. France, is like {\b 188}({\b a}) but has the involucre c. 15 × 10 mm, the appendages of the middle bracts narrowly triangular and blackish-brown, those of the inner bracts not exserted, and the outer florets scarcely radiate. It perhaps originated as a hybrid between {\b 186} or {\b 187} and {\b 193}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   It is possible that two elements may be distinguishable within subsp. ({\b f}). One, corresponding with {\i C. pseudophrygia} C.A. Meyer sensu stricto, has the involucre 12-15 mm in diameter and narrow appendages and occurs from the E. Carpathians to the S. part of the U.S.S.R.; the other, which has been called {\i C. phrygia} var.{\i  elatior} Gaudin, has the involucre 18-20 mm in diameter and wider appendages and occurs in the more central and westerly parts of the range of the subspecies.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 189. C. stenolepis} A. Kerner,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  22}: 45 (1872) ({\i C. cirrhata} Reichenb. pro parte). Perennial. Stems up to 100 cm, corymbosely branched above, densely leafy. Leaves tomentose, undivided, ovate to lanceolate; lower petiolate, denticulate, acuminate; upper and middle cuneate, rounded or cordate at base, or semiamplexicaul. Capitula solitary or in clusters at apices of branches. Involucre 15-18 × 9-14 mm, oblong-ovoid or ovoid-cylindrical; appendages not completely covering bracts, the inner orbicular, brown, not exserted; middle appendages lanceolate, attenuate into a subulate-filiform, arcuate recurved, pectinate-fimbriate acumen 8-10 mm, the fimbriae as long as or longer than the width of the appendage, black at the base, pale at apex. Florets pinkish-orange, the outer radiate. Achenes c. 3·5 mm; pappus up to 0·5 mm. {\i Grassland and scrub. • From Czechoslovakia and W. Ukraine southwards to C. Italy and N. Greece.} Au Bu Cz Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs(w).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves sparsely arachnoid-tomentose, the middle leaves 
\par 
  cuneate or rounded at the base, not semiamplexicaul .... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b stenolepis}
\par 
1 Leaves green above, sparsely arachnoid or arachnoid-
\par 
  lanate beneath, the middle leaves semiamplexicaul
\par 

\par 
294}
\par