{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 182. C. microptilon} Gren. & Godron,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 242 (1851). Perennial. Stems 30-100 cm, erect, much-branched. Leaves green, sparsely tomentose beneath, the lower lanceolate, sinuate-dentate to pinnatifid, the upper linear to lanceolate, entire or lobed. Capitula solitary, sessile. Involucre 10-13 × (6-)8-10 mm, ovoid; appendages lanceolate or triangular-lanceolate, sometimes covering bracts, blackish- or reddish-brown, pectinate-fimbriate, the fimbriae 2-2·5 mm, brown, erect or flexuous, 7-10 on each side. Florets purple or pink, the outer radiate. Achenes c. 2·5 mm; pappus very short.{\i  Roadsides, pastures and wood margins. • W. Europe, from the Netherlands to N. Spain.} Be Ga Ho Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b microptilon}: Branches slender, long. Leaves green or sparsely white-tomentose, the cauline linear, entire or dentate at the base, the uppermost remote. Capitula shortly pedunculate. Appendages lanceolate, not completely covering bracts, the fimbriae 2 mm, 7-8 on each side, erect.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b emporitana} (Vayr. ex Hayek) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 206 (1976) ({\i C. emporitana} Vayr. ex Hayek): Branches short, densely leafy. Leaves arachnoid-tomentose, the cauline lanceolate, hastate at the base, the uppermost closely subtending capitula. Appendages triangular-lanceolate, covering bracts, the fimbriae c. 2·5 mm, 10 on each side, flexuous.{\i  N. Spain.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. NIGRESCENTES (Hayek) Dostál. Appendages triangular, ovate-triangular or -lanceolate to orbicular, usually not covering bracts, the margin pectinate-fimbriate, the terminal fimbriae shorter than the lateral. Pappus present or absent.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   The species of this Section, although well-characterized, are very closely related to each other and transitional variants between them often occur.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 183. C. transalpina} Schleicher ex DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  6}: 571 (1838) ({\i C. dubia} Suter, non S.G. Gmelin). Perennial. Stems 40-80 cm, stout, with short, arcuate-erect branches. Leaves scabrid, green, the lower petiolate, oblong, subentire or sinuate-dentate, the upper oblong-lanceolate, narrowed to the cordate or subamplexicaul base. Capitula solitary or in clusters of 2-4. Involucre 12-18 × 12-15 mm, globose; appendages 1·5-2 mm, broadly triangular to ovate-lanceolate, more or less covering the bracts, dark brown, pectinate-fimbriate, the fimbriae 1-2 mm, 8-12 on each side; inner appendages brown, lacerate. Florets pink or orange-pink, the outer not radiate. Achenes 2·5-3 mm; pappus absent or very short. 2n = 44.{\i  Mountain pastures. • S. slopes of the Alps.} Au Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 184. C. nigrescens} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 2288 (1803) ({\i C. rotundifolia} (Bartl.) Hayek pro parte). Perennial. Stems 40-100 cm, erect, with few erecto-patent branches. Leaves scabrid, green or tomentose; lower petiolate, oblong-lanceolate, entire to sinuately or lyrately lobed; upper ovate-lanceolate or lanceolate, attenuate at the base, entire to pinnatifid. Capitula solitary, pedunculate. Involucre 12-14 × 6-12 mm, ovoid-cylindrical; bracts laxly imbricate; appendages 1-1·5 mm, triangular, not covering bracts, blackish-brown, pectinate-fimbriate, the fimbriae 6-8 on each side, pale brown, scarcely longer than the width of the very narrow margin. Florets purple, the outer sometimes radiate. Achenes 3 mm; pappus absent or the inner achenes with a very short pappus. 2n = 44. •{\i  S.C. & E. Europe, extending southwards to S. Italy and N. Bulgaria.} Au Bu *Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Rm ?Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves scabrid
\par 
2 Lower leaves lyrately lobed, the upper pinnatifid;
\par 
  involucre 6-7 mm in diameter, ovoid-cylindrical; appendages
\par 
  brown ............................................................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b pinnatifida}
\par 
2 All leaves entire or with few teeth; involucre 10-11 mm
\par 
  in diameter, ovoid-cylindrical ........................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b nigrescens}
\par 
1 Leaves arachnoid-lanate or densely tomentose
\par 
3 Involucre 8-10 mm in diameter, ovoid-cylindrical; appendages
\par 
   triangular, erect .................................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b ramosa}
\par 
3 Involucre narrowly cylindrical
\par 
4 Appendages triangular, erect, black ............................ ({\b e}) subsp. {\b smolinensis}
\par 
4 Appendages orbicular, recurved, brown ...................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b neapolitana}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nigrescens} ({\i C. vochinensis} Bernh. ex Reichenb.): Stems branched. Cauline leaves ovate-lanceolate, attenuate at the base, entire or with few teeth. Involucre (9-)10-11 mm in diameter, ovoid-cylindrical. Outer florets not radiate. {\i From S. Germany to Romania and Bulgaria, but only north and east of the Alps.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ramosa} Gugler,{\i  Centaur. Ung. Nationalmus.} 69 (1907): Stems with long, thin, densely leafy branches. Leaves densely tomentose, narrowly lanceolate or linear. Involucre 10-11 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; appendages brown, triangular, erect. {\i Meadows and pastures. Alps, mainly in the south-west}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b neapolitana} (Boiss.) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 206 (1976) ({\i C. neapolitana} Boiss.): Stems simple or with few branches. Cauline leaves narrowly oblong, entire or with few teeth. Involucre c. 10 mm in diameter, ovoid-cylindrical; appendages orbicular, brown.{\i  C. & S. Italy}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b pinnatifida} (Fiori) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. vochinensis} forma {\i pinnatifida} Fiori): Stems with few, long, slender branches. Basal leaves oblong-lanceolate, lyrate, pinnatifid; cauline lanceolate, entire. Involucre 6-7 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages triangular, brown.{\i  Open} Castanea-{\i woods. N.C. Appennini} ({\i E. of Firenze}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b smolinensis} (Hayek) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. smolinensis} Hayek): Stems simple or with few branches. Leaves entire or dentate; lower ovate-lanceolate; upper narrowly lanceolate. Involucre c. 14 × 7-8 mm, narrowly cylindrical; appendages small, triangular, black.{\i  Serpentine rocks. C. Jugoslavia }({\i Bosna}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 185. C. carniolica} Host,{\i  Fl. Austr.} {\b 2}: 517 (1831) ({\i C. rotundifolia} (Bartl.) Hayek pro parte). Perennial. Stems 50-80 cm, simple or with few long branches. Leaves grey-green, sparsely tomentose; lower broadly ovate, remotely dentate; upper ovate-lanceolate, rounded or amplexicaul at base. Capitula solitary or in clusters. Involucre c. 13 × 7-8 mm, ovoid-cylindrical; appendages small, not covering bracts, triangular, black, pectinate-fimbriate, with 5-9 fimbriae 1-1·5 mm on each side, the inner appendages with a black spot in the centre. Florets pink, the outer radiate. Achenes 3 mm; pappus absent. •{\i  S.E. Alps, N.W. Jugoslavia, Hungary}. Au Hu It Ju ?Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. LEPTERANTHUS (DC.) Dumort. Appendages linear to lanceolate, rarely orbicular, usually covering bracts, the margin pectinate-fimbriate, the terminal fimbriae longer than the lateral. Pappus usually present.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 186. C. debeauxii} Gren. & Godron,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 243 (1851). Perennial. Stems 10-80 cm, erect or ascending, simple or branched. Leaves scabrid to greyish-arachnoid-hairy; lower ovate to narrowly lanceolate, entire to pinnatifid; upper oblong to linear-lanceolate, entire, sometimes lobed at base. Capitula usually solitary. Involucre 12-16 × 9-14 mm, ovoid-cylindrical to globose;
\par 

\par 
292}
\par