{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 retrorsely aculeolate. Leaves in whorls of (5-)6-7(-8), 1-veined, obtuse, acute or with a hyaline apex. Inflorescence few-flowered, with usually ebracteate ultimate branches, sometimes reduced to single axillary flowers; pedicels stout, erect and not divaricate in fruit. Corolla infundibuliform or cup-shaped, white or pink; lobes acute or obtuse. Ovary and fruit usually glabrous, smooth or finely granulate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 80. G. saxosum} (Chaix) Breistr., {\i Procès-Verb. Mens. Soc. Dauph. Ethnol. Archéol.}{\b  24}({\b 182-184}): Seance 25 fév. 1948 (sine pag.) (1948) ({\i Asperula saxosa} Chaix,{\i  Galium villarsii} Req.). Laxly caespitose. Stems 5-15 cm, lax, 4-angled, glabrous. Leaves 5-12 × 1-1·5 mm, in whorls of 5-6, lanceolate to linear, with a short, cartilaginous apiculum, rather thick, flat, black when dry, glabrous and smooth. Inflorescence ovoid, with small, dense-flowered partial inflorescences; pedicels 0·5-1 mm. Corolla 2-2·2 mm, broadly cup-shaped, white, glabrous; tube 0·5-0·6 mm; lobes 1·5 mm, triangular, slightly longer than wide. Filaments c. 0·5 mm; anthers c. 0·5 mm. Fruit 2-2·7 mm, glabrous, smooth. 2n = 22. {\i Calcareous screes. • S.W. & S.C. Alps.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 81. G. cometerhizon} Lapeyr.,{\i  Hist. Abr. Pyr., Suppl.} 154 (1818). Caespitose. Stems (2-)5-10(-15) cm, ascending, glabrous. Leaves 5-15 × 1·4-3 mm, in whorls of 5-6(-7), oblanceolate, rather obtuse, blackening when dry, glabrous. Inflorescence with few axillary flowers; pedicels 0·5-3 mm. Corolla 1·5-2 mm, cup-shaped, white; tube 0·4 mm; lobes 1·4-1·6 mm, longer than wide. Filaments 0·5 mm; anthers 0·3-0·4 mm, ovate. Fruit c. 2·5 mm, glabrous, finely granulate.{\i  Siliceous screes. •  C.& E. Pyrenees, Corse.} Co Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 82. G. incanum} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 91 (1806). Caespitose. Stock more or less woody, with or without stolons. Stems 2-15 cm, erect to decumbent, usually shortly hairy. Leaves (3-)4-10(-30) × 0·4-1·2(1·6) mm, in whorls of (5-)6(-8), linear to linear-lanceolate, with a short hyaline apiculum, usually hairy and blackish when dry; margin more or less recurved. Inflorescence oval to elongate, few- or many-flowered. Corolla (1·5-)1·7-2·2(-3) mm, infundibuliform to cup-shaped, white or pink; lobes lanceolate. Fruit glabrous, rarely hairy. {\i Calcareous rocks, screes and open grassland. Mountains of Greece and Kriti.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b incanum}: stems 4-10(-15) cm, erect or ascending. Leaves 4-10 × 0·5-0·8 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, acute, shining, sparsely hairy or glabrescent. Corolla c. 2 mm. Fruit glabrous. 2n = 44. {\i Greece}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b creticum} Ehrend., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  98}: 453 (1951): stems 2-5(-7) cm. Leaves 4-7(-10) mm, narrowly oblanceolate, rather obtuse, dull, densely hairy. Corolla 1·5-2 mm. Fruit hairy or glabrous. •{\i  Kriti}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 83. G. cyllenium} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 3}({\b 2}): 117 (1856). Densely caespitose, with a slightly woody stock. Stem 3-5(-10) cm, slender, 4-angled, glabrous. Leaves 5-10 × 0·5-1 mm, in whorls of (5-)6, narrowly lanceolate, with a long hyaline apiculum, blackening when dry; midrib prominent beneath; margin and midrib with short, antrorsely directed cilia. Inflorescence few-flowered; pedicels 0-3 mm. Corolla 1·2-1·8 mm, cup-shaped, white; tube 1-1·3 mm; lobes 0·2-0·5 mm, oval, slightly longer than wide. Filaments 0·5 mm; anthers 0·4-0·5 mm. Fruit glabrous, finely granulate. 2n = 22. {\i Limestone crevices above} 2000{\i  m. • S. Greece} ({\i Killini Oros}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 84. G. palaeoitalicum} Ehrend., {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  68}: 271 (1974). Stems (1-)3-8 cm, weak, 4-angled, glabrous, forming a cushion up to 16 cm in diameter. Leaves 2·5-5 × 0·5-0·6 mm, in whorls of 5-6, densely imbricate, finely acicular, linear, with a distinct awn, green when dry; midrib prominent beneath. Inflorescence short, 2- to 6-flowered, leafy; flowers more or less sessile. Corolla c. 2 mm; tube 0·3-0·5 mm; lobes c. 1·5 mm, longer than wide. Filaments 0·6-0·7 mm; anthers 0·4 mm. Fruit 1·3-1·5 mm, glabrous, smooth. 2n = 20.{\i  Rocks and open alpine grassland. • S. Appennini} ({\i Mte. Pollino}); {\i Alpi Apuane.} It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    This plant has not hitherto been separated from {\i G. olympicum} Boiss., which is confined to N.W. Anatolia.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 85. G. pyrenaicum} Gouan,{\i  Obs. Bot.} 5 (1773). Forming a cushion up to 20 cm in diameter. Stems 3-7 cm, erect to ascending, 4-angled, glabrous. Leaves 4·5-6 × 0·5-0·7 mm, in whorls of 6, imbricate, linear, acicular, distinctly awned, often blackish when dry; midrib not distinct beneath. Inflorescence elongate few-flowered, leafy; pedicels 0·5-5 mm. Corolla 1·9-2·2 mm cup-shaped; tube 0·4-0·5 mm; lobes 1·5-1·7 mm, slightly longer than wide. Filaments 0·6-0·8 mm; anthers 0·3-0·5 mm. Fruit c. 1·5 mm, glabrous, finely granulate. 2n = 22, 44. {\i Rocks and open alpine grassland. • Pyrenees, and high mountains of N., S.E. & S. Spain}. Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    The diploids and tetraploids cannot yet be distinguished morphologically. This species hybridizes rather extensively with {\b 126}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. LEPTOGALIUM Lange. Perennial herbs, laxly or sometimes densely caespitose, with slender stock and rhizome, and usually with long, filiform stolons. Stems slender, often less than 30 cm 4-angled, hairy, glabrous or sometimes retrorsely aculeolate. Leaves usually in whorls of 6-10, 1-veined, with a short cartilaginous to long hyaline apex. Inflorescence rather lax, ovoid pyramidal or corymbose, with corymbiform partial inflorescences and usually ebracteate ultimate branches, or reduced, few-flowered and more or less leafy. Corolla rotate, purple, pink, greenish, yellowish or white; lobes acute to apiculate. Fruit dry, acutely papillose or smooth, very rarely hairy, never glochidiate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Apart from the {\i G. baldense} group ({\b 119-123}), the species pair {\b 124-125}, and the more isolated taxa {\b 118} and {\b 126}, the Section comprises the closely interrelated complex of species {\b 86-88} around {\i G. rubrum} and {\b 91-117} around {\i G. pusillum}, as well as the hybrids {\b 89-90} linking them. Both the complex {\b 86-88} and especially the complex {\b 91-117} are extremely polymorphic and are highly intricate polyploid complexes. Because of the many intermediate allopolyploid forms, taxonomic treatment, construction of keys and determinations are difficult. It is helpful to recognize, within the complex {\b 91-117}, several even more closely related (but again overlapping) clusters of species: {\b 94-97}, {\b 98-100}, {\b 102-104}, {\b 104-110} and {\b 111-114}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 86. G. corsicum} Sprengel, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  4}({\b 2}): 39 (1827). Plant not black when dry, with or without stolons. Stems (5-)10-20(-30) cm, slender, usually retrorsely aculeolate, rarely also with patent hairs or glabrescent. Leaves (5-)7-12(-18) × (0·8-)1·3-1·9(-2·3) mm, in whorls of (4-)6(-7), usually 5-7 (and never more than 9) times as long as wide, lanceolate, rarely linear; apex hyaline. Inflorescence somewhat depauperate, ovoid; pedicels 1·5-2 mm, becoming divaricate after anthesis. Corolla (1·2-)1·5-2·5(-3) mm in diameter, purple, greenish, yellow or white; lobes with awn ¼-½ as long as lobe. Fruit 1-1·7 mm, more or less papillose. 2n = 22, 44. {\i Dry places from the coast to the high mountains. • Corse, Sardegna.} Co Sa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   A polymorphic species, probably with high polyploid populations in addition to the diploids and tetraploids.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 87. G. obliquum} Vill., {\i Prosp. Pl. Dauph. }19 (1779). Like {\b 86} but often without stolons; stems (10-)20-40(-80) cm, usually with
\par 

\par 
29}
\par