{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 176. C. vinyalsii} Sennen, {\i Brotéria }({\i Bot}.) {\b 23}: 88 (1927). Like {\b 175} but leaves hastate to auriculate at the base, lanate-pubescent or arachnoid-hairy, glabrescent; capitula solitary; involucre c. 15 × 12-14(-16) mm; appendages with lacerate margin, the outer sometimes with fimbriate margin. •{\i  W. & W.C. Europe.} Ga Hs It Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b vinyalsii}: Leaves lanate-pubescent, glabrescent; lower cauline lingulate-lanceolate, sinuately pinnatifid at the base; upper narrowly linear, entire. Capitula subtended by the uppermost leaves. Involucre 12-14(-16) mm in diameter.{\i  N.E. Spain}.
\par  

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b approximata} (Rouy) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 206 (1976) ({\i C. amara} prol. {\i approximata} Rouy): Leaves greyish-green, sparsely arachnoid-hairy; cauline linear, with 1-2 linear laciniae on each side at the base. Involucre c. 12 mm in diameter.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 177. C. dracunculifolia} Dufour, {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.}{\b  23}: 157 (1831) Perennial. Stems 20-60 cm, slender, simple or virgately branched, procumbent or ascending. Leaves sparsely lanate, minutely punctate, undivided, linear-lanceolate; lower entire or remotely denticulate; middle sessile, entire. Capitula solitary, small. Involucre 11-12 × 6-8 mm, cylindric-obconical; appendages obovate-orbicular, wider than and covering the distinctly veined, broadly ovate bracts, with pale reddish-brown centre, the margin hyaline, lacerate-denticulate. Florets purple, the outer strongly radiate. Achenes c. 3 mm; pappus absent. 2n = 22.{\i  Saline grassland.• E. Spain, just extending to S. France.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 178. C. jacea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 914 (1753) ({\i C. amara} L. pro parte). Perennial. Stems 50-120 cm, 1-5, erect or ascending, scabrid simple or sparingly branched from the middle, thickened below the capitula. Leaves scabrid on the margin and beneath, green hairy; basal ovate to broadly lanceolate, entire, dentate or pinnately lobed; cauline sessile, oblong-lanceolate, entire or dentate. Capitula in a corymb. Involucre 15-18 × 12(-15) mm, ovoid; appendages appressed, orbicular, usually covering bracts, scarious, pale brown, darker in the centre, muticous, the outer bracts denticulate to pectinate-lacerate. Florets purple, rarely white, the outer more or less radiate. Achenes c. 3 mm, pale greyish- to blackish-brown; pappus absent or very short. 2n = 22, 44.{\i  Grassland and open woods. Most of Europe, except the islands.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Si Su Tu [Br].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Many morphological intermediates between {\b 178} and {\b 186}, {\b 187} and {\b 188} occur and have been given formal recognition; it is probable, however, that they are of hybrid origin.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. FIMBRIATAE (Hayek) Dostál. Appendages triangular or ovate-triangular, lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, covering bracts, the margin pectinate-fimbriate, the terminal fimbriae longer than the lateral. Pappus present or absent.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 179. C. decipiens} Thuill.,{\i  Fl. Paris} ed. 2, 445 (1800). Perennial. Stems 30-60 cm, erect or ascending from the base, simple or corymbosely branched, with 5-6 leaves. Leaves green or greyish-tomentose; lower elliptical or oblanceolate, entire, dentate or lyrately lobed, long-petiolate; upper narrowly elliptical or lanceolate, acute. Capitula solitary, sessile. Involucre 12-14 × 10-12 mm, ovoid or subglobose; appendages ovate-lanceolate, erect, covering the ovate, 3- to 5-veined bracts, pectinate-fimbriate, pale brown, the fimbriae up to 2 mm, 9-10 on each side. Florets purple, the outer not distinctly radiate. Achenes c. 3 mm; pappus absent.{\i  Pastures. • W. Europe, from Norway to S. France.} Be Da Ga Ge Ho ?It No.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b decipiens}: Stems 30-40 cm, simple or branched above. Leaves greyish-tomentose. Involucral bracts 5-veined. {\i Mainly in the north part of the range of the species, except the Netherlands.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ruscinonensis} (Boiss.) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.} {\b 71}: 206 (1976) ({\i C. ruscinonensis} Boiss.): Stems up to 60 cm, branched at middle. Leaves green, scabrid or sparsely arachnoid-hairy. Involucral bracts 3- to 5-veined. {\i Mainly in the south part of the range of the species}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 180. C. subjacea} (G. Beck) Hayek,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 70}: 712 (1901). Perennial. Stems 30-50 cm, erect, sparingly branched above, densely leafy. Leaves green, rarely almost greyish, entire or denticulate; basal ovate-lanceolate, sinuate-dentate; cauline ovate-lanceolate. Capitula solitary, sessile. Involucre 14 × 12-14 mm, ovoid-globose; appendages ovate-triangular, usually covering bracts, erect, blackish-brown, pectinate-fimbriate, the fimbriae c. 2 mm, 10-15 on each side, blackish-brown, rarely paler, flexuous, the terminal fimbriae scarcely longer. Florets deep pink, the outer radiate. Achenes c. 3 mm; pappus absent.{\i  Mountain meadows. • C. Europe.} Au Cz Ge Hu Po.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 181. C. macroptilon} Borbás, {\i Vasvárm. Növ. Fl.} 192 (1877). Perennial. Stems 60-80 cm, erect, branched above, the branches thickened below the capitula. Leaves green, scabrid, crispate-hairy; lower ovate-lanceolate or elliptical, denticulate or lobed; upper lanceolate, subentire or sinuate-dentate. Capitula solitary or in pairs. Involucre 15-17 × 12-14 mm, ovoid or ovoid-globose; bracts green, prominently veined; appendages up to 5-8 mm, lanceolate, arcuate-recurved, pectinate-fimbriate, the fimbriae 8-15 on each side, the terminal the longest. Florets pink, the outer radiate. Achenes c. 3 mm; pappus absent or very short. •{\i  E.C. Europe, W. Jugoslavia.} Au Cz Hu ?It Ju Po.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b oxylepis} (Wimmer & Grab.) Soó, {\i Acta Bot. Acad. Sci.Hung.}{\b  18}: 176 (1973) ({\i C. jacea} subvar. {\i oxylepis} Wimmer & Grab.): Lower leaves ovate-lanceolate. Capitula solitary. Involucre 16-17 × 13-14 mm; appendages completely covering bracts, up to 8 mm.{\i  Carpathian and Sudeten Mts}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b macroptilon}: Lower leaves elliptical. Capitula solitary or 2-3 together. Involucre 15 × 12 mm; appendages up to 5 mm, partially covering bracts. {\i Throughout the range of the species except the north}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. zlatarskyana} Urum. & H. Wagner,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  6}: 166 (1907), described from Bulgaria (Karlovo), has been shown to be based on a mixed gathering of immature specimens of previously described species.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. magocsyana} H. Wagner, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  2}: 281 (1903) (incl. {\i C. pseudomagocsyana} Prodan), from Romania, like {\b 181} but with triangular appendages c. 10 × 2 mm covering the bracts and the fimbriae confluent below into a lacerate membrane, {\b C. pugioniformis} E. I. Nyárády,{\i  Borbásia Nova}{\b  19}: 5 (1943), from Romania, like {\b 181} but with narrowly lanceolate appendages not covering the bracts, {\b C. degeniana} H. Wagner,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  6}: 114 (1907) ({\i C. phrygia} subsp. {\i degeniana} (H. Wagner) Stoj. & Acht.), from Bulgaria and Romania, like {\b 181} but with oblong to elliptical, white-tomentose leaves, involucre 15 mm in diameter and narrowly lanceolate, brown appendages not covering the bracts, {\b C. pseudodegeniana} Prodan, {\i Anal. Acad. Rep. Pop. Române} {\b 3}({\b 18}): 682 (1950), from Romania, like {\b 181} but with white-tomentose leaves, narrower, cylindrical involucre and yellowish, narrowly lanceolate appendages, and {\b C. degenianiformis} Prodan, {\i op. cit.} 678 (1950), from Romania, like {\b 181} but with narrowly lanceolate, brown appendages, are all probably of hybrid origin with {\b 181} as one of the parents.
\par 

\par 
291}
\par