{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 2 Capitula solitary; appendages blackish-brown, shortly
\par 
  pectinate-fimbriate ............................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b bosniaca}
\par 
2 Capitula solitary or in clusters; appendages yellowish-
\par 
  brown, long-pectinate-fimbriate ................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b razgradensis}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b stenolepis} ({\i C. cetia} (G. Beck) H. Wagner): Stems 70-100 cm. Leaves ovate-lanceolate, sparsely arachnoid-tomentose, membranous, the middle cauline narrowed or rounded at the base. Capitula solitary. Involucre (10-)12-14 mm in diameter, shortly cylindrical; appendages pale yellow or yellowish-brown, shortly fimbriate, recurved. 2n = 22.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b razgradensis} (Velen.) Stoj. & Acht.,{\i  Stud. Centaur. Bulg.} 69 (1935): Stems 30-60 cm. Leaves green above, sparsely arachnoid-hairy beneath, membranous, the middle cordate at the base, semiamplexicaul. Capitula solitary or in clusters. Involucre 9 mm in diameter, oblong-ovoid; appendages yellowish-brown, long-fimbriate. {\i Bulgaria.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b bosniaca} (Murb.) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 207 (1976) ({\i C. pseudophrygia} subsp.{\i  bosniaca} Murb.,{\i  C. phrygia} subsp.{\i  bosniaca} (Murb.) Hayek): Stems 10-40 cm. Leaves green above, arachnoid-lanate beneath, membranous, the middle broadly rounded or subcordate at the base, semiamplexicaul. Capitula solitary. Involucre 10 mm in diameter, ovoid-cylindrical; appendages blackish-brown, shortly pectinate-fimbriate.{\i  Mountains of C. Jugoslavia }({\i Bosna}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Subsp.{\b  bansagensis} (H. Wagner) Soó, {\i Syn. Syst. Geobot. Fl. Veg. Hung.}{\b  4}: 174 (1970) ({\i C. bansagensis} H. Wagner), from Romania, is like {\b 189}({\b b}) but has the leaves densely arachnoid-lanate, the middle cauline leaves lanceolate or elliptical, the involucre 14-18 × 12-14 mm and brown, recurved appendages; subsp. joannis Karpati, {\i Borbásia}{\b  5-6}: 92 (1946), described from N.W. Jugoslavia, is like {\b 189}({\b c}) but has the leaves wider and shorter, the lower leaves green and the upper mostly lanate, clustered capitula and the involucre c. 10 × 3-4 mm; the status of both these taxa is uncertain.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 190. C. indurata} Janka, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 41}: 444 (1858). Perennial. Stems 50-80(-100) cm, erect, sparingly branched. Leaves greyish-arachnoid-hairy, undivided, broadly lanceolate; lower dentate, acute, attenuate into the petiole; middle attenuate or rounded at the base. Capitulum solitary. Involucre 15 × 8-10 mm, ovoid or ovoid-cylindrical; appendages not completely covering bracts, dark brown, black at the base, narrowly lanceolate, attenuate into a subulate-filiform, recurved, pectinate fimbriate, black acumen 6-7 mm, the fimbriae 8-12 on each side, pale brown, the middle ones 3 mm. Florets pinkish-orange or purple, the outer radiate. Achenes c. 3 mm; pappus very short. {\i Grassland and open woods. • From E. Czechoslovakia to Bulgaria.} Bu Cz Hu Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Probably a hybrid between {\b 188} and {\b 189}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 191. C. uniflora} Turra,{\i  Farset. Nov. Gen.} 12 (1765). Perennial. Stems 10-15(-20) cm, numerous, erect or ascending (rarely up to 50 cm and procumbent), leafy up to the apex. Leaves green to greyish-lanate-tomentose, undivided; lower oblong-lanceolate, ovate or elliptical, long-attenuate into the petiole; middle cauline truncate, auriculate or narrowed at base, entire to dentate; upper linear-lanceolate, entire, acuminate. Involucre 12-25 mm in diameter, ovoid-cylindrical to subglobose; appendages of inner bracts ovate, imbricate, not exserted; appendages of middle bracts blackish-brown, the acumen lanceolate-setaceous, plumose-fimbriate, recurved at the apex, the fimbriae c. 20-30 on each side. Florets violet, rarely white, the outer radiate. Achenes 3-4 mm; pappus 0·5-1 mm. 2n = 22.{\i  Dry grassland, rocky slopes in montane and alpine regions. • Alps and N. Appennini; S. Carpathians and mountains of N. & C. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Au Bu Ga Gr He It Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves white-tomentose on both surfaces, later glabrous
\par 
  and greyish-green ............................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b uniflora} 
\par 
1 Leaves green puberulent on both surfaces
\par 
2 Stem usually simple, with one capitulum; middle cauline
\par 
  leaves truncate, hastate or auriculate-semiamplexicaul 
\par 
  at base, dentate; involucre 18-20(-25) mm in diameter,
\par 
  ovoid-globose ..................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b nervosa}
\par 
2 Stem branched, with several capitula; middle cauline 
\par 
  leaves gradually narrowed into a petiole, rounded at 
\par 
  the base; involucre 12 mm in diameter, ovoid-cylindrical
\par 
3 Stem ascending; lower leaves sinuately lobed; appendages
\par 
  not covering bracts ......................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b ferdinandi}
\par 
3 Stem erect; lower leaves entire; appendages completely
\par 
  covering bracts ................................................................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b davidovii}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b uniflora}: Stems simple, rarely branched. Leaves white-tomentose, entire; lower oblong-lanceolate, gradually attenuate into the petiole; middle cauline lanceolate. Involucre 17-22 mm in diameter, subglobose; appendages covering bracts.{\i  Pastures and rocky places in montane regions. S.W. Alps}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b nervosa} (Willd.) Bonnier & Layens,{\i  Fl. Fr.} 180 (1894) ({\i C. nervosa }Willd.): Stems erect, usually simple, with one capitulum. Leaves green, puberulent, dentate or sinuate-dentate; lower oblong-ovate, truncate at the base, hastate or auriculate-semiamplexicaul; upper narrowly elliptical. Involucre 18-20(-25) mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; appendages covering bracts. 2n = 22.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b ferdinandi} (Gren.) Bonnier,{\i  Fl. Compl. Fr.}{\b  6}: 45 (1923): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but stems ascending, branched; lower leaves sinuately lobed; capitula numerous; appendages not completely covering bracts.{\i  S.W. & S.C. Alps}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b dandoni} (Urum.) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 208 (1976) ({\i C. davidovii} Urum.,{\i  C. nervosa} subsp. {\i davidovii} (Urum.) Hayek): Stems branched. Leaves green, puberulent, entire; lower elliptical, gradually attenuate into the petiole; upper lanceolate, rounded at base. Involucre 12 mm in diameter, ovoid-cylindrical; appendages completely covering bracts. {\i Bulgaria} ({\i Stara Planina}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 192. C. kernerana} Janka,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  22}: 178 (1872) ({\i C. derventana} Janka, non Vis. & Pancic). Perennial. Stems 10-40 cm, simple or with 2 branches, ascending. Leaves green, subglabrous or hispidulous, scabrid; lower lanceolate, dentate, pinnatifid or pinnatilobed, attenuate into a petiole; uppermost oblong or ovate-lanceolate, sometimes subamplexicaul. Involucre 15 × 15-18 mm; appendages attenuate into a triangular-lanceolate, blackish, filiform, plumose-fimbriate, arcuate-recurved acumen up to 8 mm. Florets purple, the outer radiate. Achenes c. 4 mm; pappus 2-4 mm.{\i  Mountain rocks. • Bulgaria.} Bu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b kernerana}: Leaves subglabrous, the uppermost oblong, not subamplexicaul. Florets pale purple. Pappus as long as achene. {\i Stara Planina; Rila Planina}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b gheorghieffii} (Halácsy) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 208 (1916) ({\i C. gheorghieffii} Halácsy): Leaves hispidulous, the uppermost ovate-lanceolate, subamplexicaul. Florets purple. Pappus ½ as long as achene.{\i  Rila Planina.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 193. C. pectinata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1287 (1763). Perennial. Stems 10-40 cm, erect or ascending, sparingly branched. Leaves subcoriaceous, glabrous or hairy, obovate to oblong, entire, dentate to pinnatisect; lower attenuate into the petiole; upper semiamplexicaul or narrowed to the base. Capitulum sessile, solitary. Involucre 18-20 × 13-18 mm, ovoid or subglobose;
\par 

\par 
295}
\par