{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  appendages linear-lanceolate to ovate-triangular, almost or completely covering bracts, erect at apex, not attenuate into a narrow acumen, reddish-brown, pectinate-fimbriate, the lateral fimbriae as long as to 3 times as long as the width of the appendage, brown or yellowish-brown, the terminal fimbria not longer than appendage; appendages of inner bracts orbicular, scarious, lacerate. Florets pinkish-orange, the outer erect or radiate. Achenes c. 3 mm; pappus absent or very short. 2n = 22, 33, 44. •{\i  W. Europe, northwards to England and the Netherlands.} Be Br Co Ga Ge He Ho Hs It ?Sa [Cz].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Appendages of bracts linear- or triangular-lanceolate
\par 
2 Leaves greyish-tomentose; involucre 9-12 mm in diameter;
\par 
  appendages with 7-9 fimbriae on each side .................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b debeauxii}
\par 
2 Leaves green; involucre 10-14 mm in diameter; appendages
\par 
  with 12-16 fimbriae on each side
\par 
3 Fimbriae 2-3 times as long as the width of the pale 
\par 
  brown appendages; outer florets scarcely radiate .......... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b nemoralis}
\par 
3 Fimbriae as long as the width of the dark brown appendages;
\par 
  outer florets radiate .......................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b thuillieri}
\par 
1 Appendages of bracts ovate-triangular
\par 
4 Fimbriae as long as the width of the appendages, brown;
\par 
  appendages nearly covering bracts; leaves green ............ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b thuillieri}
\par 
4 Fimbriae longer than the width of the appendages, pale-
\par 
  or yellowish-brown or white; appendages covering bracts;
\par 
  leaves greyish-hairy
\par 
5 Involucre 8-10 mm in diameter, ovoid-cylindrical ...... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b nevadensis}
\par 
5 Involucre 10-12 mm in diameter, ovoid ......................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b endressii}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b endressii} (Hochst. & Steudel ex Lamotte) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 206 (1976) ({\i C. endressii} Hochst. & Steudel ex Lamotte): Leaves shortly greyish-hairy. Involucre 10-12 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages ovate-triangular, covering bracts, the fimbriae longer than the width of the appendage, pale brown, 10-13 on each side. Outer florets radiate.{\i  Pyrenees}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b nevadensis} (Boiss. & Reuter) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1975) ({\i C. nevadensis} Boiss. & Reuter): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but leaves greyish-arachnoid-hairy; involucre 8-10 mm in diameter, ovoid-cylindrical; fimbriae yellowish-brown or white, 12-15 on each side. Outer florets radiate.{\i  S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b thuillieri} Dostál, {\i op. cit.} 207 (1976) ({\i C. pratensis }Thuill., non Salisb.): Leaves green. Involucre 10-14 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; appendages dark brown, ovate- to narrowly triangular, almost covering the bracts, the fimbriae as long as the width of the appendage, brown, 12-16 on each side. Outer florets radiate. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b nemoralis} (Jordan) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. nemoralis} Jordan,{\i  C. nigra} sensu Hegi pro parte; incl.{\i  C. inuloides} Willk.): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but appendages pale brown, triangular-lanceolate, mostly covering bracts, the fimbriae 2-3 times as long as the width of the appendage; outer florets scarcely radiate.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b debeauxii}: Leaves grey-tomentose. Involucre 9-12 mm in diameter, globose; appendages triangular- to linear-lanceolate, not completely covering bracts, the fimbriae 3 times as long as the width of the appendage, yellowish-brown, 7-9 on each side. Outer florets not radiate.{\i  S.W. France, N. Spain}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 187. C. nigra} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 911(1753). Perennial. Stems (15-)30-100 cm, erect or ascending, simple to corymbosely branched, the branches thickened below the capitula. Leaves green, to greyish-arachnoid-hairy; lower ovate to lanceolate, entire, dentate or lobed; upper entire, lanceolate. Capitula solitary or in clusters at apices of branches. Involucre 12-18 × 15-20 mm, globose; appendages black or blackish-brown, ovate-orbicular to linear-lanceolate, mostly completely covering bracts, the apex somewhat recurved, plumosely pectinate-fimbriate, the fimbriae shorter than or up to 3 times as long as the width of the appendage, 10-20 on each side, dark to pale brown. Florets purple, the outer usually not radiate. Achenes c. 3 mm, compressed; pappus 1/6-1/3 as long as achene. 2n = 22, 44. • {\i Europe eastwards to Sweden and C. Italy; one station in C. Jugoslavia.} Be Br Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu No Su [Au Cz Da].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Variation in this species has been discussed by D. J. Ockendon, S. M. Walters & T. P. Whiffen, {\i Proc. Bot. Soc. Brit. Is.}{\b  7}: 549-552 (1969).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Outer florets somewhat radiate; involucre c. 18 mm in 
\par 
  diameter ............................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b rivularis}
\par 
1 Outer florets not radiate; involucre 12-15 mm in diameter
\par 
2 Fimbriae dark brown, 15-20 on each side ............................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b nigra}
\par 
2 Fimbriae pale- or yellowish-brown, 14-16 on each side ({\b b}) subsp. {\b carpetana}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nigra}: Leaves glabrous, green; lower elliptical to ovate-lanceolate. Appendages broadly ovate-triangular, covering bracts, the fimbriae as long as or somewhat longer than width of appendage, 15-20 on each side, dark brown. Outer florets not radiate. 2n = 22.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except Portugal}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b carpetana} (Boiss. & Reuter) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 422 (1879) ({\i C. carpetana} Boiss. & Reuter): Leaves shortly hairy, with scabrid margin; lower ovate to ovate-lanceolate. Appendages ovate, covering bracts, the fimbriae as long as width of appendage, 14-16 on each side, pale brown or yellowish-brown. Outer florets not radiate. {\i W. Pyrenees and mountains of C. Spain.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b rivularis} (Brot.) Coutinho,{\i  Fl. Port.} 655 (1913): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but lower leaves lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate; appendages not completely covering bracts; fimbriae as long as or slightly longer than width of appendage, 10-12 on each side; outer florets somewhat radiate. 2n = 22.{\i  N. & C. Portugal.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 188. C. phrygia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 910 (1753). Perennial. Stems 30-120 cm, erect, simple or branched, the branches thickened below the capitula. Leaves green to sparsely greyish-arachnoid-tomentose, undivided, lanceolate to ovate, entire or dentate, acute or acuminate; middle acute, rounded at the base or amplexicaul. Capitula usually solitary. Involucre 15-20 × 10-20 mm, ovoid to globose; appendages mostly covering bracts, those of the inner bracts ovate or orbicular, those of the middle bracts orbicular to lanceolate, pale brown to black, abruptly or gradually attenuate into a subulate-filiform, erect or recurved, plumosely pectinate-fimbriate acumen, the fimbriae 12-25 on each side, black, yellowish-brown or brown, 2-3 times as long as the width of the appendage. Florets pink to purple, the outer usually radiate. Achenes 3-4 mm; pappus 0·5-2 mm.{\i  Grassland and open woods. N., C. & E. Europe and N. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Bu Cz Da Fe Ge He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) [Su].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucre c. 10 mm in diameter, ovoid ...................... ({\b h}) subsp. {\b ratezatensis}
\par 
1 Involucre (12-)14-18(-20) mm in diameter, globose or 
\par 
  ovoid-globose
\par 
2 Leaves arachnoid-tomentose; stem simple, rarely with 
\par 
  2-3 branches .................................................................... ({\b i}) subsp. {\b rarauensis}
\par 
2 Leaves green, glabrous, puberulent or sparsely arachnoid-
\par 
  tomentose beneath; stem branched
\par 
3 Inner appendages exserted, distinctly exceeding the 
\par 
  middle appendages
\par 
4 Appendages of middle bracts ovate or broadly lanceolate
\par 
  gradually attenuate into an acumen .................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b phrygia}
\par 
4 Appendages of middle bracts broadly ovate or orbicular 
\par 
  or triangular, abruptly attenuate into an acumen
\par 

\par 
293}
\par