{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3 Involucre ovoid-cylindrical; appendages not covering 
\par 
  bracts ............................................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b jordaniana}
\par 
3 Involucre ovoid-globose; appendages covering bracts ...... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b aemilii}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b procumbens}: Stems 10-30 cm. Upper leaves amplexicaul, white-tomentose on both surfaces. Involucre ovoid-globose; appendages not covering bracts.{\i  Hills by the R. Vésubie, N. of Nice}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b jordaniana} (Gren. & Godron) Rouy,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  9}: 131 (1905) ({\i C. jordaniana }Gren. & Godron): Stems 5-15 cm. Upper leaves cuneate-attenuate at the base, white-tomentose beneath. Involucre ovoid-cylindrical; appendages not covering bracts.{\i  Mountains S.E. of Villars} ({\i Alpes Maritimes}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b aemilii} (Briq.) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 208 (1976) ({\i C. aemilii} Briq.): Stems 5-10 cm. Upper leaves cuneate at the base, white-tomentose on both surfaces. Involucre ovoid-globose; appendages covering bracts.{\i  Mountains N. of Villars} ({\i Alpes Maritimes}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b verguinii} (Briq. & Cavillier) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. procumbens} var. {\i verguinii} Briq. & Cavillier): Stems 20-30 cm. Upper leaves amplexicaul, greyish-green. Involucre ovoid-globose; appendages covering bracts.{\i  Alpes Maritimes}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 201. C. rhaetica} Moritzi,{\i  Neue Denkschr. Schweiz. Ges. Naturw.}{\b  3}: 81 (1839) ({\i C. cirrhata} Reichenb. pro parte). Perennial. Stems 10-60 cm, numerous, erect or ascending, simple or sparingly branched. Leaves subcoriaceous, scabrid, otherwise glabrous, rarely subfloccose, undivided; lower oblong- to linear-lanceolate; upper semiamplexicaul; uppermost sometimes hastate, entire. Capitula solitary, sessile. Involucre 14-20 × 8-15 mm, ovoid-cylindrical; appendages triangular, not completely covering the linear bracts, black at the base, narrowly semilunate-decurrent, the apex 7 mm, filiform, subulate, recurved, blackish-brown, plumose-fimbriate, the lower fimbriae very short, approximate, black, the upper fimbriae up to 3 mm, brown. Florets pink-purple, the outer radiate. Achenes c. 3 mm, pale brown; pappus up to 1 mm. 2n = 22.{\i  Open woods and meadows; calcicole. • S. Alps, from} 9°{\i  to }10° 45' {\i E.} He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Psephellus} (Cass.) Schmalh. Perennial; stems erect. Lower leaves pinnatisect; middle leaves entire or dentate, not pinnatisect. Appendages not decurrent, pectinate-fimbriate, not spinose. Corolla 5-fid. Pappus present, caducous.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 202. C. leucophylla} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3}: 591(1819). Stems 10-30 cm, simple, ascending. Leaves whitish-green above, grey-tomentose beneath; lower pinnatisect, with obtuse segments; cauline lyrate. Involucre 8-15 mm in diameter; appendages triangular-lanceolate, yellow or pale brown. Florets pink, the marginal radiate.{\i  Steppes and rocky hillsides. Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 203. C. declinata} Bieb., {\i op. cit.} 590 (1819). Like {\b 202} but involucre 15-20 mm in diameter; appendages brown.{\i  Rocky hillsides and coniferous woods. Krym.} Rs(K). ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 204. C. dealbata} Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 2295 (1803). Stems up to 100 cm, branched, erect. Leaves green above, grey-tomentose beneath; lower pinnatisect, with acute segments, long-petiolate; upper surrounding the capitula, pinnatisect, rarely entire, sessile. Involucre 30-40 mm in diameter; appendages ovate-orbicular, yellowish-brown. Florets bright pink, the marginal distinctly patent.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized.} [Cz.] ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Heterolophus} (Cass.) Dobrocz. Like Subgen. {\i Psephellus} but stems usually procumbent; pappus persistent.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 205. C. sibirica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 913 (1753). Stems up to 60 cm erect. Basal leaves up to 40 cm, pinnatisect, long-petiolate, with oblong-ovate, entire or weakly dentate segments; lower cauline-pinnatisect, upper oblanceolate-elliptical, undivided. Involucre c. 20 mm in diameter, globose; appendages of middle bracts broadly ovate, yellowish-brown, with 9-12 fimbriae 2-3 mm on each side. Florets purplish-pink. Achenes c. 5 mm; pappus c. 2 mm.{\i  Steppes, stony slopes and mountain woods. E. Russia, northwards to} c. 57° 30' {\i N.} Rs (C, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 206. C. carbonata} Klokov, {\i Nauk. Zapysky Kyjiv. Derz. Univ.}{\b  7}({\b 6}): 77, 82 (1948). Stems up to 20 cm, procumbent. Basal leaves 6-10(-20) cm, pinnatisect, shortly petiolate, with oblong-lanceolate, weakly dentate, rarely entire segments; lower cauline pinnatisect, the upper oblanceolate-elliptical, remotely serrate or entire. Involucre 10-15 mm in diameter, globose; appendages of middle bracts broadly ovate, brown at the base, blackish-brown towards the apex, with 6-10 fimbriae c. 2 mm on each side. Inner florets pale purple, the outer pink. Achenes c. 4-5 mm; pappus c. 1·5 mm.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • S. Russia and E. Ukraine.} Rs (C, W, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 207. C. marschalliana} Sprengel, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  3}: 398 (1826) ({\i C. sibirica} sensu Bieb., non L.). Stems 10-20(-30) cm, procumbent. Basal leaves 6-12 cm, pinnatisect, petiolate, with oblong segments; lower cauline undivided, the middle lyrate, the upper oblong, undivided. Involucre 10-15 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages of middle bracts oblong, brown, with 3-4 fimbriae c. 1 mm on each side. Florets purplish-pink. Achenes c. 4 mm; pappus c. 1·5 mm. {\i Stony slopes. From N.E. Bulgaria to E. Ukraine.} Bu Rm Rs (W, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 208. C. sumensis} Kalenicz., {\i Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  18}({\b 1}): 238 (1845). Like {\b 207} but appendages of middle bracts narrowly lanceolate to triangular-lanceolate, blackish-brown, entire or with 1-3 fimbriae on each side.{\i  Sandy coniferous woods and stony steppes. • S.W. and S.C. parts of U.S.S.R., northwards to} c. 56° 30'{\i  N}. Rs (C, W, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Odontolophus} (Cass.) Hayek. Perennial. Leaves undivided. Middle bracts with irregularly pectinate-lacerate appendages not clearly separated from the bracts. Pappus present.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 209. C. trinervia} Stephan ex Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 2301 (1803). Plant sparsely floccose-tomentose. Stems up to 30 cm, erect, leafless above. Leaves undivided, up to 70 × 4 mm, linear-lanceolate, distinctly 3-veined, entire, acute, the lower long-petiolate, the upper sessile. Involucre 6-10 × 12-15 mm; bracts pale green, with dark brown apex; middle bracts oblong-ovate. Florets pink, the outer longer than the inner, patent. Achenes 4-6 mm; pappus 2-3 mm. {\i Dry grassland. From C. Romania to S.E. Russia.} Rm Rs (W, K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. saxatilis} C. Koch,{\i  Linnaea }{\b 24}: 419 (1851) ({\i Phaeopappus saxatilis} (C. Koch) Boiss.) was described from Kriti but has never been refound; its status is uncertain.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen.{\b  Cyanus} (Miller) Hayek. Annual or perennial, rarely biennial. Leaves undivided to pinnatisect. Appendages distinctly decurrent, denticulate to fimbriate, muticous. Pappus present, rarely absent.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 210. C. montana} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 911 (1753). Perennial with creeping rhizome. Stems up to 80 cm, erect, rarely ascending, simple, rarely sparingly branched above, broadly winged. Leaves soft, patent, ovate to oblong or broadly lanceolate, entire or rarely the lower remotely dentate to lobed, floccose-tomentose beneath, glabres-
\par 

\par 
297}
\par