{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 13 Leaves subglabrous and green above, grey-tomentose 
\par 
   beneath; bracts few, in 4-5 rows; appendages with 
\par 
   decurrent margin c. 0·3 mm wide; fimbriae 3 times as 
\par 
   long as the width of the margin of the appendage ....... ({\b i}) subsp. {\b adscendens}
\par 
13 Leaves glabrous, green on both surfaces, the cauline
\par 
   lanceolate, acute; bracts numerous, in 6-7 rows appendages
\par 
   with decurrent margin c. 1 mm wide fimbriae twice as 
\par 
   long as the width of the margin of the appendage ....... ({\b j}) subsp. {\b lugdunensis}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b aligera} (Gugler) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 208 (1976) ({\i C. variegata} var.{\i  aligera} Gugler): Stems 20-70(-100) cm, sparingly branched above, broadly winged, leafy almost to capitulum. Leaves more or less patent, grey- to white-tomentose, glabrescent; basal in a rosette and present at anthesis; lower cauline oblong or broadly lanceolate, sinuately lobed or lyrate; middle and upper cauline oblong-lanceolate, entire or pinnately lobed. Involucre 15-20 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages with decurrent margin c. 2 mm wide, black or brown; fimbriae twice as long as the width of the margin, dark brown, with white apex. Pappus c. 1 mm.{\i  Open woods and scrub, mainly in the lowlands; usually calcicole. France and Italy; C. & S.E. Europe.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tanaitica} (Klokov) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. tanaitica} Klokov): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but cauline leaves with spinulose, mucronate apex, the upper oblong-oblanceolate, entire, rarely subdentate; involucre 10-15 mm in diameter, cylindrical-ovoid; appendages with narrower decurrent margin c. 1 mm wide, blackish-brown, the fimbriae less than twice as long as the width of the margin; pappus 2-3 mm. {\i Steppes. S.E. Russia and E. Ukraine}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b pirinensis} (Degen, Urum. & H. Wagner) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. variegata} var.{\i  pirinensis} Degen, Urum. & H. Wagner): Stems 10-20 cm, simple, broadly winged, leafy. Leaves white-lanate; lower broadly elliptical, entire or remotely sinuate-dentate, gradually narrowed into petiole; cauline entire. Capitula shortly pedunculate. Involucre 10-15 mm in diameter, ovoid; bracts few, large; appendages with broad decurrent margin, dark brown; fimbriae twice as long as the width of the margin pale brown, with white apex. Pappus 0·5-1 mm. •{\i  S.W. Buigaria} ({\i Pirin Pl}.).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b semidecurrens} (Jordan) Dostál, {\i op. cit.} 209 (1976) ({\i C. semidecurrens} Jordan): Stems 30-60 cm, sparingly branched near the apex, shortly and broadly winged, leafy. Leaves erect, subglabrous and green above, grey-tomentose beneath, entire; lower obovate-elliptical, shortly petiolate; cauline linear-lanceolate. Involucre ovoid; appendages with decurrent margin c. 1 mm wide, black or blackish-brown; fimbriae as long as or scarcely longer than the width of the margin, dark brown. Pappus c. 1 mm.{\i  Pastures and stony ground. • Alps; N.E. Spain}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b dominii} Dostál,{\i  Acta Bot. Bohem.}{\b  10}: 71 (1931): Stems 20-70 cm, simple, rarely sparingly branched above, angled but not winged. Leaves white-tomentose beneath; lower withered at anthesis; cauline narrowly oblong to linear-lanceolate, entire, acute, often with revolute margin, patent. Involucre 7-10 mm in diameter, cylindrical-ovoid; appendages with narrow decurrent margin, pale brown; fimbriae 2-3 times as long as the width of the margin, white at apex. Pappus c. 1 mm.{\i  Dry, rocky scrub; somewhat calcicole. • W. Carpathians, Bulgaria}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b novakii} (Dostál) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 209 (1976) ({\i C. novakii }Dostál): Stems 40-60 cm,simple or sparingly branched above. Basal leaves in a rosette, withered at anthesis, oblong-ovate, long-petiolate; cauline oblong, entire, obtuse, grey-tomentose. Involucre 7-10 mm in diameter, cylindrical; appendages blackish-brown; fimbriae twice as long as the width of the margin, pale brown, the terminal thickened, subspinuliform rigid. Pappus c. 1 mm. •{\i  S. Bulgaria} ({\i Rodopi Pl.}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b g}) Subsp. {\b stricta} (Waldst. & Kit.) Dostál, {\i Acta Bot. Bohem.}{\b  10}: 72 (1931): Stems 30-70(-80) cm, strict, simple or sparingly branched above, narrowly winged, leafy. Leaves narrowly lanceolate, entire, rarely with 1-2 teeth at the base, grey-tomentose; lower withered at anthesis; cauline erect, acute. Capitula solitary, rarely 2-3 together. Involucre 18-25 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages narrowly (0·7 mm) decurrent, brown; fimbriae twice as long as the width of the margin, dark brown, with white apex. Pappus 1-1·5 mm.{\i  Rocky ground; calcicole. • E.C. Europe and N. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b h}) Subsp. {\b angelescui} (G. Grint.) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 209 (1976) ({\i C. angelescui} G. Grint.): Stems with 2-3 long branches from the middle, narrowly winged. Leaves grey-tomentose, sparsely glandular; lower oblong-lanceolate, entire or remotely sinuate-dentate, long-petiolate; cauline linear-lanceolate, entire, acute, erect. Involucre 10-12 mm in diameter, ovoid; bracts few; appendages with decurrent margin 1-2 mm wide, dark brown; fimbriae twice as long as the width of the margin, pale yellowish-brown. Pappus 2·5-3 mm.{\i  Open woods. • Moldavia, S.E. Romania}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b i}) Subsp. {\b adscendens} (Bartl.) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. montana} var. {\i adscendens} Bartl.): Stems c. 30 cm, simple, narrowly winged, slender. Leaves narrowly lanceolate, entire, acute, glabrescent and green above, grey-tomentose beneath; lower long-petiolate. Involucre 10-12 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages with decurrent margin c. 0·3 mm wide, blackish-brown; fimbriae 3 times as long as the width of the margin, pale brown. Pappus c. 2 mm.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • S.E. Austria to W. Bulgaria}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b j}) Subsp. {\b lugdunensis} (Jordan) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. lugdunensis} Jordan): Stems simple, rarely sparingly branched from the middle, narrowly winged or angled. Leaves linear-lanceolate, entire, acute, erect, glabrous, green; lower long-petiolate. Involucre c. 15 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages with decurrent margin c. 1 mm wide, dark brown; fimbriae twice as long as the width of the margin, pale brown. Pappus 1-1·5 mm. •{\i  S.W. Alps}; ?{\i Spain}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b k}) Subsp. {\b triumfetti} (incl. {\i C. variegata} Lam.,{\i  C. seussana} Chaix): Stems 10-50 cm, simple, angled or narrowly winged, slender. Leaves narrowly lanceolate, entire, rarely remotely dentate; lower in basal rosette, long-petiolate. Involucre 12-20 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; appendages with narrow decurrent margin, pale brown; fimbriae 2-3 times as long as the width of the margin, silvery. Pappus c. 2 mm. 2n = 22, 44.{\i  Rocks and scrub; calcicole. S. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b l}) Subsp. {\b cana} (Sibth. & Sm.) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. cana} Sibth. & Sm.): Stems 3-20 cm, simple, narrowly winged. Leaves white-tomentose, lyrately sinuately lobed or entire, rarely pinnatisect, oblong-lanceolate or the cauline narrowly lanceolate, shortly decurrent; upper linear-lanceolate. Involucre c. 15 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages with decurrent margin c. 1 mm wide, dark brown; fimbriae 2-3 times as long as the width of the margin, silvery. Pappus 1-2 mm. {\i Balkan peninsula; Krym.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b m}) Subsp. {\b lingulata} (Lag.) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. lingulata} Lag.): Stems 15-25 cm, simple, unwinged. Leaves grey-tomentose; lower oblong-spathulate, remotely dentate; cauline broadly linear, entire, erect. Involucre c. 13 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages with decurrent margin c. 0·5 mm wide, brown; fimbriae 3 times as long as the width of the margin, silvery. Pappus c. 1·5 mm. {\i C., S. & E. Spain, N.E. Portugal}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp. ({\b a}) is very variable in leaf-shape; the characteristic shape is found in the Carpathians, and variants transitional to subsp. ({\b k}) are often found in the lowlands of E.C. Europe.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. achtarovii} Urum., {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  19}: 37 (1920) ({\i C. montana} subsp.{\i  achtarovii} (Urum.) Hayek), described from S.W.
\par 

\par 
299}
\par