{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 cent, the lower shortly petiolate. Involucre 10-15 mm in diameter, ovoid-cylindrical; appendages decurrent near base, black to dark brown; fimbriae as long as the width of the margin, dark brown. Inner florets violet; outer blue. Achenes 5-6 mm; pappus c. 1·5 mm. 2n = 44.{\i  Open woods and meadows; usually calcicole. Mountains of Europe, from the Ardennes and the Carpathians to the Pyrenees, C. Italy and C. Jugoslavia.} Au Be Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po [Fe].
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    Widely cultivated for ornament.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 211. C. mollis} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  3}: 243 (1806). Perennial with long-creeping, branched rhizome. Stems 30-50(-100) cm, erect, simple, rarely sparingly branched above, not or shortly winged. Leaves somewhat rigid, ovate to elliptic-lanceolate, entire, gradually acuminate, green above, densely grey-tomentose beneath, sessile. Involucre 12-18 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages long-decurrent, irregularly denticulate, black; teeth short, black. Inner florets violet; outer blue. Achenes 6-7 mm; pappus 1-1·5 mm, white. 2n = 44.{\i  Mountain meadows. • E.C. Europe.} Cz Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 212. C. maramarosiensis} (Jáv.) Czerep.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 20}: 395 (1960). Like {\b 211} but leaves thin, soft, abruptly acuminate, subglabrous and green beneath; involucre 10-14 mm in diameter, subcylindrical; achenes c. 5 mm; pappus 1·5-2 mm, reddish.{\i  Mountain woods. • E. Carpathians}. Rm.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 213. C. pinnatifida} Schur,{\i  Enum. Pl. Transs. }405 (1866). Perennial with creeping rhizome. Stems 10-20(-40) cm, simple, shortly or narrowly winged. Leaves patent, greyish-tomentose above; lower lanceolate, long-acuminate, shortly petiolate. Involucre 12-15 mm in diameter, broadly ovoid; appendages broadly decurrent, black; fimbriae as long as the width of the margin, blackish-brown. Florets violet. Achenes c. 4 mm; pappus 1·5-2 mm.{\i  Alpine meadows. S.& E.Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp. {\b sooana} (Borhidi) Soó, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  83}: 149 (1972) ({\i C. achtarovii} subsp.{\i  sooana} Borhidi), described from Romania (Mt. Ceahlau), differs from typical {\b 213} chiefly in having the lower leaves ovate- to oblong-spathulate and the involucre 30-35 mm; its status is uncertain.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 214. C. baldaccii} Degen ex Bald.,{\i  Malpighia}{\b  9}: 277 (1895). Perennial, with short rhizome. Stems very stout. Leaves linear lanceolate in outline, entire or lyrate, with undulate margin, arachnoid-tomentose, shortly petiolate. Involucre 6-8 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages long-decurrent, dark brown; fimbriae shorter than the width of the margin, silvery. Florets cream. Achenes c. 3 mm; pappus C. 1 mm.{\i  Alpine pastures. • W. Kriti.} Cr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 215. C. pindicola} Griseb., {\i Reise Rumel.}{\b  2}: 164 (1841). Perennial with short rhizome. Stems up to 15 cm. Lower leaves lyrate-pinnatisect with 2-3(-4) lobes on each side, petiolate; cauline entire or weakly dentate, decurrent. Involucre 16-18 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages broadly decurrent, black; fimbriae silvery-white at apex. Florets cream. Pappus 1-1·5 mm. •{\i  Mountains of S.W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr Ju.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 216. C. triumfetti} All.,{\i  Auct. Syn. Stirp. Horti Taur.} 16 (1773) ({\i C. axillaris }Willd.). Perennial, often with short rhizome. Stems up to 70(-100) cm, rarely very short, erect or ascending, simple or sparingly branched in upper half. Leaves oblong to lanceolate, usually tomentose or lanate, often glabrescent, the lower petiolate. Involucre 7-25 mm in diameter, ovoid to ovoid-globose or cylindrical; appendages decurrent, brown or black; fimbriae 1-3 times as long as the width of the margin, pale brown, white or silvery at apex. Inner florets violet; outer blue. Achenes (3-)4-5 mm; pappus 0·5-3 mm, rarely absent. 2n = 22, 44. {\i  S. & C. Europe}. Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W, K, E) Si Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 The following subspecies are mostly readily distinguishable morphologically as well as in their distributions and ecological preferences, and their characters remain constant in cultivation; intermediates occur, however, and the key is best used on populations rather than on individual specimens.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lower leaves broadly elliptical to ovate or obovate,
\par   the cauline oblong or oblong-lanceolate; fimbriae with
\par   pale brown or white but not silvery apex
\par 2 Stems (0·5-)2-20 cm, simple; leaves densely white-lanate
\par 3 Basal leaves broadly elliptical; cauline leaves lanceolate,
\par   long-decurrent ................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b pirinensis}
\par 3 Basal leaves oblong-lanceolate, lyrately sinuately 
\par   lobed or entire; cauline leaves linear-lanceolate, 
\par   long-acuminate, shortly decurrent .........................................  ({\b 1}) subsp. {\b cana}
\par 2 Stems 20-70(-100) cm, sparingly branched; leaves grey-
\par   to white-tomentose, glabrescent, the cauline oblong to 
\par   oblong-lanceolate
\par 4 Cauline leaves obtuse; involucre 7-10 mm in diameter,
\par   cylindrical; appendages reddish-brown; fimbriae pale
\par   brown, the terminal one spinuliform .................................. ({\b f}) subsp. {\b novakii}
\par 4 Cauline leaves acute; stems broadly winged; appendages
\par   black or brown; fimbriae brown, with white but not 
\par   silvery apex
\par 5 Cauline leaves not mucronate or spinulose at apex; in-
\par   volucre 15-20 mm in diameter; fimbriae twice as long as
\par   width of the margin of the appendage ................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b aligera}
\par 5 Cauline leaves with spinulose, mucronate apex; involucre 
\par   10-15 mm in diameter; fimbriae less than twice as 
\par   long as the width of the margin of the appendage ............ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b tanaitica}
\par 1 Lower leaves linear or oblong-lanceolate to lingulate;
\par   fimbriae with brown, white or silvery apex
\par 6 Fimbriae silvery and shining at apex
\par 7 Lower leaves ± linear-lingulate, the cauline broadly 
\par   linear, entire; all leaves abruptly acuminate at the 
\par   apex; involucre c. 13 mm in diameter; appendages 
\par   narrowly decurrent ........................................................... ({\b m}) subsp. {\b liogulata}
\par 7 Lower leaves linear-lanceolate, entire, rarely remotely
\par   dentate, the cauline linear or narrowly lanceolate, 
\par   erect, acute, long-decurrent with narrow wings
\par 8 Leaves green or grey-green beneath; bracts numerous ...({\b k}) subsp. {\b triumfetti}
\par 8 Leaves white-tomentose beneath; bracts few ......................... ({\b l}) subsp. {\b cana}
\par 6 Fimbriae brown, the apex sometimes white but not silvery
\par 9 Fimbriae as long as, or scarcely longer than the width of 
\par   the margin of the appendage; leaves erect, glabrous and green, 
\par   entire; stem shortly and broadly winged ................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b semidecurrens}
\par 9 Fimbriae 2-3 times as long as the width of the margin 
\par   of the appendage; leaves erect or patent; stem angled 
\par   or narrowly winged
\par 10 Stems angled, not winged; leaves patent, lanceolate to
\par    linear-lanceolate; involucre 7-10 mm in diameter,
\par    cylindrical ......................................................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b dominii}
\par 10 Stems with long, narrow wings; leaves erect; involucre
\par    10-25 mm in diameter, ovoid-cylindrical
\par 11 Involucre 18-25 mm in diameter; bracts numerous, in
\par    6-8 rows; fimbriae dark brown, with white apex ................ ({\b g}) subsp. {\b stricta}
\par 11 Involucre 10-15 mm in diameter; bracts numerous or few,
\par    in 4-7 rows; fimbriae pale brown
\par 12 Stems with a few long branches above; lower leaves
\par    oblong-lanceolate, sparsely glandular, long-decurrent;
\par    bracts few, in 4-5 rows ................................................. ({\b h}) subsp. {\b angelescui}
\par 12 Stems simple, rarely sparingly branched above; lower
\par    leaves narrowly lanceolate, eglandular, very narrowly
\par    decurrent
\par 
\par 298}
\par