{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 upper few, remote, small; uppermost sessile at the base of branches, small. Capitula solitary. Involucre 18-20 mm in diameter, globose; appendages up to 10 mm wide, covering bracts, orbicular, hyaline, white, with an ovate, blackish-brown central spot, lacerate, denticulate, the apex with short mucro. Florets purple. Pappus as long as or somewhat longer than achene. 2n = 18.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • E. Sardegna} ({\i Baunei}). Sa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 170. C. musarum} Boiss. & Orph. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 5}): 112 (1856). Perennial. Stems up to 20 cm, caespitose, procumbent, the apex ascending, simple or sparingly branched, leafy up to the inflorescence. Leaves appressed-hairy, greyish-green; lower shortly petiolate, pinnatifid, with oblanceolate to ovate segments, entire or lobed, the upper pinnatisect; uppermost lyrately lobed or entire, oblong. Capitula solitary. Involucre 20-25 mm in diameter, subglobose; appendages orbicular, covering bracts, convex, with ovate, blackish-brown central spot, the margin broadly white-membranous, erose-denticulate, the apex obtuse, muticous. Florets yellow, the outer somewhat patent. Achenes c. 3 mm, pale; pappus as long as or up to twice as long as achene.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S.C. Greece }({\i Parnassos}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Jacea} (Miller) Hayek. Perennial. Lower leaves undivided or pinnately lobed; middle leaves entire or dentate, not pinnatisect. Appendages entire to fimbriate, muticous or mucronulate. Pappus present or absent.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. JACEA. Appendages broadly ovate or orbicular, usually covering bracts, the margin entire, lacerate, or denticulate. Pappus usually absent.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 171. C. haynaldii} Borbás ex Vuk., {\i Rad Jugosl. Akad. Znan. Umj.}{\b  58}: 149 (1881) ({\i C. jacea} subsp.{\i  haynaldii} (Borbás ex Vuk.) Hayek). Perennial. Stems 20-60 cm, caespitose, erect, simple or with few short branches above. Leaves green above, floccose and grey but becoming green beneath, undivided, ovate or ovate-lanceolate, mucronate; lower petiolate; middle sessile, entire or remotely dentate; upper smaller, the uppermost crowded, subtending the capitula. Capitula solitary. Involucre 18-22 mm in diameter, globose; appendages 10 mm wide, covering the green, distinctly veined bracts, scarious, convex, greyish-brown, irregularly denticulate, muticous, with darker, blackish-brown, rarely white centre. Florets purple, the outer strongly radiate. Achenes 3·5 mm, pale greyish; pappus absent. •{\i   Mountains of Jugoslavia and N. Albania. }Al ?It Ju ?Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp.{\b  julica} (Hayek) E. Mayer in Lazar, {\i Ad Annum Horti Bot. Labac. Solemn. CL} 39 (1960), from N.E. Italy and N.W. Jugoslavia, differs from typical {\b 171} chiefly in having broadly elliptical, pale green leaves and the involucre c. 25 mm in diameter, with lacerate appendages; its status is uncertain.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 172. C. bracteata} Scop.,{\i  Delic. Fl. Insubr.} {\b 2}: 17 (1786) ({\i C. jacea }subsp.{\i  bracteata} (Scop.) Hayek). Perennial. Stems up to 60 cm, caespitose, erect or ascending, shortly and sparingly branched at the middle. Leaves floccose-tomentose or green and sparsely arachnoid-hairy, scabrid; lower petiolate, ovate-lanceolate, undivided, rarely lyrately lobed, denticulate, mucronate; upper lanceolate, subtending the capitula. Capitula solitary. Involucre 14-20 × (12-)14-20 mm, globose or broadly cylindrical; appendages orbicular, covering bracts, convex, scarious, white, sometimes darker, the margin 6-8 mm wide, involute, entire or somewhat lacerate, the apex obtuse. Florets pinkish-orange, the outer radiate. Achenes 3 mm, pale greyish-brown; pappus absent.{\i  Dry hillsides. • S. Alps and mountains of N.W. Jugoslavia.} Au Ga He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 173. C. weldeniana} Reichenb.,{\i  Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 213 (1831). Perennial. Stems 30-60 cm, caespitose erect, sparingly branched below the middle, the branches long virgate. Leaves scabrid, sparsely greyish-tomentose or arachnoid-hairy, undivided; basal broadly lanceolate, acute; cauline lanceolate. Capitula solitary, subtended by the uppermost leaves. Involucre c. 13 × 10 mm ovoid-cylindrical; appendages orbicular, covering the indistinctly veined bracts, scarious, convex, white to yellowish or pale reddish-brown, entire or irregularly denticulate, involute above, the apex acute. Florets pinkish-orange, the outer radiate. Achenes c. 3 mm, pale greyish-brown; pappus absent.{\i  Stony grassland. • E. Mediterranean region.} Al Gr It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Intermediates between {\b 173} and {\b 175} occur frequently in the S.E. Alps and Balkan peninsula ({\i C. weldeniana} var.{\i  balcanica} Hayek, {\i C. stenophylla} Wilmott, non Dufour).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 174. C. rocheliana} (Heuffel) Dostál,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 205 (1976) ({\i C. jacea} var.{\i  rocheliana }Heuffel, {\i C. jacea} subsp.{\i  banatica} Hayek). Perennial. Stems 60-100(-150) cm, caespitose, erect or ascending, sparingly branched at the middle, the branches long, erect. Leaves scabrid, greyish-arachnoid-tomentose, sometimes green; basal ovate-lanceolate, entire, denticulate or with a few lobes, acute; cauline broadly lanceolate, rounded or subcordate at the base. Capitula solitary. Involucre 13(-16) × 11-12(-15) mm, ovoid-globose; appendages 5-6 mm wide, covering the distinctly veined bracts, orbicular, scarious, convex, greyish-brown, denticulate, the central vein produced into a very short mucro. Florets pinkish-orange, the outer radiate. Achenes c. 3 mm, pale greyish-brown; pappus absent.{\i  Sandy hills, meadows, open forests. • From S. Hungary to N. Bulgaria.} Bu Hu Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 175. C. pannonica} (Heuffel) Simonkai,{\i  Math. Term. Közl.} {\b 24}: 620 (1891) ({\i C. angustifolia} Schrank, non Miller). Perennial. Stems 30-100 cm, 1-3, erect or ascending, branched at or above the middle, the branches virgate, erecto-patent, long. Leaves scabrid, green or sparsely hairy glabrescent; basal dead at anthesis, lanceolate, entire, rarely lobed; cauline linear to lanceolate, entire to pinnately lobed. Capitula solitary or in dense corymbs. Involucre c. 15 × 10-12 mm, ovoid-globose or -cylindrical; appendages orbicular, almost covering the appressed bracts, with blackish- or yellowish-brown centre, the margin white or pale reddish-brown, entire, lacerate or irregularly denticulate, muticous. Florets pink, the outer radiate. Achenes c. 3 mm, greyish-brown; pappus absent. 2n = 22, 44.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu ?It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Intermediates between {\b 175} and {\b 178} from E.C. Europe have been described as {\b C. jacea} subsp.{\b  jungens} Gugler,{\i  Mitt. Bayer. Bot. Ges.}{\b  1}: 406 (1904). Intermediates also occur between {\b 175} and {\b 174}, and between {\b 175} and {\b 172}, as well as between {\b 175} and various other species of Sect. {\i Jacea} and {\i Lepteranthus}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pannonica}: Leaves green or sparsely greyish-arachnoid-hairy; cauline lanceolate to linear, entire, rarely pinnately lobed. Capitula solitary, shortly pedunculate. Involucre c. 10 mm in diameter; appendages irregularly denticulate. •{\i  C. & S.E. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b substituta} (Czerep.) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 206 (1916) ({\i C. substituta} Czerep.): Leaves greyish-green, arachnoid-pubescent; lower cauline oblong-lanceolate; upper linear-lanceolate, remotely denticulate to sinuately lobed. Capitula in dense corymbs. Involucre 12-16 mm in diameter; appendages lacerate or lacerate-fimbriate.{\i  S.W. part of U.S.S.R.}
\par 

\par 
290}
\par