{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 162.          RUBIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.H. Valentine & A.O. Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or dwarf shrubs. Leaves nearly always opposite, simple, entire; stipules separate, connate or divided, sometimes leaf-like and then forming whorls of 4-12 apparent leaves. Inflorescence thyrsoid, paniculate or corymbose, sometimes condensed to a spike or head, or reduced. Flowers actinomorphic, usually hermaphrodite. Sepals usually free, sometimes reduced or absent. Sympetalous; corolla hypocrateriform, infundibuliform, cupshaped or rotate. Stamens epipetalous, alternating with the lobes of the corolla. Ovary inferior, usually 2-locular and with a disc; loculi with 1-numerous ovules. Style simple or 2-fid. Fruit dry, dividing into mericarps, or fleshy. Seeds endospermic.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   This predominantly woody and tropical family is represented in Europe, apart from the genus{\i  Putoria}, by more or less herbaceous plants with leaf-like stipules. For convenience, where leaves and leaf-like stipules form a whorl, the description is abbreviated to ' leaves in whorls . . . ' etc.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   In the habitat notes, the term {\i montane} refers to the upper part of the deciduous forest zone, the term {\i subalpine} to the zone of coniferous forest upwards to the tree-line and the term {\i alpine} to the treeless zone above the limits of the forest. The actual altitude indicated by these zones will, of course, vary with location, aspect, etc.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves opposite, with small stipules, dwarf shrub ...................... {\b 1. Putoria}
\par
1 Leaves and leaf-like stipules in whorls of 4 or more
\par
2 Corolla-tube longer than lobes
\par
3 Flowers in dense spikes, usually with only 1 sessile 
\par
  flower in the axil of each bract ................................................ {\b 3. Crucianella}
\par 
3 Flowers in panicles, cymes or capitula
\par 
4 Flowers in capitula
\par 
5 Calyx 6-toothed, persistent in fruit ............................................. {\b 2. Sherardia}
\par 
5 Calyx absent ................................................................................ {\b 4. Asperula}
\par 
4 Flowers in cymes or panicles
\par 
6 Leaves in whorls of 4 .................................................................. {\b 4. Asperula}
\par 
6 Leaves in whorls of more than 4
\par 
7 Pedicels with bracteoles; ovary and fruit oblong,
\par 
  truncate at apex ............................................................................ {\b 4. Asperula}
\par 
7 Pedicels without bracteoles; ovary and fruit ovoid ....................... {\b 5. Galium} 
\par 
2 Corolla-tube shorter than lobes
\par 
8 Corolla 5-lobed; fruit fleshy ............................................................ {\b 9. Rubia}
\par 
8 Corolla 4-lobed; fruit dry 9 Central flower of cymes
\par 
  hermaphrodite; lateral flowers male (rarely absent)
\par 
10 Leaves in whorls of more than 4 ................................................. {\b 5. Galium}
\par 
10 Leaves in whorls of 4
\par 
11 Flowers yellow; peduncles and pedicels deflexed under
\par 
   the leaves, not enlarging in fruit nor encircling the
\par 
   fruit, without conspicuous bristles ............................................... {\b 7. Cruciata}
\par 
11 Flowers whitish; peduncles and pedicels deflexed 
\par 
   between the leaves, enlarging in fruit and encircling
\par 
   the fruit, with conspicuous bristles or hooks on outside .............. {\b 8. Valantia}
\par 
9  All flowers hermaphrodite
\par 
12 Most flowers ± enclosed in white, membranous bracts;
\par 
   annual ........................................................................................ {\b 6. Callipeltis}
\par 
12 Flowers not enclosed in membranous bracts; annual or perennial
\par 
13 Ultimate inflorescence branches with bracts and often 
\par 
   bracteoles .................................................................................... {\b 4. Asperula}
\par 
13 Ultimate inflorescence-branches without bracts or 
\par 
   bracteoles ....................................................................................... {\b 5. Galium}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.               Putoria}               Pers.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Dwarf shrubs. Leaves opposite; stipules small, interpetiolar, more or less fused. Flowers in small fascicles. Calyx 4-toothed, persistent in fruit. Corolla infundibuliform with a long tube, 4-lobed. Style filiform, with short 2-lobed stigma. Ovary 2-locular with 1 ovule in each loculus. Fruit a drupe with 2 pyrenes.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. calabrica} (L. fil.) DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  4}: 577 (1830). Much branched, forming mats up to 1 m in diameter, foetid, glabrous to densely puberulent. Leaves 10-20 × c. 3 mm, obovate to elliptic-lanceolate, obtuse with revolute margin; stipules c. 1 mm, ovate. Corolla 10-15 mm, pink, the lobes 3-4 mm, linear-lanceolate. Fruit c. 5 mm, black. 2n = 22.{\i  Rocks  and river gravels. Mediterranean region.} Al Cr Gr Hs It Ju Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.               Sherardia}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves in whorls of 4-6. Flowers in small terminal heads, with up to 10 connate leaves forming an involucre. Calyx 4- to 6-toothed, persistent in fruit. Corolla infundibuliform with a long tube, 4-lobed. Style filiform, bifid; branches unequal; stigmas capitate. Ovary 2-locular with 1 ovule in each loculus. Fruit dry; mericarps 2, 1-seeded.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. arvensis} L., Sp. Pl. 102 (1753). Stems up to 40 cm, procumbent, somewhat scabrid with small deflexed prickles. Lower leaves obovate-cuspidate, soon withering; upper leaves 5-20 × 1-5 mm, oblanceolate, mucronate. Heads 4- to 10-flowered. Corolla 4-5 mm, lilac. Fruit 2-7 mm, scabrid. 2n = 22.{\i  Cultivated ground and dry grassland. Almost throughout Europe, but only casual in the extreme north.} All except Fa Is Sb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.           Crucianella }            L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By F. Ehrendorfer.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Woody or herbaceous perennials or annuals. Leaves in whorls of 4-8. Inflorescence a spike; flowers hermaphrodite, usually solitary, sessile or shortly pedicellate in the axil of a bract and subtended by two bracteoles at the base. Calyx reduced or absent. Corolla coloured, infundibuliform; tube narrow, 3-6 times as long as the 4-5 lobes; lobes usually with incurved awn at apex. Style bifid; branches unequal; stigmas capitate. Fruit dry, glabrous, smooth to tuberculate; mericarps usually 2, narrowly ovoid, 1-seeded.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 All species grow in dry, open habitats.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perennial, woody at base; leaves in whorls of 4, 
\par 
  coriaceous, ± pungent .................................................................. {\b 1. maritima}
\par 
1 Annual; leaves often in whorls of more than 4, herbaceous
\par 
2 Corolla 6-9·5 × 1·3-2 mm (excluding awn), distinctly
\par 
  exceeding bracts
\par 
3 Bracts acute; 1 flower to each bract .................................... {\b 2. macrostachya}
\par 
3 Bracts aristate-acuminate; usually 2 flowers to each bract
\par 
4 Leaves in whorls of 6(-8) ................................................................ {\b 4. graeca}
\par 
4 Leaves in whorls of 4 or less ...................................................... {\b 3. bithynica}
\par 
2 Corolla 2-7·5 × 0·8 mm (excluding awn), not or only 
\par 
  slightly exceeding bracts
\par 
5 Bracts up to 1 mm wide, linear-subulate; flowers shortly
\par 
  pedicellate; corolla 2-2·5 mm, 5-lobed ............................................. {\b 8. patula}
\par 
5 Bracts 1·5-3 mm wide, lanceolate; flowers sessile;
\par 
  corolla 3-7·5 mm, 4-lobed
\par 

\par 
3}
\par