{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy2\hr11\min2}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy2\hr11\min4}{\version2}{\edmins2}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords958}{\nofchars5465}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 Hb Rs (E) }{\i\fs28 and perhaps other regions.}{\fs28  Al Bu Gr *Ju Si Tu [Au Be Br Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Sa Su].
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28  C. hortorum}{\fs28  Pau, }{\i\fs28 Not. Bot. Fl. Esp. }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 12 (1887), described from cultivated material from Spain, with procumbent stems, very small capitula and the pappus twice as long as the achene, is probably a monstrous variant of }{\b\fs28 220}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par   Subgen.}{\b\fs28  Melanoloma}{\fs28  (Cass.) Dost\'e1l. Annual. Leaves lobed to pinnatisect. Appendages of middle bracts with remotely pinnate-spinulose apical spine. Pappus present.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 221. C. pullata}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  911 (1753) stems 5-45 cm, leafy up to the capitula, simple or branched, sometimes absent. Leaves hairy, scabrid; basal in a rosette, oblong, sinuately lobed or lyrate, petiolate; cauline pinnatisect or lyrate-pinnatisect, the uppermost pinnately lobed, rarely entire. Capitula 3-5 cm in diameter. Involucre 15-18 mm, glabrous; bracts ovate-lanceolate, ciliolate, pale green. Florets bluish-purple, rarely white, the outer patent, much longer than the inner. Achenes 3-4 mm, sparsely villous, pale brown or greyish; pappus 2\'b75-3 mm, white. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Dry, open habitats. Spain and Portugal.}{\fs28  Hs Lu [Ga].
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 139.    Crupina}{\fs28    (Pers.)Cass. 
\par }{\fs24 By J. do Amaral Franco.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Slender, erect, annual herbs, corymbosely branched above. Leaves alternate, unarmed; basal simple; cauline pinnatisect. Involucre cylindrical to ovoid; bracts imbricate, unequal, oblong-lanceolate, acute. Receptacular scales linear-subulate. Florets 5-fid; inner hermaphrodite; outer sterile. Corolla purple. Achenes subcylindrical to compressed, puberulent at base, villous towards apex, dark brown; pappus absent in the outer achenes, of 2 rows in the inner achenes, the outer with very unequal, minutely scabrid hairs, the inner with 5-10 short scales.
\par 
\par Literature: M. Le Vaillant,}{\i\fs28  Rev. G\'e9n. Bot.}{\b\fs28  77}{\fs28 : 111-124 (1970).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 Stem leafy up to the branches; capitula with 3-5 florets ................. }{\b\fs28 1. vulgaris}{\fs28  
\par  Stem leafy only in lower 1/3-1/2; capitula with 9-15 florets  ..}{\b\fs28 2. crupinastrum}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. C. vulgaris}{\fs28  Cass.,}{\i\fs28  Dict. Sci. Nat. }{\b\fs28 12}{\fs28 : 68 (1817). Stem 20-50(-80) cm, leafy up to the branches. Basal leaves oblong to obovate, entire to dentate, scabrid, sessile to petiolate, soon decaying; cauline leaves scabrid, sessile, the lobes 0\'b75-1\'b75 mm wide, linear, denticulate. Involucre 8-15 \'d7 3-5 mm at anthesis, the bracts light green, sometimes purplish distally. Capitula with 3-5 florets. Achenes 3-4 \'d7 2-2\'b75 mm, subcylindrical, with a wide, suborbicular, basal scar; pappus-hairs 5-6 mm, blackish-brown, the scales triangular-lanceolate, acute. 2n = 30. }{\i\fs28 Dry grassland and stony slopes. S. Europe, extending northwards to W.C. France, S. Czechoslovakia and S. Ukraine.}{\fs28  Al Bl Bu Co Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. C. crupinastrum}{\fs28  (Moris) Vis.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Dalm.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 42 (1847) (}{\i\fs28 C. morisii}{\fs28  Boreau). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but stem leafy only in lower 1/3-1/2; basal leaves often broadly pinnatifid; lobes of cauline leaves 1\'b75-3 mm wide, dentate to pinnatisect; involucre 15-20 \'d7 5-10 mm at anthesis; capitula with 9-15 florets; achenes usually compressed, with a linear, sublateral scar; pappus-hairs golden-brown, the scales oblong, truncate or trifid. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  Mediterranean region. }{\fs28 Al Bl Bu Co Cr Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 140.     Chartolepis}{\fs28       Cass.
\par }{\fs24 By J. Dost\'e1l
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial herbs. Leaves entire or dentate. Capitula solitary on stems and branches. Involucre oblong-ovoid; bracts imbricate, with orbicular, non-decurrent, lacerate, membranous apical appendage. Florets tubular, equal, hermaphrodite. Corolla 4-fid. Anthers without basal appendage. Achenes somewhat compressed; pappus-hairs in 2 rows, the outer plumose, connate at the base.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. C. glastifolia}{\fs28  (L.) Cass.,}{\i\fs28  Dict. Sci. Nat.}{\b\fs28  54}{\fs28 : 492 (1829) (}{\i\fs28 C. intermedia}{\fs28  Boiss.). Stem up to 100 cm, simple or sparingly branched, broadly winged, leafy throughout. Basal leaves up to 30 cm, oblong-elliptical, petiolate; cauline oblong to linear-lanceolate, long-decurrent at base, entire, sessile, arachnoid-lanate, with yellowish sessile glands. Involucre up to 30 mm in diameter; outer bracts elliptical, the inner sublinear, covered by over-lapping appendages; appendages pellucid, with brown basal spot. Corolla yellow. Achenes 5\'b75-6 mm, oblong, smooth, puberulent; outer pappus-hairs 8-10 mm, the inner very short. }{\i\fs28 Wet, saline grasslands. S. & S.E. parts of U.S.S.R.}{\fs28  Rs (C, W, E).
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 141.        Wagenitzia}{\fs28        Dost\'e1l     
\par }{\fs24 By J. Dost\'e1l
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial herbs with robust, woody rhizome. Leaves alternate. Capitula large, solitary on stems and branches. Involucre ovoid; bracts in several rows, imbricate, coriaceous, with spiny apical appendages. Florets tubular, equal, the inner hermaphrodite, the outer sterile. Corolla with filiform lobes. Achenes somewhat compressed; pappus-hairs persistent, plumose, in 2 rows.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. W. lancifolia}{\fs28  (Sieber ex Sprengel) Dost\'e1l, }{\i\fs28 Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b\fs28  19}{\fs28 : 76 (1973) (}{\i\fs28 Centaurea lancifolia }{\fs28 Sieber ex Sprengel). Stems erect or procumbent, sparingly branched above, sometimes woody at base. Leaves lanceolate, acuminate, entire, scabrid; basal petiolate; cauline indistinctly auriculate at base sessile. Capitula surrounded by upper leaves. Involucre 10-20 mm in diameter; outer bracts ovate-triangular, the inner linear-oblong, covered by overlapping appendages; appendages palmately divided into 9-13 spinules, the middle longer, erect, dark brown. Florets yellow. Achenes c. 4\'b75 mm, pale; pappus as long as or longer than achene. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Mountains of Kriti.}{\fs28  Cr.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 142.         Cnicus}{\fs28           L. 
\par }{\fs24 By J. do Amaral Franco.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Annual herbs. Leaves alternate, subcoriaceous, minutely spinose-dentate. Capitula solitary, surrounded by the upper leaves. Involucre ovoid; bracts imbricate, ovate-lanceolate, the outer mucronate-subulate, the inner longer and with a pectinate, spinelike apical appendage. Receptacular scales numerous, setaceous. Inner florets hermaphrodite; outer florets very small, sterile. Corolla yellow. Achenes subcylindrical, ribbed, sparsely hairy, with an oblong lateral scar and crowned by a dentate ring; pappus of 2 rows of 10 setae, the outer long, minutely scabrid, the inner much shorter, ciliate.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. C. benedictus}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  826 (1753). Stem 10-60 cm, arachnoid-villous. Leaves oblong in outline, light green with prominent white veins beneath; basal up to 30 \'d7 8 cm, runcinate to pinnatifid, petiolate; cauline smaller, usually sinuate in the wide proximal half, sessile, semiamplexicaul, the uppermost ovate-lanceolate, spine-tipped. Capitula 25-40 \'d7 20-30 mm; involucral. bracts brown. Achenes 6-8 \'d7 2-2\'b75 mm, brown; pappus yellow. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated fields and waste places.}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 301}
\par }