{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. minima} (L.) Schweigger & Koerte, {\i Fl. Erlang.}{\b  2}: 72 (1811). Leaves 10-90 × 3-20 mm, numerous, spathulate or oblanceolate, obtuse to acute, with patent to ascending teeth, narrowed at base to a usually short petiole, scabridulous or slightly hairy particularly on the margin. Scapes 5-32 cm, glabrous or nearly so; peduncles conspicuously thickened towards apex. Involucre 3-6 × 4-8 mm; bracts lanceolate, acuminate, glabrous or minutely hairy; midrib paler and thickened dorsally after flowering. Achenes 1·5-2·25 mm, narrowly obovate, dark, with pale angles and ribs and a short border at apex. 2n = 18.{\i  Cultivated and waste land, mainly on sandy soils. W. & C. Europe, extending northwards to S. Sweden and eastwards to S.W. Ukraine.} Au Be Br Co Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho Hs It Ju Lu Po ?Rm Rs (B, ?C, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 152.               Koelpinia}            Pallas 
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.D. Sell.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Stem solitary, often branched. Leaves linear to filiform, entire. Capitula 1-3. Involucral bracts few, subequal. Receptacle without scales. Ligules whitish-yellow. Achenes linear-cylindrical, strongly incurved, with long hooked projections along the back and at the apex, the pappus otherwise absent.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. K. linearis} Pallas,{\i  Reise}{\b  3}: 755 (1776). Up to 40 cm. Leaves 15-90 × 0·5-3 mm, linear or filiform, entire. Inflorescence of 1-3 capitula on peduncles up to 4 cm, and usually with 1 capitulum on a short peduncle at the base of the plant. Involucre 7-8 × 2-6 mm; bracts 5-7, linear, entire. Achenes (8-)12-16 mm. {\i Semi-deserts. S.E. Spain} ({\i Almería prov}.);{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Hs Rs (E). ({\i C. Asia, N. Africa}.)
\par 

\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 153.            Hyoseris}              L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.D. Sell.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Stems several, simple. Leaves all basal, pinnatifid. Capitula solitary. Involucral bracts in 2 rows, the outer much shorter than the inner. Receptacle flat, without scales. Ligules yellow, the outer sometimes with a purplish stripe on outer face which turns greenish when dry. Marginal achenes compressed, the median compressed and winged, the inner terete or compressed and winged; pappus of rigid hairs and scales, or only of scales.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Scapes 0·5-7 cm, often swollen; involucre 7-10 × 3-5 mm ............. {\b 1. scabra}
\par 
1 Scapes 6-36 cm, not swollen; involucre 10-19 mm
\par 
2 Stock not woody; involucre 10-15 mm; inner achenes terete, 
\par 
  sterile ................................................................................................ {\b 2. radiata}
\par 
2 Stock woody; involucre 13-19 mm; inner achenes compressed,
\par 
  winged, fertile .................................................................................. {\b 3. taurina}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. scabra} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 809 (1753). Annual. Leaves 15-80 × 3-14 mm, patent, narrowly oblanceolate, obtuse to subacute, narrowed at base to a winged petiole, glabrous or with few hairs, often farinose; lobes ovate, obtuse or acute, more or less dentate. Scapes 0·5-7 cm, ascending or procumbent, often swollen at the middle or near the apex, glabrous or farinose. Involucre 7-10 × 3-5 mm; bracts usually pale, linear, oblong or lanceolate, more or less obtuse, glabrous or slightly farinose. Achenes 7-8 mm, brown, sometimes minutely puberulent, the outer compressed, the median compressed and winged, the inner terete; outer achenes with a pappus of short hairs, the median and inner achenes with a pappus of pale, narrowly linear-lanceolate scales. 2n = 16. {\i Dry, open habitats. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} .Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. radiata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 808 (1753). Perennial. Leaves 50-250 × 10-50 mm, ascending or erect, oblanceolate, obtuse to acute, often long-petiolate; lobes more or less ovate, often runcinate, sometimes imbricate, subentire to dentate. Scapes 6-36 cm, erect, usually glabrous or farinose, sometimes hispid. Involucre 10-15 × 7-15 mm; bracts pale or dark, linear or oblong, obtuse, glabrous or farinose. Achenes 8-10 mm, brown, puberulent, the marginal compressed, the median compressed and winged, the inner terete; all achenes with a pappus of both rigid hairs and linear scales, those of the outer achenes sometimes much shorter than those of the inner.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si.
\par 

\par 
 ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b radiata}: Leaves not fleshy, glabrous, farinose or somewhat hispid; lobes dentate. Pappus of all achenes more than 5 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 
 ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b graeca} Halácsy,{\i  Consp. Fl. Graec.}{\b  2}: 119 (1902) ({\i H. lucida} L.): Leaves fleshy, glabrous or farinose; lobes subentire or slightly dentate. Pappus of outer achenes up to 1 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Mainly in C. Mediterranean region}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. taurina} (Pamp.) G. Martinoli,{\i  Caryologia}{\b  5}: 257 (1953). Perennial with branched, woody stock. Leaves 70-250 × 25-60 mm, ascending or erect, fleshy, oblanceolate or oblong, obtuse, glabrous; lobes ovate, sinuate-dentate or -crenate. Scapes 13-16 cm, erect, glabrous or with a few hairs. Involucre 13-19 × 10-15 mm; bracts pale, sometimes with dark apex, the outer ovate and contracted into a narrow but obtuse apex, the inner broadly oblong, obtuse, glabrous. Achenes 7-8 mm, pale brown, puberulent, the outer compressed and with a pappus of hairs and scales up to 1 mm, the inner compressed, winged and with a pappus of long hairs and linear scales. 2n = 16.{\i  Rock crevices. • S.W. Sardegna} ({\i Isola il Toro}). Sa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 154.           Hedypnois}             Miller
\par        

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.D. Sell.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Stems usually many, branched. Leaves entire to dentate or lobed. Capitula 1-many. Involucral bracts in 2 rows, the outer very small. Receptacle flat, without scales. Ligules yellow, the outer sometimes with a greenish stripe on the outer face. Achenes more or less cylindrical, often incurved, the outer usually partly enclosed in the involucral bracts; pappus (at least of inner achenes) of narrow, long-aristate scales, sometimes also including hairs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Involucral bracts strongly incurved in fruit; pappus of 
\par 
  outer achenes usually a corona ......................................................... {\b 1. cretica}
\par  
Involucral bracts not or only slightly incurved in fruit;
\par 
  pappus of all achenes of scales and hairs ....................................... {\b 2. arenaria}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. cretica} (L.) Dum.-Courset, {\i Bot. Cult.}{\b  2}: 339 (1802) ({\i H. rhagadioloides} (L.) F.W. Schmidt, {\i H. polymorpha} DC.). Plant 3-45(-60) cm, more or less hairy. Leaves 5-180(-250) × 2-25(-35) mm, mostly narrowly elliptical to oblanceolate, entire to deeply dentate or lobed, the basal usually with winged petioles, the cauline usually sessile. Capitula 1-numerous; peduncles more or less thickened. Involucre 7-10·5 × 3-11 mm; bracts narrowly linear-lanceolate, more or less acute, the inner usually partially enclosing the outer achenes and strongly incurved in fruit. Achenes 5-7·5 mm, often narrowed near apex, with minute, rigid hairs; outer achenes incurved. Pappus of outer achenes usually a corona, that of inner achenes of narrow, long-aristate scales. 2n = 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18. {\i Dry places. S. Europe.} Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in size, habit, hairiness, dissection of leaf and thickening of peduncle. Many variants have been named, but the
\par 

\par 
307}
\par