{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min50}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min50}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1032}{\nofchars5886}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 patent hairs at the base, sometimes retrorsely aculeolate above, rarely glabrescent; leaves (6-)9-20(-25) \'d7 (0\'b76-)1-2(-4) mm, in whorls of (6-)7-10(-12), (6-)7-10(-11) times as long as wide, narrowly lanceolate to linear, thin to coriaceous; inflorescence many-flowered, broadly ovoid to pyramidal; pedicels (0\'b74-)0\'b78-1\'b78(-2\'b77) mm, scarcely elongating or squarrose after flowering; corolla 0\'b78-2(-2\'b77) mm in diameter, yellow, greenish or purple; lobes awned, the awn 1/3-2/3 as long as lobe. 2n = 22, 44. }{\i\fs28 Dry, stony places. \bullet  C\'e9vennes, Jura, S.W. Alps, Appennini and adjacent lowlands.}{\fs28  Ga It.
\par 
\par   A variable polyploid complex, differentiated both ecologically and geographically, and composed of various diploid and tetraploid races. Several of the following supposed species might possibly be regarded as subspecies: }{\b\fs28 G. alpicola}{\fs28  Jordan,}{\i\fs28  Obs. Pl. Crit.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 : 131 (1846),}{\b\fs28  G. brachypodum}{\fs28  Jordan, }{\i\fs28 op. cit.}{\fs28  130 (1846) (}{\i\fs28 G. corsicum}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  brachypodum}{\fs28  (Jordan) Arcangeli), }{\b\fs28 G. gracilentum}{\fs28  Jordan, }{\i\fs28 op. cit.}{\fs28  126 (1846), }{\b\fs28 G. luteolum}{\fs28  Jordan,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\fs28  128 (1846),}{\b\fs28  G. myrianthum}{\fs28  Jordan, }{\i\fs28 op. cit. }{\fs28 126 (1846),}{\b\fs28  G. rubidum}{\fs28  Jordan,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\fs28  121 (1846),}{\b\fs28  G. leucophaeum}{\fs28  Gren. & Godron,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Fr.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 28 (1851). In zones of contact }{\b\fs28 87}{\fs28  is sometimes difficult to distinguish from }{\b\fs28 88}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 88. G. rubrum}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  107 (1753). Plant not black when dry, with stolons; stems usually 20-50 cm, slender, usually retrorsely aculeolate above, almost always with patent hairs at the base; internodes long. Leaves (12-)15-23(-28) \'d7 (1\'b75-)1\'b77-2\'b75(-3) mm, in whorls of 7-8(-9), 7-9(-10) times as long as wide, oblanceolate, thin; apex hyaline. Inflorescence ovoid-oblong, many-flowered; pedicels 1\'b75-2\'b72 mm, scarcely elongating or divaricate after anthesis. Corolla usually 1\'b75-2 mm in diameter, dark purple; lobes with awn at least \'bd as long as lobe. Fruit c. 1\'b75 mm, more or less papillose. 2n = 88.}{\i\fs28  Woods; somewhat calcifuge. \bullet  Foothills of S. Alps and N. Appennini.}{\fs28  He It.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 89. G}{\fs28 . \'d7 }{\b\fs28 centroniae}{\fs28  Cariot, }{\i\fs28 Ann. Soc. Bot. Lyon}{\b\fs28  6}{\fs28 : 13 (1879) (}{\i\fs28 G. pumilum}{\fs28  \'d7 }{\i\fs28 rubrum}{\fs28 ). Like }{\b\fs28 88}{\fs28  but stems 25-50 cm, often without patent hairs; inflorescences short; corolla c. 2 mm in diameter, purple to pink; lobes with shorter awn; fruit larger and smoother. 2n = 88. }{\i\fs28 Woods and grassland; often in the absence of one or both parent species. \bullet  Alps.}{\fs28  Au Ga He It Ju.
\par 
\par   Forms a continuous series between the parents and extends far beyond the area of }{\b\fs28 88}{\fs28 . It differs from }{\b\fs28 103}{\fs28  especially in the colour and form of the flower.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28  90. G.}{\fs28  \'d7 }{\b\fs28 carmineum}{\fs28  Beauverd, }{\i\fs28 Bull, Soc. Bot. Gen\'e8ve}{\fs28  ser. 2, }{\b\fs28 27}{\fs28 : 92 (1937) (}{\i\fs28 G. anisophyllon }{\fs28 \'d7}{\i\fs28  centroniae}{\fs28 ). Like }{\b\fs28 88}{\fs28  but of compact habit; stems 10-15 cm, often without patent hairs; leaves broadly oblanceolate; inflorescence more or less corymbose; corolla reddish; lobes more or less awned; fruit more than 1\'b75 mm. }{\i\fs28 Alpine grassland; somewhat calcifuge. \bullet  S. Alps.}{\fs28  Ga He It.
\par 
\par   Links }{\b\fs28 88}{\fs28 , via }{\b\fs28 89}{\fs28 , with octoploid variants of }{\b\fs28 112}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 91. G. balearicum}{\fs28  Briq.,}{\i\fs28  Annu. Cons. Jard. Bot. Gen\'e8ve }{\b\fs28 11-12}{\fs28 : 191 (1908). Densely caespitose with numerous filiform stolons. Stems 5-10 cm, slender, somewhat rough to almost smooth. Leaves (2\'b72-)2\'b75-5 \'d7 0\'b76-0\'b79 mm, in whorls of 5-6, the lower ovate, the upper lanceolate, 4-6 times as long as wide; upper surface and margin antrorsely scabrid; hyaline apex short. Inflorescence few-flowered; pedicels 0\'b78-1\'b71 mm, more or less divaricate after flowering. Corolla 1\'b74-2 mm in diameter, bright purple; lobes not apiculate. Fruit c. 1\'b72 mm, dull, obtusely papillose. }{\i\fs28 Rocky grassland and scrub on limestone mountains. \bullet  Mallorca.}{\fs28  Bl.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 92. G. valentinum}{\fs28  Lange, }{\i\fs28 Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kj\'f8benhavn}{\b\fs28  1881}{\fs28 : 95 (1882). Laxly caespitose, with filiform stolons. Stems 10-20 cm, slender, retrorsely aculeolate. Leaves (3\'b75-)5-6(-8) \'d7 (1\'b71-)1\'b73-1\'b76(-2\'b74) mm, in whorls of 6-7, 3-4 times as long as wide; upper surface and margin antrorsely scabridulous; hyaline apex short. Inflorescence relatively many-flowered, ovoid; pedicels 0\'b75-0\'b78 mm, divaricate after flowering. Corolla 1\'b77-2 mm in diameter, yellowish, or suffused with red; lobes not apiculate. Fruit c. 1 mm, shining, papillose.}{\i\fs28  Rocky places on limestone. \bullet  Mountains of E. & S.E. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 93. G. rosellum}{\fs28  (Boiss.) Boiss. & Reuter,}{\i\fs28  Pugillus}{\fs28  52 (1852). Laxly caespitose, with long, filiform stolons. Stems (5-)8-15(-25) cm, slender, glabrous, smooth. Leaves (4-)6-10(-15) \'d7 (1-)1\'b72-2\'b74(-3) mm, in whorls of 6(-8), oblanceolate, 4-5 times as long as wide; upper surface and margin antrorsely scabrid; hyaline apex very short. Inflorescence ovoid; partial inflorescences dense; pedicels 0\'b73-0\'b75 mm, rather stout. Corolla 1\'b78-2\'b78 mm in diameter, flesh-coloured to pink; lobes not apiculate. Fruit 1\'b73-1\'b74 mm, scarcely shining, papillose. 2n = 22. }{\i\fs28 Screes. \bullet  Mountains of S. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 94. G. helodes}{\fs28  Hoffmanns. & Link, }{\i\fs28 Fl. Port.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 47 (1820-1824). Plant dark green when dry, with short, subterranean stolons. Stems (15-)20-30(-70) cm, less than 1\'b75 mm in diameter, arising singly, slender, weak, retrorsely aculeolate and quite rough; middle internodes 3-5 times as long as the leaves. Leaves (5-)9-15(-30) \'d7 (1-)1\'b72-2\'b72(-4) mm, in whorls of (5-)6(-7), narrowly oblanceolate, 6-8\'bd times as long as wide; upper surface and margin with dense antrorse scabridity; apex hyaline. Inflorescence broadly pyramidal, intricately branched, many-flowered. Pedicels 1-1\'b75 mm, capillary. Corolla c. 2\'b74 mm in diameter, white, rarely suffused with pink; lobes acute. Fruit c. 1\'b74 mm, obtusely papillose, more or less shining. 2n = 22. }{\i\fs28 Grassy places and open scrub. \bullet  Portugal, N.W. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs Lu.
\par 
\par  It is not always easy to distinguish this species from }{\b\fs28 95}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 96}{\fs28  in zones of contact.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 95. G. rivulare}{\fs28  Boiss. & Reuter,}{\i\fs28  Diagn. Pl. Nov. Hisp.}{\fs28  15 (1842). Like }{\b\fs28 94}{\fs28  but green to brownish when dry, with long, subterranean stolons; stems (15-)20-60(-80) cm, often more than 1 mm in diameter, with white angles, mostly with patent hairs as well as retrorsely aculeolate, or subglabrous; middle internodes 1\'bd-4 times as long as leaves; leaves (11-)14-25(-30) \'d7 (1\'b74-)1\'b76-2\'b78(-3\'b78) mm, in whorls of 6(-8), usually 7\'bd-10 times as long as wide, very thin, somewhat paler beneath; inflorescence ovoid-oblong; pedicels c. 1\'b73 mm, slender; corolla 2-2\'b78 mm in diameter; fruit dull. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Damp or shady places from the coast to the mountains. \bullet  N. & C. Spain, N. Portugal.}{\fs28  Hs Lu.
\par 
\par    Populations at high altitudes tend to be glabrous.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 96. G. asturiocantabricum}{\fs28  Ehrend.,}{\i\fs28  Sitz.-Ber. Akad. Wiss. Wien}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Math.-Nat. Kl., Abt.}{\fs28  I) }{\b\fs28 169}{\fs28 : 409 (1960). Like }{\b\fs28 94}{\fs28  but mostly blackish when dry, with long, subterranean stolons; stems 20-40 cm, more than 1 mm in diameter, retrorsely aculeolate or glabrescent; leaves 17-21 \'d7 2-3 mm, in whorls of 6-7, scabridulous especially on margin; inflorescence broadly pyramidal; pedicels 1\'b75-2 mm, not particularly slender; corolla c. 3 mm in diameter; fruit 1\'b75-2 mm, dull. 2n = 88. }{\i\fs28 Damp shady places. \bullet  Mountains of N.W. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs.
\par 
\par   Hybrids with }{\b\fs28 99}{\fs28  have more or less smooth stems.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 97. G. papillosum}{\fs28  Lapeyr.,}{\i\fs28  Hist. Abr. Pyr.}{\fs28  66 (1813). Like }{\b\fs28 94}{\fs28  but dark green to brownish when dry, with short, subterranean stolons; stems (10-)20-60(-80) cm, more than 1 mm in diameter,
\par 
\par 30}
\par }