{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 Bulgaria (Pirin Pl.), is like {\b 216}({\b c}) but has simple unwinged stems 1-10 cm, narrowly lanceolate leaves mostly confined to a basal rosette and long-pedunculate capitula. {\b C. ternopoliensis} Dobrocz.,{\i  Bot. Zur.} {\b 6}({\b 2}): 71 (1949), described from W. Ukraine (near Ternopol'), is like {\b 216}({\b g}) but has a thicker stem, entire or sinuately lobed, shortly decurrent, sometimes white-lanate leaves and black or dark brown fimbriae.{\b  C. epirota} Halácsy,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  6}: 581 (1898), from the W.C. part of the Balkan peninsula, is like {\b 216}({\b 1}) but has lyrate-pinnatisect leaves, the involucre 10-15 mm in diameter and appendages with decurrent margin 1-2 mm wide. The status of all these taxa is uncertain and further investigation is required.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 217. C. napulifera} Rochel, {\i Magyar Tudós Társaság Évkönyvei} ({\i Budapest}){\i  2}: 260 (1835). Perennial; rhizome present, rarely with stolons; roots fusiform or napiform. Stem (1-)5-35 cm, erect simple or sparingly branched, not or narrowly winged. Leaves glabrescent; lower petiolate, rarely in a basal rosette; cauline entire or remotely dentate. Involucre 8-14 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages decurrent, dark brown or black; fimbriae 2(-3) times as long as the width of the margin, silvery at apex. Inner florets purple or lilac. Achenes 4-5 mm; pappus 2-3 mm. •{\i  Balkan peninsula, S.E. Romania, S. Moldavia.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (W) Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in leaf-shape, corolla-colour and root-shape. Resembling {\b 216} in most respects but distinguished by its fusiform or napiform roots and purple or lilac inner florets.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Roots up to 20 cm, narrowly fusiform with very long, 
\par   slender apex; leaves mostly entire, narrowly lanceolate
\par   ................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b pseudaxillaris}
\par 1 Roots up to 5 cm, broadly fusiform or napiform with a 
\par   short apex; leaves mostly lobed
\par 2 Rhizome long-creeping, sometimes with stolons; roots
\par   spreading, fusiform
\par 3 Outer florets white or pale cream, rarely pale blue or 
\par   pale purple; stems 10-30 cm; rhizome with or without 
\par   stolons; leaves eglandular .................................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b nyssana}
\par 3 Outer florets purple or pink; stems 5-10 cm, rarely 
\par   almost absent; rhizome with stolons; leaves glandular
\par   ........................................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b napulifera}
\par 2 Rhizome short, without stolons; roots crowded, fusiform
\par   or napiform
\par 4 Outer florets dark blue; stems 10-20 cm; roots fusiform;
\par   upper leaves linear, entire, the basal remotely lobed
\par   or pinnatisect .................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b tuberosa}
\par 4 Outer florets pale cream, rarely purple; stems 1-10(-20)
\par   cm; roots napiform; all leaves broadly ovate, lyrately 
\par   lobed .................................................................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b thirkei}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pseudaxillaris} (Stefanov & Georgiev) Dostál, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 209 (1976) ({\i C. pseudaxillaris} Stefanov & Georgiev): Rhizome short, truncate, without stolons; roots up to 20 cm, spreading, narrowly fusiform, with very long, slender apex. Stem 25-35 cm, simple or sparingly branched. Leaves with arachnoid indumentum; lower narrowly lanceolate, entire or lyrate-dentate, very acute; cauline linear-lanceolate. Appendages with decurrent margin c. 0·5 mm wide. Outer florets purplish-pink.{\i  S. Bulgaria.}
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tuberosa} (Vis.) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. tuberosa} Vis.): Rhizome short, truncate, without stolons; roots up to 5 cm, fusiform, crowded. Stem 5-20 cm, simple. Leaves grey-tomentose; lower linear-lanceolate, entire, rarely sinuate-dentate; cauline linear, entire. Appendages with decurrent margin c. 1 mm wide. Outer florets dark blue.{\i  Mountains of W. Jugoslavia, N. Albania and S. Bulgaria}.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b napulifera}: Rhizome long-creeping, with stolons; roots up to 5 cm, fusiform, spreading. Stem 5-10 cm, rarely almost absent, simple or sparing branched. Leaves with arachnoid indumentum, glandular; lower oblong, sinuate-dentate or lyrately lobed; cauline linear-lanceolate, entire or remotely dentate. Appendages narrowly (0·5 mm) decurrent. Outer florets purple or pink.{\i  From N. Greece northwards to E. Jugoslavia and E. Romania.}
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b nyssana} (Petrovic) Dostál, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i C. nyssana} Petrovic; incl. {\i C. orbelica} Velen., {\i C. velenovskyi} Adamovic): Rhizome long-creeping, with or without stolons; roots up to 5 cm, fusiform, spreading. Stem 10-30 cm, simple. Leaves grey-tomentose; lower linear-lanceolate or lyrately lobed, entire or remotely dentate; cauline linear-lanceolate, entire. Appendages broadly (1 mm) decurrent. Outer florets white or pale cream, rarely pale blue or pale purple.{\i  S.W. Bulgaria, S. & E. Jugoslavia, N. Greece}.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b thirkei} (Schultz Bip.) Dostál, {\i op. cit.} 210 (1976) ({\i C. thirkei} Schultz Bip.): Rhizome short, truncate, without or with short stolons; roots up to 5 cm, napiform, crowded. Stem 1-10(-20) cm, simple, rarely sparingly branched. Leaves grey-tomentose; lower in basal rosette, broadly obovate to broadly oblong-elliptical, sinuately lobed or lyrate-pinnate; cauline linear-oblong, remotely dentate. Appendages broadly (1-2 mm) decurrent. Outer florets pale cream, rarely purple.{\i  E. part of Balkan peninsula, extending northwards to S. Moldavia}.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C. karlowensis} Friv. ex Hampe, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  20}: 228 (1837), from Bulgaria (Karlovo), is probably only a variant of {\b 217}({\b d}) with the leaves not or scarcely decurrent.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 218. C. depressa} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 346 (1808). Annual, rarely biennial. Stem 20-60 cm, unwinged, with many erecto-patent branches from the base. Leaves grey-tomentose; lower oblong, undivided, rarely lyrate-pinnatisect, obtuse, shortly petiolate; upper oblong- or linear-lanceolate, entire, acute, spinulose-mucronulate. Involucre 10-12 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages narrowly (c. 0·3 mm) decurrent, reddish-black; fimbriae c. 2 mm, silvery. Inner florets violet; outer dark blue. Pappus 6-8 mm.{\i  Cultivated fields and waste ground. Naturalized in S.E. Europe}. [Bu Gr Rs (K) Si Tu.] (S. W. & C. Asia.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 219. C. pinardii} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 4}): 17 (1844). Annual. Stem 8-20 cm, erect or procumbent, simple or sparingly branched, unwinged. Leaves grey-tomentose; lower obovate or oblanceolate, undivided or lyrately pinnatisect, shortly petiolate; upper linear-oblong, entire or subdentate, attenuate at base. Involucre c. 10 mm in diameter, ovoid; appendages broadly decurrent, dark brown; fimbriae slightly longer than the width of margin, silvery. Inner florets purple; outer bluish-violet. Achenes c. 3 mm; pappus absent.{\i  Cultivated fields and stony hillsides. C. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C. mentiens} Czerep., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 20}: 397 (1960) from dry grasslands in Greece, differs from{\b  219} in its longer stem 20-30 cm, larger, more sparsely tomentose leaves, and larger capitula and bracts. Its status requires further investigation.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 220. C. cyanus} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 911 (1753). Annual, rarely biennial. Stem 20-80 cm, erect, branched. Leaves floccose beneath, glabrescent and green; lower lanceolate, entire, remotely dentate or lyrately pinnatisect with 1-3 linear or lanceolate segments on each side, acute, petiolate; upper linear-lanceolate, entire. Involucre 12-13 mm in diameter, ovoid-globose; appendages narrowly (0·3 mm) decurrent, brown; fimbriae c. 1 mm, silvery. Inner florets bluish-violet; outer dark blue, rarely white or purple. Achenes 3·5-4 mm; pappus 3-4 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  Native in dry, open habitats in S.E. Europe and Sicilia; naturalized in cornfields almost throughout Europe, but now very rare or only casual in} Br
\par 
\par 300}
\par