{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 characters occur in various combinations, even in the same  locality, and there seem to be no variants of any geographical or  ecological significance.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. arenaria} (Schousboe) DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  7}: 82 (1838). Plant 10-40 cm, glabrous or sparsely hairy. Leaves 6-35 × 5-12 mm, lanceolate to oblong-linear, sinuate-dentate, the basal usually with winged petioles, the cauline sometimes semiamplexicaul. Capitula more or less numerous; peduncles not or only slightly thickened. Involucre 11-14 × 8-12 mm; bracts lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, the inner sometimes partially enclosing the outer achenes, not or only slightly incurved. Achenes 8-9 mm, with minute rigid hairs, the outer not incurved. Pappus of all achenes of hairs and narrow scales. 2n = 6.{\i  Maritime sands. S.W. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 155.           Rhagadiolus}            Scop.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.D. Sell.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Stems usually solitary, branched. Leaves dentate to  pinnatifid. Capitula few to numerous. Involucral bracts in 2 rows, the outer very short, the inner accrescent and patent in fruit. Receptacle flat, without scales. Ligules yellow. Achenes narrowly cylindrical, the inner caducous, the outer enclosed in the involucral bracts and long-persistent; pappus absent.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. stellatus} (L.) Gaertner,{\i  Fruct. Sem. Pl.}{\b  2}: 354 (1791) ({\i R. edulis} Gaertner). Plant 7-40 cm, usually sparsely hairy throughout. Leaves 25-140 × 10-70 mm, mostly oblong-obovate, sinuate-dentate to lyrate-pinnatifid, but the cauline sometimes ovate to lanceolate. Involucre 5-8 × 2·5-3·5 mm at anthesis, accrescent in fruit; outer bracts 5, very small, ovate; inner bracts 5-8, narrowly linear-lanceolate, sometimes with a median row of rigid  hairs. Outer achenes 10-15 × 1-1·5 mm, curved, forming a characteristic radiating infructescence. 2n.= 10.{\i  Cultivated  ground and stony waste places. S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga  Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 156.              Aposeris}                Cass.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.D. Sell.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Stems several, simple. Leaves all basal, pinnately divided. Capitulum solitary. Involucral bracts in 1 row. Receptacle flat, without scales. Ligules yellow. Achenes oblong-cuneate to obovoid, 5-angled; pappus absent.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. foetida} (L.) Less., {\i Syn. Gen. Comp.} 128 (1832). Leaves 5-18 × 1·5-5 cm, numerous, oblanceolate, subacute, regularly pinnately divided into subrhombic, subacute, patent or retrorse lobes which have 1-2 subacute teeth on the lower margin, narrowed at base to a short more or less winged petiole, glabrous, or with a few hairs especially on the veins beneath. Scapes 10-20 (-35) cm, glabrous or subglabrous. Involucre 10-12 × 4-6 mm; bracts dark, linear to narrowly linear-lanceolate, obtuse, glabrous, the outermost c. ¼ as long as the inner. Achenes 4-4·5 mm, pale yellowish-brown. 2n = 16. {\i Woods, river-banks and damp meadows, mainly in the mountains; somewhat calcicole. C. Europe, extending to S.E. France, N. Italy, C. Jugoslavia and White Russia.} Au Cz Ga Ge He ?Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W).   
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 157.            Urospermum}            Scop.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.D. Sell.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs. Stems solitary, sparingly branched. Leaves entire to pinnatifid. Capitula few, large. Involucral bracts 7-8, in 1 row, connate at base, some with pale margins. Receptacle without scales. Ligules yellow, sometimes striped with red. Achenes beaked; pappus of 2 rows of plumose hairs. 
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Involucral bracts lanceolate, subacute, softly hairy;
\par 
  pappus pale reddish-brown ..................................................... {\b 1. dalechampii}
\par 
Involucral bracts ovate-lanceolate, long-acuminate,
\par 
  spinulose; pappus white ............................................................... {\b 2. picroides}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. U. dalechampii} (L.) Scop. ex F. W. Schmidt,{\i  Samml. Phys. Aufs. Naturk.} 276 (1795). Probably always perennial. Stem 25-40 cm, pubescent. Leaves 50-190 × 10-40 mm, hispid; lower usually runcinate-pinnatifid (rarely entire), with winged petiole; upper lanceolate to ovate, entire to dentate, amplexicaul. Capitula up to 5 cm in diameter, 1-3 on very long peduncles. Involucral bracts 15-25 × 2·5-6 mm, lanceolate, subacute, softly hairy. Ligules pale yellow, often with a red stripe on the outer face. Body of achene 4-5·5 mm, oblong, with short, obtuse projections; beak 9-14.mm, scabrid, very narrowly pyramidal, confluent with the body; pappus pale reddish-brown. 2n.= 14.{\i  Cultivated and waste ground. Mediterranean region, eastwards to Jugoslavia.} Bl Co Ga Hs It Ju Sa Si. 
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. U. picroides} (L.) Scop. ex F. W. Schmidt,{\i  op. cit.} 275 (1795). Annual. Stem 30-45 cm, long-hispid and spinulose. Leaves 40-140 × 10-50 mm, hispid or spinulose at least on the veins beneath; lower obovate-oblong, pinnatifid or dentate, with winged petiole; upper ovate to linear, acute, more or less dentate, auriculate-amplexicaul. Capitula up to 4 cm in diameter, 1-9 on long peduncles thickened at the apex. Involucral bracts 13-22 × 5-8 mm, ovate-lanceolate, long-acuminate, hispid and spinulose. Ligules pale yellow. Body of achene 5-6·5 mm, more or less oblong but swollen distally, with short, obtuse projections; beak 6-8 mm, slender, cylindrical, shortly hairy; pappus white. 2n = 10.{\i  Cultivated ground, dry grassland and waste places. Mediterranean region and S. W. Europe. }Al Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 158.             Hypochoeris}          L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R.A. DeFilipps.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs. Stems solitary to few, usually branched. Leaves usually all basal, entire or sinuate-dentate to pinnatifid. Capitula 1-few. Involucral bracts in 1-several imbricate rows. Receptacle flat, with numerous scarious scales. Ligules yellow, the outer sometimes with a greenish or reddish stripe on the outer face. Achenes more or less cylindrical, at least the inner usually beaked; pappus of 1-2 rows of scabrid or plumose rigid hairs sometimes dilated at the base, or rarely of fimbriate scales.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Pappus of 2 rows of hairs 
\par 
2 Outer row of pappus-hairs 0·5-1 mm; inner row of pappus-
\par 
  hairs 4-8 mm, narrowly dilated at the base, achenes
\par 
  4·5-6·5 mm, beaked; involucral bracts up to 15 mm 
\par 
3 Perennial; stem usually glabrous, at least above;
\par 
  capitula 15-20 mm wide ............................................................... {\b 2. laevigata} 
\par 
3 Annual; stem hispid, at least above; capitula up to
\par 
  15 mm wide ........................................................................... {\b 3. achyrophorus} 
\par 
2 Outer row of pappus-hairs 3-6 mm; inner row of pappus-hairs
\par 
  9·5-15 mm, not dilated at the base; achenes 2·5-17 mm, 
\par 
  beaked or unbeaked; involucral bracts up to 25 mm 
\par 
4 Marginal achenes 2·5-6 mm, unbeaked, inner achenes
\par 
  6-8·5(-13·5) mm, beaked or unbeaked; capitula 5-15 mm
\par 
  wide; leaves glabrous to puberulent, rarely setulose-
\par 
  hispid; usually annual ....................................................................... {\b 8. glabra} 
\par 
4 Achenes 8-17 mm, beaked, or the marginal achenes c.
\par 
  5 mm, beaked or unbeaked; capitula 20-30(-40) mm wide;
\par 
  leaves usually setulose-hispid; perennial ....................................... {\b 9. radicata}
\par 
1 Pappus of 1 row of hairs or fimbriate scales 
\par 
5 Capitula up to 60 mm wide; involucral bracts up to
\par 
  30 mm; pappus-hairs 6-13 mm; achenes 9·5-20 mm 
\par 

\par 
308}
\par