{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 erect, with rigid, patent-ascending branches. Basal leaves 7-30 × 1-12 cm, oblanceolate, runcinate-pinnatifid to dentate, shortly petiolate; cauline with fewer teeth or entire, sessile, amplexicaul. Peduncles of terminal capitula slightly thickened at apex. Involucre 11-14 × 4-10 mm; outer bracts c. 8, broadly lanceolate, patent at apex; inner bracts c. 5, twice as long as the outer and narrower, erect. Ligules bright blue, rarely pink or white, 3 times as long as involucre. Achenes 2-3 mm, irregularly angular, pale brown; pappus-scales 1/10-1/8 as long as achene. 2n = 18. {\i Much of Europe, but doubtfully native in most of the north. Formerly cultivated as a medicinal plant, and more recently as a coffee substitute and for ornament, and widely naturalized.} All except Fa Is Sb, but only casual or doubtfully naturalized in Fe Hb No Rs (N).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   The cultivated plant is larger in all its parts, with more handsome flowers.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. endivia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 813 (1753). Like {\b 1} but usually annual or biennial; peduncles of terminal capitula strongly thickened; pappus-scales of larger achenes 1/6-1/2 as long as achene. {\i S. Europe; widely cultivated elsewhere.} Al Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b endivia}: Stems (30-)60-120 cm. Leaves dentate to deeply pinnatifid, nearly glabrous. 2n = 18.{\i  Widely cultivated as a salad plant, particularly in S. Europe.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b divaricatum} (Schousboe) P. D. Sell,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 240 (1976) ({\i C. divaricatum} Schousboe, {\i C. pumilum} Jacq.): Stems 5-50 cm. Leaves runcinate-dentate, the basal hairy.{\i  S. Europe}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. spinosum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 813 (1753). Dwarf perennial with a woody stock. Stems 3·5-18 cm, divaricately branched from the base, the upper branches non-flowering and spine-like. Leaves 2-9 × 0·2-1·5 cm, fleshy, runcinate or dentate, glabrous. Capitula mostly in the dichotomies of the stem, subsessile in groups of 1-4. Involucre 5-8 × 2-3 mm; outer bracts ovate to broadly elliptical, the inner lanceolate, c. 3 times as long as the outer. Ligules blue, rarely pink or white, about twice as long as involucre. Achenes 1·5-2 mm; pappus-scales 1/10-1/8 as long as achene.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Cr Gr Hs It Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 147.          Catananche}              L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.D. Sell
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Stems solitary or few. Leaves entire or remotely dentate, mostly basal. Capitula 1-5, mostly long-pedunculate. Involucral bracts in several rows, scarious except for darker mid-vein. Receptacle flat, with long, filiform scales. Ligules blue or yellow. Achenes oblong, obscurely 5-angled, 5-to 10-ribbed; pappus of 1 row of 5-7 ovate, long-aristate scales.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Involucral bracts all ovate, abruptly and acutely cuspidate;
\par 
   ligules blue ...................................................................................  {\b 1. caerulea} 
\par 
 Involucral bracts of 2 kinds, the outer ovate, abruptly acute at
\par 
   apex, the inner narrower and long-attenuate at apex; ligules yellow . {\b 2. lutea}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. caerulea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 812 (1753). Perennial. Stems 20-90 cm, hairy, the hairs mostly appressed. Leaves linear, entire, or with up to 4 linear, usually forwardly directed teeth; basal 20-300 × 2-7 mm, numerous; cauline remote. Peduncles up to 30 cm, bracteate. Involucre 13-25 × 10-20 mm; all bracts ovate, the apex abruptly and acutely cuspidate. Ligules blue. 2n = 18.{\i  S.W. Europe.} Bl Ga Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. lutea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 812 (1753.) Annual. Stems 8-40 cm, hairy, the hairs mostly appressed. Leaves linear, narrowly oblanceolate-linear or very narrowly elliptic-linear, entire or remotely and shallowly dentate; basal 30-150 mm, numerous; cauline remote. Peduncles up to 20 cm, mostly ebracteate, usually with several sessile capitula at base of stem. Outer involucral bracts ovate, the inner narrow and long-attenuate at apex, much exceeding the outer. Ligules yellow.{\i  Dry places. Mediterranean region.} Cr Gr *Hs It Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b lutea}: Involucre 15-20 mm.{\i  From the Aegean region to N.W. Italy.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b carpholepis} (Schultz Bip.) Nyman, {\i Consp}. 472 (1879) ({\i Piptocephalum carpholepis} Schultz Bip.): Involucre 20-30 mm.{\i  S. Spain} ({\i perhaps introduced}). ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 148.         Rothmaleria}            Font Quer
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  (Haenselera Boiss. ex DC., non Lag.)
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P. D. Sell
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Stems several, simple. Leaves dentate to pinnatifid. Capitulum solitary. Involucral bracts in several rows. Receptacle with numerous scales. Ligules yellow. Achenes oblong; pappus of 5 or 6 ovate, dentate scales.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. granatensis} (Boiss. ex DC.) Font Quer,{\i  Broteria} ({\i Ci. Nat}.) {\b 9}: 151 (1940) ({\i Haenselera granatensis} Boiss. ex DC.). Stems 2-30 cm, several, glabrous or scabridulous, with a thick stock. Basal leaves 15-100 × 5-20 mm, in a rosette, thick, glaucous, obovate-oblong, narrowed to the petiole, incise-dentate to pinnatifid with crispate, dentate lobes; cauline leaves similar but smaller, often sessile, remote. Involucre 10-12 × 10-12 mm; bracts imbricate, oblong, obtuse to acute, with a wide, whitish, scarious margin. Receptacular scales linear, acute. Achenes 4-5 mm.{\i  Mountain rocks and screes. • S. Spain }({\i Sierra Nevada, Sierra Harana}). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 149.           Hymenonema}           Cass.   
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P. D. Sell
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Stems solitary to few, branched. Leaves pinnatifid. Capitula few. Involucral bracts in several imbricate rows; margins scarious. Receptacle pitted, with scales near the margin. Ligules yellow. Achenes 5-angled, with rigid, appressed hairs, the marginal enfolded within the inner involucral bracts (or bract-like scales); pappus of rigid, subplumose hairs and scales in 2-3 rows, or sometimes only of scales.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Terminal lobe of leaf (10-)15-30 mm wide; outer achenes 
\par 
  with pappus of trifid scales with a rigid, subplumose 
\par 
  hair at apex; inner achenes with outer pappus of rigid,
\par 
  subplumose hairs and inner pappus of entire, lanceolate
\par 
  scales with a rigid subplumose hair at apex ............................... {\b 1. laconicum} 
\par 
Terminal lobe of leaf not more than 10 mm wide; pappus 
\par 
  more or less uniform, of lanceolate scales, with a 
\par 
  rigid, subplumose hair at apex ...................................................... {\b 2. graecum}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. laconicum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  3}: 715 (1875). Stems 20-70 cm, with pale, minute glandular and longer eglandular hairs. Leaves with dense, appressed, rigid hairs; basal 70-250 mm, pinnatifid, with dentate segments, the terminal (10-)15-30 mm wide, larger than the lateral; cauline 1-6, like basal or bract-like. Capitula 1-3. Involucre 15-24 × 15-22 mm; bracts ovate or oblong-ovate, obtuse, entire or dentate, glabrous. Receptacular pits long-ciliate. Achenes 4-5 mm; pappus of outer achenes of trifid scales, the central point of each scale prolonged as a rigid, subplumose hair; pappus of inner achenes with an outer row of rigid, subplumose hairs and an inner row of lanceo-
\par 

\par 
305}
\par