{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i  Mediterranean region, Portugal; cultivated as a medicinal herb  elsewhere, and locally naturalized in C. & S.E. Europe.} Al Bu Cr  Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Tu [Cz Rm Rs (W)].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 143.       Carthamus }               L.          
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  (incl. Kentrophyllum DC.)  
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P. Hanelt.
\par 


\pard\f0\fs28 Usually spiny, branched annuals, rarely perennial and woody at the base, with glandular and more or less villous-lanate to arachnoid indumentum. Leaves usually pinnatifid to pinnatisect, with spiny margin. Involucral bracts in many rows, imbricate, spiny, the outer leaf-like, the inner sometimes with apical appendages. Capitula solitary on stems and branches. Florets all hermaphrodite; corolla yellowish or violet to pinkish-purple; filaments usually densely bearded. Achenes oblong to obpyramidal, 4-angled, glabrous, the outer usually coarsely rugose, without pappus, the inner more or less smooth, usually with a persistent pappus of many rows of linear scales. All species grow in dry, open habitats, principally as ruderals or weeds of cultivated ground.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: A. Ashri & P. F. Knowles,{\i  Agron. Jour.}{\b  52}: 11-17  (1960). P. Hanelt, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  67}: 41-180 (1963).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves usually undivided, entire or spinose-dentate; 
\par 
  filaments subglabrous; achenes ± smooth; pappus usually
\par 
  absent ............................................................................................ {\b 2. tinctorius}
\par 
1 Leaves ± divided, spinose-dentate; filaments bearded;
\par 
  at least the outer achenes rugose, the inner with a pappus  
\par 
2 Corolla yellow or whitish  
\par 
3 Perennial, woody at the base; inner involucral bracts 
\par 
  without apical appendages; inner achenes rugulose;
\par 
  pappus of very narrow scales, deciduous ................................. {\b 1. arborescens}
\par 
3 Annual; inner involucral bracts with ovate-lanceolate,
\par 
  dentate to subentire apical appendages (often inconspicuous);
\par 
  inner achenes ± smooth; pappus of rather wide scales, 
\par 
  persistent .......................................................................................... {\b 7. lanatus}
\par 
2 Corolla pale violet to pinkish-purple  
\par 
4 Inner involucral bracts with distinct, ovate-lanceolate,
\par 
  dentate apical appendages ............................................................. {\b 3. dentatus}
\par 
4 Inner involucral bracts oblong-lanceolate, entire,
\par 
  without apical appendages  
\par 
5 Plant usually subglabrous; stems white to purple,
\par 
  without spots; cauline leaves pinnatisect to pinnate,
\par 
  with spinose segments, shiny; pappus-scales usually
\par 
  truncate .................................................................................... {\b 6. leucocaulos}
\par 
5 Plant ± densely glandular, with lanate-villous and arachnoid 
\par 
  indumentum; stems pale brown with brownish to violet spots; 
\par 
  cauline leaves sinuate to pinnatifid, spinose-dentate, 
\par 
  not shiny; pappus-scales acute or acuminate    
\par 
6 Stems densely arachnoid-hairy; outer involucral bracts
\par 
  4-5 cm, patent, with spines 7-9 mm, the inner bracts
\par 
  abruptly acuminate; achenes 4-5 mm ............................................ {\b 5. boissieri}
\par 
6 Stems rather sparsely arachnoid-hairy; outer involucral
\par 
  bracts less than 4 cm, ± erect, with spines 4-7 mm, the
\par 
  inner bracts gradually acuminate; achenes 3·5-4 mm .................... {\b 4. glaucus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. arborescens} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 831 (1753) ({\i Kentrophyllum arborescens} (L.) Hooker). Much-branched, densely glandular perennial up to 2·5 m, woody at the base. Upper cauline leaves ovate to lanceolate-ovate, pinnatifid, spinose-dentate. Capitula up to 40 mm in diameter, broadly ovoid. Inner involucral bracts oblong- to ovate-lanceolate, entire to denticulate towards the apex. Corolla yellow. Achenes oblong to obpyramidal, rugulose. Pappus-scales very narrow, densely ciliate, deciduous. 2n = 24. {\i S. & S.E. Spain.} Hs. 
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. tinctorius} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 830 (1753). Subglabrous annual. Cauline leaves undivided or rarely sinuate to pinnatifid, ovate to lanceolate-ovate, spinose-dentate or entire. Capitula broadly ovoid to conical-ovoid. Inner involucral bracts oblong-lanceolate, entire. Corolla yellow, orange or reddish; filaments subglabrous. Achenes obpyramidal, more or less smooth, shiny, white. Pappus absent or rarely the inner achenes with short narrow scales. 2n = 24. {\i Formerly cultivated in a large part of Europe for its red and yellow flower-pigments used in dyeing; nowadays cultivated on a smaller scale in parts of S. & C. Europe, mainly for the oil derived from the achenes, and occasionally naturalized}. [Au Cz ?Ga ?Ge ?Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm.] ({\i W. Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. gypsicola} Iljin,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. URSS}{\b  30}: 357 (1932), a species of W.C. Asia with globose capitula, numerous soft, yellowish spines crowded near the base of the outer involucral bracts, yellow corolla, shiny, inconspicuously angled, white or mottled achenes, and pappus absent or reduced to short scales, may also occur in the European part of W. Kazakhstan.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. dentatus} (Forskål) Vahl,{\i  Symb. Bot.}{\b  1}: 69 (1790). Glandular annual, with more or less lanate or villous, arachnoid indumentum. Cauline leaves lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, pinnatifid to pinnatisect, with spiny margin. Capitula oblong-ovoid. Inner involucral bracts with scarious, ovate-lanceolate, dentate apical appendages. Corolla pale violet to pinkish-purple. Achenes broadly obpyramidal. Pappus of long, brown, linear, ciliate scales, at least twice as long as the achene. 2n = 20.{\i  S. part of  Balkan peninsula, Aegean region.} Bu Cr Gr Ju Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b dentatus}: Plant densely glandular, with lanate and arachnoid indumentum. Leaves greyish. Outer involucral bracts not more than 1½ times as long as the inner, erect or somewhat patent, with short spines. Inner pappus-scales usually shorter than the outer.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, except the south.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ruber} (Link) Hanelt, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  67}: 98 (1963) ({\i Kentrophyllum rubrum} Link): Plant more or less glandular, with sparsely villous and arachnoid indumentum. Leaves greyish or green. Outer involucral bracts at least twice as long as the inner, strongly patent or deflexed, with long spines. Most or all inner pappus-scales as long as the outer.{\i  S. Greece and Aegean region}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. glaucus} Bieb.,{\i  Tabl. Prov. Casp. }118 (1798). Glandular annual, with lanate-villous and sparsely arachnoid indumentum; stems with brownish to purplish spots. Basal leaves with up to 6 pairs of lobes; cauline leaves broadly to narrowly lanceolate sinuate to pinnatifid, spinose-dentate, greyish. Capitula 13-15 mm in diameter, ovoid. Outer involucral bracts 2·5-3·8 cm, up to 1½ times as long as the inner, more or less erect, densely greyish-villous; inner bracts oblong-lanceolate, entire, without apical appendages. Corolla pinkish-purple, the lobes 4·5-6·5 mm. Achenes 3·5-4 mm. Pappus of linear, acuminate, ciliate  scales 2-2½ times as long as the achene.{\i  S. Krym.} Rs (K).  ({\i S.W. Asia, Egypt}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. boissieri} Halácsy, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  49}: 186 (1899). Like {\b 4} but basal leaves usually with more than 10 pairs of lobes; stems with dense arachnoid indumentum; capitula oblong-ovoid; outer involucral bracts 4-5 cm, patent, 1½-2 times as long as the inner, with spines 7-9 mm; inner bracts wider than the outer, abruptly acuminate; corolla-lobes 7-7·5 mm; achenes 4-5 mm; pappus-scales acute or shortly acuminate. •{\i  S. Aegean region. }Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. leucocaulos} Sibth. & Sm., {\i Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  2}: 160 (1813). Usually subglabrous annual, rarely with arachnoid indumentum, 
\par 

\par 
302}
\par