{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 6 Outer involucral bracts entire; leaves often streaked 
\par 
  with dark purple; stem not thickened, or sometimes 
\par 
  thickened immediately below the capitula ................................... {\b 5. maculata}
\par 
6 Outer involucral bracts usually lacerate-fimbriate;
\par 
  leaves not streaked; stem thickened in upper half .......................... {\b 6. uniflora}
\par 
5 Capitula up to 25 mm wide; involucral bracts up to 15 mm; pappus
\par 
   of hairs 4-6 mm or of scales 0·15 mm; achenes 3·5-10 mm
\par 
7 Stems with at least one ± large foliage leaf; marginal achenes
\par 
   5·5-6 mm, with pappus of fimbriate scales c.0·15 mm or of hairs; 
\par 
  inner achenes 7·5-10 mm, with pappus of hairs ........................... {\b 4. cretensis}
\par 
7 Leaves all in a basal rosette (the stem with several bract-like scales);
\par 
   achenes 3·5-6·5 mm, with pappus of hairs
\par 
8 Stems 4-30 cm; achenes unbeaked; pappus-hairs narrowly
\par 
  dilated at the base ........................................................................... {\b 1. robertia}
\par 
8 Stems 2-9 cm; achenes shortly beaked; pappus-hairs not
\par 
  dilated at the base ........................................................................ {\b 7. tenuiflora}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. robertia} Fiori,{\i  Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.} nov. ser., {\b 17}: 655 (1910) ({\i Robertia taraxacoides} (Loisel.) DC.). Perennial. Stems 4-30 cm, simple, not thickened near the apex, glabrous, or sparsely setose below, with several remote, linear scales. Leaves 3-12 cm, spathulate to oblanceolate, pinnatifid, rarely entire, glabrous. Capitula up to 10(-25) mm wide. Involucral bracts up to 11 × 3 mm, in 1-several rows, glabrous (except for tomentose apex), crispate-puberulent or hispid. Ligules lemon yellow or pale golden yellow. Achenes 3·5-6·5 × 0·5-0·7 mm, unbeaked; pappus of 1 row of plumose hairs 5-6 mm, narrowly lanceolate-dilated at the base. 2n = 8. {\i Mountain rocks and screes. • Italy, Sicilia, Corse, Sardegna.} Co It Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. laevigata} (L.) Cesati, Passer. & Gibelli, {\i Comp. Fl. Ital.} 465 (1879). Perennial. Stems 8-50 cm, simple or branched, not thickened near the apex, usually glabrous, sometimes with several remote, linear scales. Leaves 3-20 cm, spathulate to oblanceolate, entire to pinnatifid, glabrous to hispid. Capitula 15-20 mm wide. Involucral bracts up to 15 × 2·5 mm, in several rows, hispid or pubescent (rarely glabrous) at least along upper part of the mid-vein, with tomentose apex. Ligules sulphur-yellow. Achenes 5-6 mm, beaked; pappus of 2 rows of hairs, the outer 0·5-1 mm, the inner 7-8 mm, plumose, narrowly lanceolate-dilated at the base.{\i  Rocks and dry grassland. S.W. Italy, Sicilia}. It Si. ({\i N. Africa.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. achyrophorus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 810 (1753) ({\i H. aethnensis} (L.) Ball). Annual. Stems 8-35(-60) cm, usually branched, sometimes thickened immediately below the capitula, hispid at least above, sometimes with remote, linear scales. Leaves 3-18 cm, spathulate, oblanceolate or obovate, entire to lobed, hispid; cauline 0-several. Capitula up to 15 mm wide. Involucral bracts up to 14 × 2 mm, in several rows, densely hispid. Ligules golden or orange-yellow. Achenes 4·5-6·5 mm, beaked; pappus of 2 rows of hairs, the outer c. 0·5 mm, the inner 4-6 mm, plumose, narrowly lanceolate-dilated at the base. 2n = 12.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. H. cretensis} (L.) Bory & Chaub. in Bory, {\i Expéd. Sci. Morée}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 237 (1832) ({\i H. pinnatifida} (Ten.) Cyr.). Perennial. Stems 10-85 cm, usually branched, somewhat thickened below the apex, glabrous to sparsely tomentose, sometimes hirsute below. Leaves 5-25 cm, spathulate, elliptical or oblanceolate, pinnatifid, rarely dentate, glabrous to setose-hispid; cauline several, gradually merging into scales above. Capitula up to 22 mm wide. Involucral bracts up to 15 × 1·5 mm, in several rows, subglabrous, tomentose, or the keel setose-hispid. Ligules yellow. Marginal achenes 5·5-6 mm, beaked, with pappus a corona of fimbriate scales c. 0·15 mm or of 1 row of long, plumose hairs; inner achenes 7·5-10 mm, long-beaked, with pappus of 1 row of plumose hairs 5-6 mm, not dilated at the base. 2n = 6. {\i E. & C. Mediterranean region.} Al Bu Co Cr Gr It Ju Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. H. maculata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 810 (1753) ({\i Achyrophorus maculatus} (L.) Scop.). Perennial. Stems 15-75(-90) cm, simple or sparingly branched, not thickened, or sometimes thickened immediately below the capitula, hispid or sparsely hirsute. Leaves 4-30 cm, elliptical to ovate or obovate, subentire to deeply dentate, subglabrous to hispid, often streaked with dark purple; cauline few or absent, often merging into scales above. Capitula up to 45(-60) mm wide. Involucral bracts up to 25 × 2·5 mm, in several rows, entire, setose-hispid, often with tomentose margin. Ligules pale lemon-yellow. Achenes 9·5-17 mm, rather long-beaked; pappus of 1 row of plumose hairs 6-11 mm, not dilated at the base. 2n = 10.{\i  Meadows and open woodland. Much of Europe, but absent from the arctic and most of the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. H. uniflora} Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 37 (1779) ({\i Achyrophorus uniflorus} (Vill.) Bluff & Fingerh.). Perennial. Stems 13-60 cm, usually simple, strongly thickened in upper half, hirsute, puberulent near the apex. Leaves 5-22 cm, oblong, elliptical or oblanceolate, dentate, rarely subentire, subglabrous to pubescent, ciliate, not streaked; cauline 1-several, often merging into remote scales above. Capitula up to 60 mm wide. Involucral bracts in several rows, the outer up to c. 15 × 8 mm, lanate-tomentose or hispid, usually lacerate-fimbriate, the inner up to 30 × 12 mm. Ligules pale golden yellow. Achenes 10-20 mm, long-beaked; pappus of 1 row of plumose hairs 9·5-13 mm, not dilated at the base. 2n = 10.{\i  Mountain meadows and pastures; calcifuge. • C. Europe, extending to W. Ukraine.} Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. H. tenuiflora} (Boiss.) Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  3}: 785 (1875). Perennial. Stems 2-9 cm, simple or sparingly branched, not thickened near the apex, subglabrous, with several remote, linear scales. Leaves 1·5-10 cm, linear to spathulate or oblanceolate, subentire to pinnatifid, glabrous to sparsely pubescent. Capitula up to 5-9 mm wide. Involucral bracts up to 10 × 2 mm, in several rows, tomentose on the margin or on the back, sometimes sparsely long-setose on the back. Ligules yellow. Achenes 4·5-6·5 mm, shortly beaked; pappus of 1 row of plumose hairs 4-4·5 mm, not dilated at the base.{\i  Rock-crevices,} 1700-2100{\i  m. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. H. glabra} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 811 (1753). Annual or perennial. Stems 1-40 cm, usually branched, slightly to strongly thickened immediately below the capitula, glabrous, rarely setulose or prickly, usually with remote scales or leaves above. Leaves 1-20 cm, oblanceolate or spathulate, dentate to pinnatifid, glabrous to puberulent, rarely setulose-hispid. Capitula 5-15 mm wide. Involucral bracts up to 21 × 2·5 mm, in several rows, glabrous, or sparsely long-setose on the mid-vein. Ligules bright or pale yellow. Marginal achenes 2·5-6 mm, unbeaked, sometimes absent; inner achenes 6-8·5(-13·5) mm, long-beaked or unbeaked; pappus of 2 rows of hairs, the outer 3-6 mm, scabrid or sparsely plumose, the inner 9·5-15 mm, plumose, not dilated at the base. 2n = 10.{\i  Europe northwards to S.E. Norway and eastwards to Latvia, W. Ukraine and the Aegean region.} All except Fa Fe Hu Is Rs (N, K, E) Sb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. H. radicata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 811 (1753). Perennial. Stems (10-)20-60(-100) cm, usually branched, sometimes thickened immediately below the capitula, glabrous, or hispid below, with remote scales above. Leaves (2-)5-25 cm, oblong to elliptical or
\par 

\par 
309}
\par