{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 late scales, the midrib prolonged as a rigid, subplumose hair.{\i  Dry grassland. • S. Greece} ({\i Peloponnisos}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. graecum} (L.) DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  7}: 116 (1838). Like {\b 1} but leaves with the terminal segment not more than 10 mm wide; ligules sometimes with a purple spot at base; receptacular pits glabrous or with a few short cilia; all achenes with more or less uniform pappus of lanceolate scales, the midrib prolonged as a rigid, subplumose hair.{\i  Roadsides and stony places. • S. Aegean region. }Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b  150.        Tolpis}            Adanson
\par            

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By T.G. Tutin.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs. Stems solitary to many, usually branched. Leaves entire to dentate or lobed. Capitula few to numerous. Involucral bracts in 2-3 rows. Receptacle flat, pitted, without scales. Ligules yellow or the inner purplish-brown, usually turning greenish when dry. Achenes 0·5-4 mm, with 6-8(-10) ribs, not narrowed or beaked above, uniform or of 2 kinds; pappus of short or long rigid hairs, or a mixture of the two, the hairs sometimes expanded at the base.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Annual; outer involucral bracts at least as long as the
\par 
  inner; achenes with pappus of numerous short hairs, the
\par 
  inner with (0-)2-4(-5) long hairs, the outer without long hairs ....... {\b 1. barbata}
\par 
1 Perennial, rarely biennial; outer involucral bracts 
\par 
  shorter than the inner; all achenes with pappus of 4 to
\par 
  many long hairs, with or without short hairs
\par 
2 Stem uniformly leafy; middle cauline leaves as large as
\par 
  or larger than the basal .................................................................... {\b 4. azorica}
\par 
2 Leaves mostly basal, the cauline usually much smaller 
\par 
  than the basal, or absent
\par 
3 Stems simple, or with branches not or scarcely over-topping
\par 
   the main stem; pappus of numerous long hairs and no short 
\par 
   hairs ........................................................................................... {\b 5. staticifolia}
\par 
3 Stems with branches overtopping the main stem; pappus 
\par 
  of 4-12 long hairs mixed with short hairs
\par 
4 Mature leaves pubescent; branches making a narrow angle
\par 
  with the main stem .......................................................................... {\b 2. virgata} 
\par 
4 Mature leaves glabrous; branches divaricate ............................... {\b 3. fruticosa}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. barbata} (L.) Gaertner,{\i  Fruct. Sem. Pl.}{\b  2}: 372 (1791). Somewhat pubescent annual 6-90 cm. Lower leaves 2-10 cm, linear-lanceolate to broadly ovate or obovate, entire to coarsely dentate or subpinnatifid, usually acute; upper cauline leaves similar but smaller. Stem simple or branched, the branches overtopping the main stem. Capitula 1 to several, on thickened peduncles with few to many curved, setaceous supplementary bracts. Involucre 6-15 mm; outer bracts at least as long as inner, setaceous, curved, not appressed; inner linear-lanceolate, erect. Outer achenes with pappus of hairs much shorter than the achene; inner achenes with pappus of short hairs mixed with (0-)2-4(-5) hairs much longer than the achene. 2n = 18.{\i  Grassy and sandy places. S. Europe.} Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu ?Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in leaf-shape, size of capitula and colour of florets, as well as in number of long hairs in the pappus. Most commonly the capitula are 17-30 mm in diameter, with the outer florets pale yellow and the inner purplish-brown. A variant ({\b T. umbellata} Bertol.,{\i  Rar. Lig. Pl. }{\b 1}: 13 (1803)) has the capitula 11-16 mm in diameter and all the florets pale yellow. There is little correlation between these characters and the number of long hairs in the pappus of the inner achenes, and the variant occurs rather rarely throughout most of the range of the species. In S.W. Spain another variant occurs which has the outer florets deep yellow, the inner purplish and the leaves usually broadly ovate to obovate, obtuse and mucronate. The pappus is sometimes entirely without long hairs and the plant biennial or perennial.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. virgata} Bertol., {\i op. cit.} 15 (1803) ({\i T. altissima} Pers.). Somewhat pubescent perennial or biennial 30-100 cm. Lower leaves 5-20 cm, oblong-lanceolate to elliptical, entire to serrate or deeply dentate, acute or subobtuse; upper cauline leaves similar but smaller. Stem branched, the branches making a narrow angle with the main stem and overtopping it. Capitula usually several; peduncles slightly thickened below the capitula; supplementary bracts absent, or few, small and usually appressed. Involucre 6-8 mm; outer bracts shorter than inner; all bracts linear-lanceolate, straight, appressed. All achenes with pappus of 4-12 long hairs mixed with short hairs.{\i  Dry, grassy or sandy places. Mediterranean region from S.E. France eastwards. }Al Co Cr Ga Gr It Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\i T. virgata} var. {\i quadriaristata} (Biv.) Fiori & Paol., from Sicilia, is somewhat intermediate between {\b 1} and {\b 2}. It appears to be perennial and has a pappus of usually 4 long hairs, but the outer involucral bracts are about as long as the inner, curved and not appressed. It requires further investigation.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. T. fruticosa} Schrank,{\i  Pl. Rar. Horti Monac.} t. 46 (1819). Like {\b 2} but involucre and very young stems and leaves floccose, soon glabrescent; stems up to c. 30 cm, woody at base, with divaricate branches; capitula usually 3-4; pappus usually of 12 long hairs.{\i  Maritime rocks. Açores.} Az. ({\i Madeira}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. T. azorica} (Nutt.) P. Silva in Palhinha,{\i  Cat. Pl. Vasc. Açores} 129 (1966). Subglabrous perennial 15-70 cm, woody below. Leaves 3-15 cm, the middle cauline as large as or larger than the basal, oblong to ovate, dentate, often deeply so, the teeth usually falcate with a wide, rounded sinus between them. Stem branched, the branches not or slightly overtopping the main stem. Capitula usually several; peduncles not thickened below the capitula, with more or less numerous erecto-patent supplementary bracts. Involucre 8-11 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, the outer half as long as the inner, floccose at base, the inner puberulent near apex. Pappus usually of 10-12 hairs.{\i  Shady rocks. • Açores.} Az.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. T. staticifolia} (All.) Schultz Bip., {\i Bonplandia}{\b  9}: 173 (1861) ({\i Hieracium staticifolium} All.). Subglabrous, rhizomatous perennial 10-50 cm. Basal leaves 4-10 cm, linear to linear-oblanceolate, entire or remotely denticulate, subacute; cauline few or none, linear, entire. Stems simple or sparingly branched, the branches not or scarcely overtopping the main stem. Capitula few; peduncles somewhat thickened below the capitula, with few, more or less appressed small supplementary bracts. Involucre 9-11 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate to narrowly elliptical, the outer much shorter than the inner, all floccose. Pappus of numerous long hairs and no short hairs. 2n = 18.{\i  Dry, open habitats, mainly in the mountains; somewhat calcicole. • Alps and adjacent regions; Albania.} Al Au ?Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 151.          Arnoseris}            Gaertner
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.D. Sell.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Stems numerous. Leaves all basal, more or less dentate. Capitula 1-3. Involucral bracts usually in 1 row, connate near base, sometimes with a few small supplementary bracts. Receptacle flat, without scales. Ligules yellow, becoming discoloured when dry. Achenes 3- to 5-angled, with the same number of alternate, weaker ribs; pappus absent.
\par 

\par 
306}
\par