{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy2\hr11\min10}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy2\hr11\min11}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1025}{\nofchars5845}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 to 20 cm, rather soft, simple, oblong-elliptical to lyrate-pinnate; cauline leaves lyrate with oblong-lanceolate to elliptical, entire or denticulate lobes; uppermost leaves dentate. Outer involucral bracts appressed, shorter than the inner, with ovate-lanceolate, dentate, leaf-like part towards the apex. Corolla yellowish. Achenes c. 6 mm, rugose towards the apex, with inconspicuous angles, brown, rarely smooth and white; pappus-scales densely ciliate, brownish, twice as long as the achene.}{\i\fs28  Mountain rocks. \bullet  E. Spain}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 near Denia}{\fs28 ). ?Bl Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. C. araneosus}{\fs28  Boiss. & Reuter,}{\i\fs28  Diagn. Pl. Nov. Hisp. }{\fs28 18 (1842). Stem (10-)15-30(-45) cm, simple or somewhat branched, greyish-white subtomentose to arachnoid-hairy. Basal and lower cauline leaves (lyrate-)pinnate; segments in 6-9 pairs, lanceolate, spinose-dentate; upper cauline leaves pinnatifid to dentate, ovate-lanceolate, with more or less lanate-arachnoid indumentum, with spiny margin and apex, the spines 3-4 mm. Involucral bracts subtomentose to arachnoid-hairy; outer bracts patent, distinctly leaf-like, spinose-dentate, as long as or longer than the inner, the spines or spiny lobes 5-8 mm, yellowish. Achenes 4-7 mm, smooth, with inconspicuous angles; pappus-setae more or less plumose, white, rarely reddish, 2(-4) times as long as the achene. \bullet }{\i\fs28  C., E. & S. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs.
\par 
\par   The size of the plant, capitula, achenes and pappus have been used for delimiting subspecies but they show considerable variation and no satisfactory subdivision of the species is possible at present.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. C. caeruleus}{\fs28  (L.) C. Presl,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Sic.}{\fs28  xxx (1826) (}{\i\fs28 Carthamus caeruleus}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Kentrophyllum caeruleum}{\fs28  (L.) Gren. & Godron). Stem (15-)30-60 cm, simple, rarely branched, with variable lanate-arachnoid indumentum, sometimes glabrescent. Basal and cauline leaves shiny, simple, dentate, or pinnatisect to lyrate with 6-10 pairs of lobes or teeth, the margin and apex spiny; upper cauline leaves ovate-lanceolate. Involucral bracts with short glands, more or less arachnoid-hairy; outer bracts leaf-like, spinose-dentate, as long as or longer than the inner. Achenes c. 6 mm, more or less obpyramidal, inconspicuously angled, narrowed from the middle to the base, rugose towards the apex; pappus-scales ciliate, whitish, 1\'bd-2 times as long as the achene, free, persistent. 2n = 24. }{\i\fs28 Mediterranean region}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 mainly in the west}{\fs28 ),}{\i\fs28  C. & S. Portugal.}{\fs28  Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par 
\par   A very variable species in which leaf-division and indumentum have been used to separate infraspecific taxa. However, no consistent morphological and geographical pattern can be discerned at present and further study is required.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  Subfam.    }{\b\fs28  CICHORIOIDEAE
\par }{\fs24 Edit. S.M. Walters.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Plant with latex. All florets with a ligulate corolla. Pollen-grains usually with spines arranged in rows and forming a polygonal pattern.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 145.      Scolymus}{\fs28              L.
\par }{\fs24 By P.D. Sell.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Spiny annual to perennial herbs. Stems solitary, branched. Leaves pinnatifid. Capitula few to numerous. Involucral bracts in several rows. Ligules yellow. Achenes dorsally compressed, tightly enclosed in and adnate to the ovate, slightly winged, deciduous receptacular scales; pappus absent or of a few rigid hairs.
\par 
\par   All species occur on waste ground or in other dry, open habitats.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Leaves and wings of stem with a strongly thickened 
\par   white margin; uppermost leaves regularly pectinate-
\par   spiny; pappus absent ................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. maculatus}{\fs28  
\par 1 Leaves and wings of stem without or with only a 
\par   slightly thickened white margin; uppermost leaves
\par   irregularly spiny; pappus of a few rigid hairs
\par 2 Involucral bracts without or with few hairs, more or 
\par   less lanceolate, gradually attenuate to an acute apex;
\par   receptacular scales narrowed at apex ......................................... }{\b\fs28 2. hispanicus}{\fs28 
\par 2 Involucral bracts with numerous hairs, ovate-lanceolate to 
\par   linear-oblong, at least the outer abruptly contracted into 
\par   a spiny apex; receptacular scales not narrowed at apex ......... }{\b\fs28 3. grandiflorus}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. S. maculatus}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  813 (1753). Annual 15-90 cm, nearly glabrous, the continuous, irregularly spinose-dentate wings of the stem and the leaves with strongly thickened white margins. Leaves 40-200 \'d7 20-80 mm; basal oblanceolate, soft, pinnatifid, with few spines; cauline rigid, oblong-lanceolate to ovate, sinuate-pinnatifid, spiny, the uppermost regularly pectinate-spiny. Panicle subcorymbose. Involucre 12-18 \'d7 8-12 mm; bracts ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, acute. Receptacular scales not narrowed at apex. Achenes 2\'b75-4 mm, obovate; pappus absent. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  S. Europe.}{\fs28  Bl Bu ?Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [Ju].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. S. hispanicus}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  813 (1753). Biennial or perennial 20-80 cm, more or less hairy; stem with interrupted spinose-dentate wings. Leaves 40-200 \'d7 15-70 mm; basal oblanceolate, soft, pinnatisect, with few spines, petiole long; cauline rigid linear-oblong to ovate, sinuate-pinnatifid, spiny, not or scarcely thickened at margin, the uppermost very irregularly spiny. Panicle narrow. Involucre 15-20 \'d7 8-10 mm; bracts more or less lanceolate, gradually attenuate to an acute apex, without or with few hairs. Receptacular scales narrowed at apex. Achenes 3-5 mm, clavate; pappus of a few rigid hairs. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  S. Europe, extending to N.W. France.}{\fs28  Al*Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. S. grandiflorus}{\fs28  Desf.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Atl.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 240 (1799). Perennial 18-40 cm, more or less hairy; stem with continuous spinose-dentate wings. Leaves 60-120 \'d7 35-40 mm; ovate-lanceolate to linear-oblong, pinnatisect, spiny, not or scarcely thickened at margin; the uppermost sparsely long-spinose-dentate. Panicle subcorymbose. Involucre 15-22 \'d7 14-16 mm; bracts ovate-lanceolate to linear-oblong, the outer abruptly contracted into a spiny apex, with numerous hairs. Receptacular scales not narrowed at apex. Achenes c. 5 mm, obovate; pappus of a few rigid hairs.}{\i\fs28  W. Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  Co Ga It Sa Si *Tu.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 146.            Cichorium}{\fs28               L.
\par }{\fs24 By P.D. Sell.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs. Stems usually solitary, branched. Leaves runcinate-pinnatifid or dentate. Capitula numerous, terminal and axillary. Involucre cylindrical; bracts in 2 rows, the outer shorter. Receptacle more or less flat, without scales. Ligules usually blue. Achenes obovoid, more or less angled truncate at apex; pappus of 1-2 rows of short, obtuse scales.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Upper branches non-flowering and spine-like; involucre 5-8 mm   ...................................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. spinosum}{\fs28  
\par 1 Spine-like branches absent; involucre 11-14 mm
\par 2 Peduncles of terminal capitula slightly thickened at 
\par   apex; pappus-scales 1/10-1/8 as long as achene ............................. }{\b\fs28 1. intybus}{\fs28 
\par 2 Peduncles of terminal capitula strongly thickened;
\par   pappus-scales 1/6-1/2 as long as achene ......................................... }{\b\fs28 2. endivia}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. C. intybus}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  813(1753). Glabrous or with subrigid hairs. Perennial with long, stout taproot. Stems 30-120 cm,
\par 
\par 304}
\par }