{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy2\hr11\min9}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy2\hr11\min10}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1042}{\nofchars5945}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 sometimes sparsely glandular; stems whitish to purplish. Cauline leaves pinnatisect to pinnate, with 2-3 pairs of segments, shiny; segments 13-17 mm, spiny. Capitula 10-13 mm in diameter. Outer involucral bracts very shiny, deflexed, 2\'bd-3 times as long as the inner; inner bracts entire. Corolla pale violet, the lobes 3-3\'b75 mm. Pappus of linear, usually truncate scales 5-7 mm. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  Aegean islands.}{\fs28  Cr  Gr.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 C. rechingeri}{\fs28  P. H. Davis,}{\i\fs28  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b\fs28  21}{\fs28 : 128 (1953), described from Karpathos, is like }{\b\fs28 6}{\fs28  but has densely crowded, narrower capitula, leaves with 3-4(-7) pairs of segments, less shiny involucral bracts and pappus-scales 4\'b75-5 mm. Like }{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28  it has villous, sometimes spotted stems and shorter leaf-spines. It requires further investigation.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 7. C. lanatus}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  830 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 Kentrophyllum lanatum}{\fs28  (L.) DC.). Glandular annual, with more or less lanate-villous arachnoid indumentum. Leaves pinnatifid or pinnatisect, spinose-dentate. Capitula ovoid. Inner involucral bracts oblong-lanceolate, with small, often inconspicuous, ovate-lanceolate, scarious, dentate to subentire apical appendages. Corolla yellow, rarely whitish. Pappus of narrow, acute, ciliate scales.}{\i\fs28  S. Europe, extending locally northwards to N.C. France and S.E. Czechoslovakia.}{\fs28  Al Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, ?E) Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par   A complex containing allopolyploid taxa which are treated here as subspecies because morphological intermediates occur in areas of contact and hybridization seems to occur.
\par 
\par   (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 lanatus}{\fs28 : Indumentum more or less densely lanate-villous and arachnoid; stems straw-coloured. Spines borne at an acute angle to the leaf-margin. Outer involucral bracts erect or slightly patent, c. 1\'bd times as long as the inner. Corolla and anthers yellow. 2n = 44. }{\i\fs28 Throughout the range of the species except parts of the extreme south}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par   An allotetraploid, perhaps with }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28  as one parent.
\par 
\par   (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 baeticus}{\fs28  (Boiss. & Reuter) Nyman,}{\i\fs28  Consp.}{\fs28  419 (1879) (}{\i\fs28 Kentrophyllum baeticum}{\fs28  Boiss. & Reuter): Usually sparsely hairy to subglabrous; stems whitish. Leaves shiny, the spines borne at 90\'b0 to the margin. Outer involucral bracts twice as long as the inner, patent to deflexed, with longer spines, shiny. Corolla pale yellow, rarely whitish; anthers white with violet lines. 2n = 64.}{\i\fs28  Mediterranean islands, S. Greece, S. Spain}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par   An allohexaploid derived from }{\b\fs28 7}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) and }{\b\fs28 6}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 144.        Carduncellus}{\fs28              Adanson    
\par }{\fs24 By P. Hanelt.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial herbs, usually spiny, acaulescent or with simple or rarely somewhat branched stems, more or less lanate to arachnoid-hairy. Basal leaves usually pinnate to lyrate, the cauline usually sinuate to dentate, the teeth often spinose. Involucral bracts in many rows, imbricate, usually spiny, the outer more or less leaflike, the inner with semicircular to ovate, lacerate to fimbriate appendages. Florets hermaphrodite; corolla usually blue or purple; filaments bearded. Achenes more or less 4-angled, usually rugose to sulcate at least towards the apex, glabrous; pappus of many rows of narrow ciliate scales to plumose setae, which are usually connate at the base and deciduous.
\par 
\par   All species grow in dry, open habitats and are calcicole.
\par 
\par   Literature: S. Rivas Goday & S. Rivas Martinez, }{\i\fs28 Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b\fs28  25}{\fs28 : 188-197 (1967).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Acaulescent or with stems not more than 20 cm; cauline leaves 
\par   not more than 6; pappus (3-)4 6 times as long as the achene
\par 2 Leaves entire or setulose-dentate; involucral bracts 
\par   setulose-dentate; achenes smooth; pappus c. 6 times as
\par   long as the achene ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. mitissimus}{\fs28 
\par 2 Leaves and involucral bracts spinose-dentate; achenes 
\par   rugose at least towards the apex; pappus c. 4 times as 
\par   long as the achene
\par 3 Leaves with 6-9 pairs of linear- to oblong-lanceolate 
\par   pinnae or lobes; outer involucral bracts patent, as 
\par   long as or longer than the inner; achenes rugose 
\par   towards the apex; pappus white ....................................... }{\b\fs28 1. monspelliensium}{\fs28 
\par 3 Leaves with (8-)11-13 pairs of ovate to lanceolate-
\par   ovate pinnae; outer involucral bracts appressed, as 
\par   long as or shorter than the inner; achenes rugose all
\par   over; pappus reddish-brown .......................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. pinnatus}{\fs28 
\par 1 Stems usually more than 20 cm; cauline leaves 10 or more;
\par   pappus usually not more than twice as long as the achene
\par 4 Leaves entire or denticulate; outer involucral bracts 
\par   shorter than the inner; corolla yellowish ......................................... }{\b\fs28 4. dianius}{\fs28 
\par 4 Leaves spinose-dentate; outer involucral bracts as long
\par   as or longer than the inner; corolla blue
\par 5 Stem (10-)15-30(-45) cm, with greyish-white, subtomentose
\par   to densely arachnoid indumentum; spines yellowish;
\par   pappus-setae plumose, connate at base, deciduous ..................... }{\b\fs28 5. araneosus}{\fs28 
\par 5 Stem (15-)30-60 cm, with \'b1 lanate-arachnoid indumentum,
\par   sometimes glabrescent; spines whitish; pappus-scales 
\par   ciliate, free, persistent .................................................................. }{\b\fs28 6. caeruleus}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. C. monspelliensium}{\fs28  All., }{\i\fs28 Fl. Pedem. }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 154 (1785). Acaulescent, or with stem 2-20 cm and with 2-6 cauline leaves, more or less sparsely lanate to arachnoid-hairy, sometimes subglabrous. Leaves pinnate to pinnatifid; pinnae or segments 6-9 pairs, linear- to oblong-lanceolate, spinose-dentate or -lobed. Outer involucral bracts patent, leaf-like, spinose-dentate, acuminate, as long as or longer than the inner. Achenes c. 5 mm, more or less obpyramidal, rugose towards the apex; pappus-setae subplumose, white, c. 4 times as long as the achene. 2n = 48. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S.W. Europe.}{\fs28  Bl Ga Hs It.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. C. mitissimus}{\fs28  (L.) DC. in Lam. & DC.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Fr.}{\fs28  ed. 3, }{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28 : 73 (1805). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but usually acaulescent; leaves usually subglabrous; leaf-lobes or pinnae entire or setulose-dentate, with setose apex; outer involucral bracts appressed, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, setulose-dentate, with setose apex, sometimes pinnatifid, shorter than the inner; achenes smooth; pappus-setae plumose, c. 6(-8) times as long as the achene. 2n = 24. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S., W. & C. France, N.E. Spain.}{\fs28  Ga Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. C. pinnatus}{\fs28  (Desf.) DC., }{\i\fs28 Prodr.}{\b\fs28  6}{\fs28 : 614 (1838). Acaulescent, sometimes with stem 2-20 cm and with cauline leaves. Leaves pinnate, glabrous but the rhachis somewhat lanate to arachnoid-hairy; pinnae (8-)11-13(-15) pairs, ovate to lanceolate-ovate, glaucous. Outer involucral bracts appressed, dentate or pinnatifid towards the apex, with margin and apex spiny, as long as or shorter than the inner. Achenes c. 7 mm, broadly obpyramidal, rugose, with sharp, somewhat prominent angles, reddish-brown; pappus-setae subplumose, reddish-brown, 3-4 times as long as the achene.}{\i\fs28  C. Spain, Sicilia.}{\fs28  ?Bl Hs Si. (}{\i\fs28 N. Africa.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par   Plants from Spain, described as subsp.}{\b\fs28  matritensis}{\fs28  (Pau) Rivas Goday & Rivas Mart\'ednez,  }{\i\fs28 Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b\fs28  25}{\fs28 : 192 (1967), are distinguished by the decurrent pinnae and more plumose pappus-setae.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. C. dianius}{\fs28  Webb,}{\i\fs28  Iter Hisp.}{\fs28  33 (1838). Stem 70-100 cm, somewhat branched, with sparse shortly stipitate glands, the base covered with remains of leaves of previous years. Basal leaves up
\par 
\par 303}
\par }