{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 bracts, yellow outside; achenes up to 17 mm; pappus-hairs as long as achene. 2n = 14.{\i  C., S. & S.E. Europe, extending northwards to N. France.} Al Au Be Bl Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Extremely variable, especially in leaf-shape.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. SCORZONERA. Leaves entire to dentate. Achenes glabrous (rarely spinulose), with smooth to lamellate ribs, without or with a short tubular base not more than 1/5 as long as the rest of the achene.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. mollis} Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3}: 522 (1819) (incl. {\i S. rumelica} Velen.). More or less densely arachnoid-tomentose or -lanate perennial 5-30 cm; rootstock vertical, tuberous-incrassate and obovoid to oblong-cylindrical. Stems solitary or few, simple or branched near the base, erect or ascending. Leaves 5-15 × 0·2-0·4(-0·6) cm, linear, acute, entire, sometimes undulate, dilated and semiamplexicaul at base, usually crowded in the lower or middle part of stem. Involucre 18-27 mm, up to 35 mm in fruit. Ligules (¾-)1¼-1½ times as long as involucre, yellow, reddish outside. Achenes 13-20(-28) mm, cylindrical, glabrous, the outer with squamulose and the inner with smooth, weak ribs, pale brown, with a pale tubular base 1/10-1/5 as long as the rest of the achene. Pappus-hairs 1-1¼ as long as achene, plumose, dirty white.{\i  S.E. Europe.} Al Bu ?Cr Gr Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. idaea} (Gand.) Lipsch., {\i Fragm. Monogr. Scorzonerae}{\b  2}: 11 (1939). Like {\b 3} but less hairy and much smaller in all its parts; stems not more than 4 cm, several, simple; leaves 3-6 cm, all basal; involucre 10-15 mm, up to 22 mm in fruit. 1800-2300 m. •{\i  Kriti.} Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants of {\b 3} from E. Greece (Evvoia) show some approach to {\b 4}, and the two are perhaps not specifically distinct.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. undulata} Vahl,{\i  Symb. Bot.}{\b  2}: 86 (1791). Glabrous or sparsely tomentose perennial 7-30 cm; rootstock vertical, 0·7-1·5 cm thick, tuberous-incrassate, oblong-cylindrical, not fibrous at apex. Stem solitary, simple or branched near the base, erect. Basal leaves 3-15 × 0·2-0·7 cm, linear to linear-lanceolate, flat, entire; cauline similar but smaller, amplexicaul. Involucre 15-25 mm. Ligules 1½-2 times as long as involucre, purplish, very rarely white. Achenes c. 12 mm, cylindrical-ellipsoid, with the ribs scabrid or rugose to squamate above, otherwise glabrous, brownish, with a paler, tubular base c. 1/5 as long as rest of achene. Pappus-hairs about as long as achene, plumose.{\i  Calcareous hills. S. Italy, Sicilia.} It Si. ({\i N. Africa.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  The European plant is subsp. {\b deliciosa }(Guss.) Maire, {\i Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Afr. Nord}{\b  22}: 54 (1931), with more or less glabrous leaves and scentless flowers; subsp.{\b  undulata} has hairy leaves and scented flowers. Plants of both subspecies in N. Africa often have much wider leaves.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. purpurea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }191 (1753). Perennial, subglabrous or arachnoid-lanate at apex of stock and at base of capitula and leaves; rootstock vertical, usually less than 1 cm thick, cylindrical. Stem solitary, erect. Basal leaves (3-)10-25(-40) cm, grass-like, entire; cauline similar but smaller, amplexicaul. Ligules 1½-2 times as long as involucre. Achenes cylindrical-ellipsoid, shortly and obscurely beaked, ribbed, pale brownish, with a paler, tubular base c. 1/5 as long as rest of achene. Pappus-hairs about as long as achene, plumose, dirty white. 2n = 14.{\i  From C. Germany and Lithuania southwards to C. Italy, C. Greece and S.E. Russia; S.C. France.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant not more than 8 cm, with rootstock not or only
\par 
  weakly fibrous at apex; leaves recurved ......................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b peristerica} 
\par 
1 Plant more than 8 cm, with rootstock densely fibrous 
\par 
  at apex; leaves straight, ± erect
\par 
2 Leaves 0·3-0·7 cm wide, flat, scarcely keeled; achenes
\par 
  scabrid towards apex .............................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b rosea}
\par 
2 Leaves 0·1-0·3 cm wide, canaliculate, keeled; achenes 
\par 
  smooth .............................................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b purpurea}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b purpurea}: Rootstock densely fibrous at apex. Stems 10-70 cm, often branched above. Leaves 0·1-0·3 cm wide, canaliculate, keeled, more or less erect. Involucre 15-25 mm, with 10-16 bracts. Ligules pale lilac. Achenes 10-12 mm, smooth.{\i  Dry places. Throughout most of the range of the species but absent from most of the Balkan peninsula}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b rosea} (Waldst. & Kit.) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 464 (1879) ({\i S. rosea }Waldst. & Kit.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but stems simple; leaves flat, not or scarcely keeled; involucre with 15-20 bracts; ligules pale purplish; achenes 10-15 mm, scabrid towards apex. 2n = 14. {\i Damp or shady places. • E.C. Europe, Balkan peninsula, N. & C. Italy}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b peristerica} Form., {\i Verh. Naturf. Ver. Brünn}{\b  37}: 159 (1899): Rootstock not or only weakly fibrous at apex. Stems not more than 8 cm, simple. Leaves not more than 5 × 0·3 cm, canaliculate, keeled, usually recurved. Involucre 12-17 mm, with 10-15 bracts. Ligules pale purplish. Achenes 8-12 mm, smooth.{\i  Rocky and grassy places, above }2000 {\i m. • C. & N.W. Greece}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. graminifolia} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 791 (1753). Perennial or rarely biennial 10-50 cm, subglabrous to more or less arachnoid-tomentose especially at base of stems, leaves and capitula; rootstock vertical, slender, not fibrous at apex. Stems usually solitary, simple or sparingly branched, erect, densely leafy almost to the apex. Leaves 5-25 × 0·1-0·3(-0·5) cm, grass-like, flat, entire, subamplexicaul at base. Involucre 30-50(-70) mm. Ligules 1-1½ times as long as involucre, pale yellow or whitish, usually purplish outside. Achenes 15-25 mm, cylindrical-ellipsoid, attenuate above, with weak, smooth ribs, glabrous. Pappus-hairs about as long as achene, plumose, dirty white.{\i  Dry places. • Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. austriaca} Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 1498 (1803). Perennial 5-50 cm, glabrous or sparsely arachnoid-tomentose especially at base of stems and leaves; rootstock vertical, stout, densely fibrous at apex. Stems solitary or few, erect, usually leafless except for 3-6 almost scale-like leaves. Basal leaves 5-30 × 0·3-3 cm, entire, acuminate. Involucre 15-25(-30) mm. Ligules 1½-2 times as long as bracts, pale yellow. Achenes 8-14 mm, cylindrical-ellipsoid, with smooth to rugose ribs, glabrous. Pappus-hairs about as long as achene, plumose, white. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry places. From C. France and Czechoslovakia southwards to S. Italy and Bulgaria, and in the S. & E. parts of U.S.S.R.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Rm Rs (N, C, W, K, E ).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable, especially in leaf-shape; the following subspecies are more or less distinct.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems branched. ................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b crispa} 
\par 
1 Stems simple
\par 
2 Lamina of basal leaves abruptly contracted into petiole
\par 
  ..................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b bupleurifolia}
\par 
2 Lamina of basal leaves gradually narrowed into petiole .. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b austriaca}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b austriaca} (incl. {\i S. ruprectiana} Lipsch. & Krasch.): Stems simple. Lamina of basal leaves not coriaceous, usually with flat margin, linear to narrowly elliptical, gradually narrowed into a short or long petiole.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except Krym}.
\par 

\par 
319}
\par