{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 strongly transversely muricate; pappus of 1 row of c. 10 rigid, plumose hairs.{\i  S.E. Spain} ({\i Prov. Almería}). Hs. ({\i N. Africa.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  The type specimen of{\i  L. creticus} Boiss. ({\i L. taraxacifolius} (Cass.) Halácsy, non St-Lager), allegedly from Kriti, was probably collected in Egypt.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. LEONTODON. Stems with 0-3 bracts which do not merge into those of the involucre. At least some hairs sessile and stellate, or stalked and 2- to 7-fid. Pappus of 2 rows of hairs (or pappus of some marginal achenes of scales or absent).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. L. repens} Schur,{\i  Verh. Mitt. Siebenb. Ver. Naturw.}{\b  10}: 148 (1859). Perennial with branched, horizontal or ascending stock. Stems 1-numerous, 25-45 cm, simple, glabrous or with few simple eglandular hairs in the upper part especially just below the capitulum; bracts 0-3. Leaves 90-230 × 10-30 mm, dark green, oblong-lanceolate or -oblanceolate, obtuse or acute, subentire to sinuate-denticulate, tapered to base, with very sparse simple eglandular hairs above and more numerous hairs on the margin and veins beneath. Capitulum solitary. Involucre 10-15 × 5-11 mm; bracts blackish, linear-lanceolate, obtuse, with long, whitish simple eglandular hairs mainly in a median line. Ligules yellow, the outer brownish on the outer face, blackish at apex of teeth. Stigmas yellow. Achenes c. 5 mm, brown, narrowed at apex, but without a beak, transversely muricate; pappus of 2 rows of hairs, the inner plumose, the outer shorter and scabrid. •{\i  Mountains of Romania and W. Ukraine.} Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. L. schischkinii} V. Vassil.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 21}: 398 (1961). Perennial with oblique, truncate stock. Stems 1-numerous, 15-35 cm, simple, slightly thickened above; bracts 1-3, glabrous or with minute, white, simple eglandular hairs. Leaves 50-110 × 10-22 mm, oblanceolate or spathulate, obtuse or acute, sinuate-dentate to -pinnatifid, with winged petioles, glabrous or with a few simple hairs. Capitulum solitary. Involucre 13-15 × 10-13 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, the outermost linear, deflexed, dark, the inner with pale margins, the median with pale, weak simple eglandular hairs. Ligules yellow, concolorous. Stigmas yellow. Achenes 5-7 mm, brown, fusiform, curved, weakly transversely muricate; pappus of 2 rows of plumose hairs, or the outer sometimes simple. •{\i  W. & E. Carpathians.} Po Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. L. hispidus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 799 (1753). Perennial with vertical or oblique, usually branched, truncate stock. Stems 1-numerous, 5-70 cm, usually simple, glabrous or with simple eglandular or long-stalked 2- to 3-fid hairs. Leaves 30-350 × 3-40 mm, oblanceolate, obtuse to acute, sinuate-dentate to deeply pinnatifid with the terminal lobe usually large, attenuate into the winged petiole, glabrous or with simple eglandular or long-stalked 2- to 3-fid hairs. Capitula 1(-2). Involucre (9-)10-15 × 6-12(-15) mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, the outermost lax, glabrous, or with simple eglandular and long-stalked 2- to 3-fid hairs mainly in a median line. Ligules bright yellow, the outermost orange or reddish (rarely greyish-violet) on outer face. Stigmas yellow. Achenes 5-8 mm, brown, narrowed above or beaked, the inner with a beak ½ as long as the remainder of the achene, transversely muricate; pappus very pale brown, of 2 rows of hairs, the inner plumose, the outer denticulate. 2n = 14.{\i  Most of Europe, but absent from many of the islands.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant with numerous hairs
\par 
2 Leaves pinnatifid with sinuate-crispate lobes ......... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b pseudocrispus}
\par 
2 Leaves sinuate-dentate to pinnatifid, but lobes not 
\par 
  crispate
\par 
3 Stems (5-)10-60 cm, 2-3 times as long as leaves; involucre
\par 
  (9-)11-13(-15) mm ............................................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b hispidus}
\par 
3 Stems 10-20 cm, usually not more than twice as long as
\par 
  leaves; involucre 13-15 mm ................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b alpinus} 
\par 
1 Plant glabrous or almost so
\par 
4 Leaves deeply pinnatifid, usually with a narrow apex  ({\b f}) subsp. {\b hyoseroides}
\par 
4 Leaves sinuate-dentate, usually with a broad apex
\par 
5 Stems 15-70 cm, at least twice as long as leaves .......... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b danubialis}
\par 
5 Stems 5-20 cm, usually not more than twice as long as
\par 
  leaves ................................................................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b opimus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b hispidus}: Stems (5-)10-60 cm, 2-3 times as long as leaves, with numerous, white, rigid simple eglandular or stalked 2- to 3-fid hairs. Leaves sinuate-dentate to pinnatifid, with numerous to dense, white, rigid simple eglandular or 2- to 3-fid hairs. Involucre (9-)11-13(-15) mm, with numerous to dense white, rigid simple eglandular or stalked 2- to 3-fid hairs. 2n = 14. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b alpinus}(Jacq.) Finch & P. D. Sell,{\i  Bot. Jour.Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 244 (1976) ({\i L. alpinus} Jacq., {\i L. protheiformis} subsp. {\i alpicola} Rouy,{\i  L. hispidus} var.{\i  dubius} (Hoppe) Hegi): Stems 10-20 cm, usually not more than twice as long as leaves, with numerous white, rigid, simple eglandular or 2- to 3-fid hairs. Leaves sinuate-dentate, with numerous to dense, white, rigid, simple eglandular or stalked 2- to 3-fid hairs. Involucre 13-15 mm, with white, rigid, simple eglandular or long-stalked 2- to 3-fid hairs. •{\i  Alpine pastures and scree. Alps, Carpathians}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b pseudocrispus} (Schultz Bip. ex Bischoff) J. Murr,{\i  Neue Uebers. Farn-Blütenpfl. Vorarlb.} 337 (1924): Stems 7-20 cm, with numerous, white, rigid simple eglandular or 2- to 3-fid hairs. Leaves pinnatifid with sinuate, crispate lobes, with dense, white, rigid simple eglandular or 2- to 3-fid hairs. Involucre 11-13 mm, with numerous to dense, white, rigid simple eglandular or 2- to 3- fid hairs.{\i  Stony ground and screes. • C. & S. Alps}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b danubialis} (Jacq.) Simonkai, {\i Enum. Pl. Transs.} 353 (1887) ({\i L. hastilis} L.,{\i  L. danubialis} Jacq., {\i L. hastilis} var.{\i  glabratus} Koch): Stems 15-70 cm, at least twice as long as leaves, glabrous or with a few simple eglandular or stalked 2-fid hairs. Leaves sinuate-dentate, with broad apex, glabrous or with a few simple eglandular or stalked 2-fid hairs. Involucre 12-15 mm, glabrous or with a few simple eglandular or stalked 2-fid hairs. 2n = 14.{\i  From C. Europe to N. Balkan peninsula, C. Russia and Krym}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b opimus} (Koch) Finch & P. D. Sell,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 244 (1976) ({\i L. hastilis} var.{\i  opimus} Koch): Stems 5-20 cm, up to twice as long as leaves, glabrous or almost so. Leaves sinuate dentate, with broad apex, glabrous or subglabrous, shining. Involucre 11-14 mm, glabrous or subglabrous. •{\i  Mountains of C. Europe, Appennini}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b hyoseroides} (Welw. ex Reichenb.) J. Murr,{\i  Neue Uebers. Farn-Blütenpfl. Vorarlb.} 337 (1924): Stems up to 20(-30) cm, slender, glabrous or almost so. Leaves more or less deeply pinnatifid, usually with narrow apex, glabrous or almost so. Involucre 13-15 mm, glabrous or almost so.{\i  Limestone rocks and screes. • Alps, Carpathians.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sterile hybrids (2n = 11) of subsp. ({\b a}) with {\b 25} are frequent in Britain where the two species grow together.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Intermediates between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b d}) are frequent, and occasional plants similar to subsp. ({\b d}) occur among those of subsp. ({\b a}) outside the range of the former.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. L. siculus} (Guss.) Finch & P. D. Sell,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 245 (1976) ({\i Apargia sicula} Guss.). Perennial with vertical stock and vertical rhizome. Stems 1-3, 20-60 cm, simple, with few to numerous rigid, long-stalked 2- to 4-fid hairs and sometimes some
\par 

\par 
313}
\par