{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 oblanceolate, dentate to pinnatifid, usually setulose-hispid; cauline 0-2. Capitula 20-30(-40) mm wide. Involucral bracts up to 25 × 2·5 mm, in several rows, glabrous, or setose on the midvein. Ligules bright yellow. Achenes 8-17 mm, long-beaked, or the marginal achenes c. 5 mm, unbeaked or very shortly beaked; pappus of 2 rows of hairs, the outer 3-6 mm, scabrid or sparsely plumose, the inner 9·5-12·5 mm, plumose, not dilated at the base. 2n = 8.{\i  Most of Europe except the north-east.} All except Bl Fa Fe Is Rs (N, K) Sb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 159.             Leontodon}             L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  (Microderis DC.)
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R.A. Finch & P.D. Sell.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial, sometimes tuberous herbs, variously hairy but the hairs never with hooked branches. Stems solitary to numerous, scapose, sometimes branched, with 0-numerous bracts. Leaves all basal, entire to deeply pinnatisect. Capitula 1-few, rarely numerous. Involucral bracts in several imbricate rows. Receptacle pitted, the pits often with dentate or ciliate margins, without scales. Ligules yellow, rarely orange, the outer often with a reddish or greyish stripe on the outer face. Achenes more or less cylindrical, sometimes beaked, longitudinally ribbed, with numerous transverse ridges or minute rigid hairs; pappus-hairs 10-40, in 1 row, plumose and with dilated bases, or in 2 rows, the inner always plumose and with dilated bases, the outer sometimes plumose and with dilated bases; marginal achenes sometimes without pappus or with a pappus of scales or hairs.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   The nature of the indumentum is important; the hairs may be simple, or more or less sessile and stellate, or stalked and 2- to 7-fid. The length of the stalks in relation to the arms is also important and difficult to define other than by comparison. In an attempt to indicate this difference the terms{\i  long-stalked} and {\i short-stalked} are used. The abundance of the hairs is indicated by the following terms:{\i  few} or {\i sparse}, when the hairs in question are scattered or form only a small proportion of the total indumentum; {\i numerous}, when the hairs are abundant but separated widely enough to be individually distinct; {\i dense}, when they form a continuous indumentum.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Stigmas which are{\i  discoloured} have developed a dirty greyish or greenish tinge which may turn even darker when dry; yellow stigmas with no discoloration usually remain yellow when dry.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves glabrous or with an occasional hair
\par 
2 Plant with slender tubers
\par 
3 Leaves 2-5 mm wide; involucre 7-8 mm;
\par  
   achenes 4-5 mm .................................................................. {\b 8. microcephalus}
\par 
3 Leaves 5-20 mm wide; involucre 12-15 mm;
\par  
   achenes 7-10 mm  ................................................................... {\b 9. cichoraceus} 
\par 
2 Plant without tubers
\par 
4 Pappus of 2 rows of hairs or scales
\par 
5 At least the inner achenes with a beak at least ½ as 
\par 
  long as remainder of achene
\par 
6 Outer achenes without a pappus ............................................. {\b 11. salzmannii}
\par 
6 All achenes with a pappus
\par 
7 Leaf-hairs 2- to 3-fid; achenes 5-8 mm ...................................... {\b 15. hispidus}
\par 
7 Leaf-hairs 2- to 7-fid; achenes 7-12 mm ...................................... {\b 19. crispus}
\par 
5 Achenes narrowed above or only obscurely beaked
\par 
8 Leaves deeply pinnatisect with narrow lobes; stigmas
\par 
  discoloured ................................................................................... {\b 5. keretinus}
\par 
8 Leaves sinuate-dentate, or pinnatifid with broad lobes;
\par 
  stigmas yellow
\par 
9 Involucral bracts with pale, weak simple eglandular hairs ... {\b 14. schischkinii} 
\par 
9 Involucral bracts glabrous or with a few rigid simple
\par 
  eglandular or stalked 2-fid hairs .................................................. {\b 15. hispidus}
\par 
4 Pappus of 1 row of hairs
\par 
10 Achenes slightly narrowed at apex but not beaked
\par 
11 Leaves entire to denticulate; stigmas yellow ............................... {\b 2. croceus}
\par 
11 Leaves sinuate-dentate to deeply pinnatifid; stigmas
\par 
   discoloured ............................................................................... {\b 4. autumnalis}
\par 
10 At least some achenes distinctly beaked
\par 
12 Outer achenes with a pappus of short scales ............................ {\b 10. muelleri}
\par 
12 Outer achenes with a pappus of long hairs
\par 
13 Beak of inner achenes 1/3-1/2 as long as remainder of 
\par 
   achene; pappus-hairs c. 10 ...................................................... {\b 12. hispidulus}
\par 
13 Beak of inner achenes not more than 1/3 as long as 
\par 
   remainder of achene; pappus-hairs more than 12
\par 
14 Ligules yellow, concolorous ................................................... {\b 6. carpetanus}
\par 
14 Ligules yellow, the outer with a purplish or bluish 
\par 
   stripe on outer face
\par 
15 Leaves sinuate-dentate to deeply pinnatisect; involucre 10-14 mm;
\par 
    beak of achene 1/4-1/3 as long as remainder of achene ........... {\b 6. carpetanus}
\par 
15 Leaves usually entire to sinuate-dentate; involucre 9-11 mm;
\par 
    beak of achene less than ¼ as long as remainder of achene ........ {\b 7. duboisii}
\par 
1  Leaves hairy
\par 
16 Hairs on leaves simple
\par 
17 Plant with slender tubers
\par 
18 Leaves 2-5 mm wide; involucre 7-8 mm;
\par  
    achenes 4-5 mm ................................................................. {\b 8. microcephalus}
\par 
18 Leaves 5-20 mm wide; involucre 12-15 mm; 
\par 
   achenes 7-10 mm .................................................................... {\b 9. cichoraceus}
\par 
17 Plant without tubers
\par 
19 Stigmas discoloured
\par 
20 Involucre glabrous or with dark hairs; pappus-hairs in 1 row  {\b 4. autumnalis}
\par 
20 Involucre with reddish hairs; pappus-hairs in 2 rows ............... {\b 5. keretinus}
\par 
19 Stigmas yellow
\par 
21 At least the inner achenes with a beak ¼-½ as 
\par 
   long as remainder of achene
\par 
22 Pappus-hairs more than 12 ..................................................... {\b 6. carpetanus}
\par 
22 Pappus-hairs c. 10 ................................................................. {\b 12. hispidulus}
\par 
21 Achenes narrowed above or only obscurely beaked
\par 
23 Leaves 90-230 mm; involucre with pale simple eglandular
\par 
   hairs ............................................................................................... {\b 13. repens}
\par 
23 Leaves 10-90 mm; involucre with blackish or grey simple
\par 
    eglandular hairs intermixed with shorter whitish hairs
\par 
24 Outer ligules with purplish stripe on outer face .......................... {\b 7. duboisii}
\par 
24 Ligules yellow, concolorous
\par 
25 Stems 4-50 cm; leaves entire to dentate or rarely 
\par 
   pinnatifid; involucre 9-13 mm; pappus very pale brown .......... {\b 1. pyrenaicus}
\par 
25 Stems 1-20 cm; leaves dentate to runcinate-pinnatifid;
\par 
   involucre 9-18 mm; pappus white, greyish or yellowish ........... {\b 3. montanus}
\par 
16 At least some hairs on leaves stellate or 2- to 7-fid
\par 
26 Outer achenes with a pappus of short scales, or hairs 
\par 
   not more than 1 mm
\par 
27 Plant with tubers; outer achenes with pappus of short hairs .. {\b 23. tuberosus}
\par 
27 Plant without tubers; outer achenes with pappus of scales
\par 
28 Beak of inner achenes 5-7 mm ........................................... {\b 24. maroccanus}
\par 
28 Beak of inner achenes not more than 3 mm ...................... {\b 25. taraxacoides}
\par 
26 Outer achenes with a pappus of hairs more than 5 mm
\par 
29 Hairs on leaves long-stalked and not more than 2-fid
\par 
30 Capitula 2-80
\par 
31 Capitula 2-4, on long peduncles ....................................................... {\b 26. filii}
\par 
31 Capitula 20-80, in a corymbose panicle ....................................... {\b 27. rigens}
\par 
30 Capitulum solitary
\par 
32 Leaves with a small terminal lobe; hairs on leaves 
\par 
   thickened at base ............................................................................. {\b 18. hirtus}
\par 
32 Leaves with a large terminal lobe; hairs on leaves not
\par 
   thickened at base
\par 
33 Outer ligules orange, reddish or greyish-violet on outer face .. {\b 15. hispidus}
\par 
33 All ligules yellow, concolorous ....................................................... {\b 26. filii}
\par 

\par 
310}
\par