{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 weaker simple eglandular hairs; bracts 0-2. Leaves 35-160 × 5-20 mm, lanceolate, linear-lanceolate or oblanceolate, usually acute, denticulate to remotely dentate, gradually narrowed to the petiole, with dense long-stalked 2- to 5-fid hairs. Involucre 15-18 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse, with weak simple eglandular hairs and stouter simple eglandular and long-stalked 2-fid hairs. Ligules yellow, concolorous. Stigmas yellow. Achenes 10-15 mm, strongly transversely muricate, the inner with a beak about as long as remainder of achene; pappus-hairs in 2 rows, more or less plumose, pale brown. •{\i  S.W. Italy, Sicilia.} It Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. L. boryi} Boiss. ex DC., {\i Prodr. }{\b 7}: 103 (1838). Perennial with branched, woody stock and long, vertical rhizome. Stems 1-4, 1-4 cm, simple, with few to numerous long-stalked, 2- to 4-fid hairs and shorter, weaker simple eglandular hairs; bracts 0-1. Leaves 10-30 × 6-8 mm, crowded, oblanceolate to elliptical, regularly pinnately divided nearly to the midrib with narrow lobes, with dense indumentum of usually long-stalked 2- to 4-fid hairs. Capitulum solitary. Involucre 11-16 × 6-9 mm, bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, glabrous or with simple eglandular or long-stalked 2-fid hairs mainly in a median line. Ligules yellow, the outer with a darker stripe on outer face. Stigmas yellow. Achenes 8-10 mm, pale brown, narrowed at apex or shortly beaked, with dense short rigid hairs; pappus-hairs in 2 rows, the inner plumose, the outer simple. 2n = 14. •{\i  S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. L. hirtus} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2}: 1194 (1759) ({\i L. villarsii} (Willd.) Loisel.). Perennial with an oblique or vertical, truncate stock. Stems 1-several, 10-30 cm, with short, rigid simple eglandular or 2- to 4-fid hairs; bracts 0-2. Leaves 15-70 × 3-12 mm, regularly pinnatisect with narrow lateral lobes and small terminal lobe, with few to numerous, sometimes dense, long, more or less rigid hairs thickened at the base and minutely 2-fid at the apex. Capitulum solitary. Involucre 9-15 × 5-10 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse, with few to numerous simple eglandular or minutely 2-fid hairs. Ligules pale yellow, concolorous. Stigmas yellow. Achenes 5-8 mm, brown, narrowed above or shortly beaked, transversely muricate; pappus of 2 rows of plumose hairs or the outer scabrid. 2n = 8. •{\i  Italy, S. France.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. L. crispus} Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 34 (1779). Perennial with branched, oblique stock and long, vertical rhizome. Stems 1-6, 7-40 cm, more or less thickened at apex, simple or branched, with few to numerous, rigid, stalked 2- to 4-fid hairs (often with only their bases remaining) and sometimes shorter, weaker, simple eglandular and sessile stellate hairs; bracts 0-5. Leaves numerous, 20-140 × 3-15(-20) mm, more or less oblanceolate, dentate to pinnatifid, usually with numerous 2- to 7-fid hairs, sometimes also with sessile stellate hairs. Capitula 1(-3). Involucre 10-25 × 7-14 mm; bracts oblong-lanceolate, more or less acute, glabrous or with simple eglandular, 2- to 4-fid or stellate hairs, often pectinate-ciliate. Ligules yellow, sometimes reddish-purple on outer face. Stigmas yellow. Achenes 7-12 mm, brown, with beak up to about as long as remainder of achene, with short rigid hairs above and transversely muricate below; pappus of 2 rows of very pale brown plumose hairs dilated at the base, the outer shorter than the inner.{\i  S. & S.E. Europe, extending northwards to} c. 55°{\i  N. in E.C. Russia. }Al Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves with at least some sessile stellate hairs and 
\par 
  numerous 2- to 7-fid stalked hairs 
\par 
2 Leaves with scattered small stellate hairs and numerous
\par 
  stalked 2- to 5-fid hairs .............................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b bourgaeanus}
\par 
2 Leaves with numerous or dense ± sessile stellate hairs
\par 
  and 3-to 7-fid hairs ............................................................. ({\b e}) subsp. {\b graecus} 
\par 
1 Leaves with stalked 2- to 7-fid hairs, without sessile
\par 
  stellate hairs
\par 
3 Involucral bracts with minute hairs or glabrous .............. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b rossianus}
\par 
3 Involucral bracts with rigid hairs, at least on the
\par 
  margins
\par 
4 Involucre 12-15 mm, the bracts not or minutely pectinate-
\par 
  ciliate; achenes 7-12 mm ..................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b crispus}
\par 
4 Involucre 14-25 mm, with at least the outer bracts 
\par 
  strongly pectinate-ciliate; achenes 12-20 mm ............... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b asperrimus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rossianus} (Degen & Lengyel) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 813 (1931): Stem simple. Leaves with a few simple or long-stalked 2- to 3-fid hairs. Involucre 9-12 mm bracts with minute simple eglandular hairs or glabrous, not or only minutely pectinate-ciliate. Achenes 7-10 mm. •{\i  Jugoslavia and N. Greece}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b crispus} ({\i L. asper} (Waldst. & Kit.) Poiret, non Forskål,{\i  L. crispus} subsp.{\i  asper} (Waldst. & Kit.) Rohlena): Stems simple or branched. Leaves with numerous long-stalked 2- to 6-fid hairs. Involucre 12-15 mm; bracts with rigid, white simple eglandular or long-stalked 2-fid hairs on outer face particularly in a median line, not or only minutely pectinate-ciliate. Achenes 7-12 mm. 2n = 8.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b asperrimus} (Willd.) Finch & P.D.Sell,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  17}: 246 (1974) ({\i L. asperrimus} (Willd.) Boiss. ex Ball, {\i Scorzonera asperrima} Willd.): Stems simple or rarely branched. Leaves with numerous long-stalked 2- to 7-fid hairs. Involucre 14-25 mm; at least the outer bracts distinctly white-pectinate-ciliate, the outer face glabrous or with 2- to 4-fid rigid hairs and softer, simple eglandular hairs. Achenes 12-20 mm.{\i  Balkan peninsula}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b bourgaeanus} (Willk.) Finch & P. D. Sell, {\i loc. cit.} 6 (1976) ({\i L. bourgaeanus }Willk.): Stems simple. Leaves with few sessile stellate hairs and numerous long-stalked 2- to 5-fid hairs. Involucre 15-16 mm; bracts with long, rigid simple eglandular or long-stalked 2-fid hairs mainly in a median line, and soft simple eglandular hairs, not or minutely white-pectinate-ciliate. Achenes 10-11 mm. •{\i  C. Spain}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b graecus} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan}.{\b  2}: 813 (1931) ({\i L. graecus} Boiss. & Heldr.): Stems simple. Leaves with numerous to dense, more or less sessile stellate hairs and short- to long-stalked 3- to 7-fid hairs. Involucre 12-15 mm; bracts with few to numerous sessile stellate hairs and unequal, rigid simple eglandular or 2- to 4-fid hairs mainly in a median line, sometimes pectinate-ciliate. Achenes 9-12 mm. 2n = 8. •{\i  Greece and S. Albania; S. & C. Italy}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Var.{\i  intermedius} Huter, Porta & Rigo ex Fiori, with short indumentum and less divided leaves, and{\i  L. graecus} var.{\i  heldreichianus} Boiss., with longer, denser, less forked hairs, which are included in subsp.{\i  graecus}, may perhaps merit subspecific rank.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. L. hellenicus} Phitos, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  113}: 272 (1966). Perennial with branched stock and long rhizome. Stems up to 8 cm, simple, thickened at the apex, with numerous stellate hairs; bracts 1-2. Leaves up to 55 × 12 mm, spathulate or oblanceolate, entire or remotely denticulate, narrowed at base, subpetiolate, with dense, short stellate hairs on both surfaces. Capitulum solitary. Involucre 10-13 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, with stalked 2- to 5-fid hairs. Ligules yellow. Stigmas yellow. Pappus-hairs in 2 rows, the inner plumose, the outer shorter and scabrid. •{\i  C. Greece} ({\i Evritania}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. L. incanus} (L.) Schrank, {\i Baier. Reise }14 (1786). Perennial with vertical or oblique, often branched stock. Stems 1-6, 10-35 cm, simple, with numerous, sessile stellate and short-stalked 2- to 4-fid 
\par 

\par 
314}
\par