{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 glabrous or with simple eglandular hairs. Capitula (1-)2-7. Involucre 7-12 × 7-11 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, glabrous or with simple eglandular hairs. Ligules deep yellow, the outer with a reddish stripe on outer face. Stigmas discoloured. Achenes 3·5-7 mm, reddish-brown, cylindrical, slightly narrowed above, transversely muricate; pappus of 1 row of plumose hairs. 2n = 12, 24.{\i  Most of Europe, but rather local in the south.} All except Al Az Bl Cr Sa Sb Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b autumnalis}: Stems 5-60 cm. Capitula (1-)2-7. Involucre glabrous or with few to numerous pale or dark hairs. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pratensis} (Koch) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} 416 (1882) ({\i L. gutzulorum }V. Vassil.): Stems 5-25 cm. Capitula 1-3. Involucre with dense, long, dark hairs. •{\i  N., C. & E. Europe, mainly in the mountains}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. keretinus} F. Nyl.,{\i  Spicil. Pl. Fenn.}{\b  1}: 24 (1843). Perennial with oblique, truncate stock. Stems 1-numerous, 15-45 cm, usually branched, with few simple eglandular hairs below, glabrous or nearly so above; bracts numerous, particularly just below the capitula. Leaves 30-180 × 3-25 mm, oblong-lanceolate or oblanceolate, deeply pinnatisect with narrowly lanceolate or linear, usually upwardly directed lobes, tapered into the petiole, glabrous or with simple eglandular hairs. Capitula (1-)2-4. Involucre 7-12 × 7-12 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, with dense, long, reddish simple eglandular hairs and shorter whitish hairs. Ligules orange, concolorous. Stigmas discoloured. Achenes 5-7 mm, brown, with a short beak, transversely muricate; pappus of 2 rows of plumose hairs, the hairs of the outer row shorter. •{\i  N.E. Europe.} Fe Rs (N, C).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. carpetanus} Lange, {\i Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kjøbenhavn}{\b  1861}: 96 (1861). Perennial with vertical or oblique, often branched, truncate stock. Stems 1-numerous, 10-45 cm, simple or branched, glabrous or with few simple eglandular hairs; bracts numerous. Leaves 10-120 × 1-15 mm, linear or narrowly oblanceolate, obtuse to acute, sinuate-dentate to deeply pinnatisect with usually linear segments, tapered into the petiole, glabrous or with simple eglandular hairs. Capitula 1-3. Involucral bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, with numerous long, greyish simple eglandular hairs intermixed with shortish whitish ones. Stigmas yellow. Achenes 5-7 mm, pale brown, with a beak 1/4-1/3 as long as the remainder of the achene, transversely muricate; pappus of 1 row of at least 12 plumose hairs. •{\i  Mountains of C., S. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b carpetanus} ({\i L. pyrenaicus} subsp.{\i  reverchonii} Freyn): Involucre 10-14 mm. Ligules yellow, the outer with a bluish stripe on outer face.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b nevadensis} (Lange) Finch & P. D. Sell, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 243 (1976) ({\i L. nevadensis} Lange): Involucre 8-10 mm. Ligules yellow, concolorous.{\i  Sierra Nevada}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. L. duboisii} Sennen ex Widder, {\i Phyton }({\i Austria}) {\b 12}: 201 (1967). Perennial with oblique or vertical, truncate stock. Stems 1-3, 3-25 cm, usually simple, glabrous or with a few simple eglandular hairs; bracts numerous. Leaves 15-60 × 1-15 mm, linear, linear-lanceolate or -oblanceolate, obtuse to acute, entire to sinuate-dentate, rarely runcinate-pinnatifid, sessile or shortly petiolate, glabrous or with simple eglandular hairs. Capitula 1-2(-3). Involucre 9-11 × 8-11 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, with long, dark simple eglandular hairs intermixed with shorter whitish ones often in a median line, with the margins subglabrous. Ligules yellow, the outer with a violet-purple stripe on the outer face. Stigmas yellow. Achenes 4-6 mm, pale brown, with a short beak, transversely muricate; pappus of 1 row of at least 12 plumose hairs. •{\i  Pyrenees and Cordillera Cantábrica.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. L. microcephalus} (Boiss. ex DC.) Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 380 (1841). Perennial with long, slender tubers. Stems 1-4, 3-10 cm, sometimes branched, glabrous; bracts 2-numerous. Leaves 10-45 × 2-5 mm, linear, spathulate to oblanceolate, obtuse, entire, glabrous or with a few simple eglandular hairs. Capitula 1-2. Involucre 7-8 × 4-5 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse, glabrous or with a few short simple eglandular hairs. Ligules yellow. Stigmas yellow. Achenes 4-5 mm, pale brown, cylindrical, weakly transversely muricate; pappus of 1 row of plumose hairs. •{\i  S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. L. cichoraceus} (Ten.) Sanguinetti, {\i Cent. Prodr. Fl. Rom.} 111 (1837) ({\i L. fasciculatus} (Biv.) Nyman). Perennial with slender tubers. Stems 1-numerous, 8-40 cm, simple, glabrous or with few simple eglandular hairs; bracts numerous. Leaves 15-70 × 5-20 mm, oblanceolate, dentate to runcinate-pinnatifid, glabrous or with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs. Capitulum solitary. Involucre 12-15 × 7-8 mm; bracts narrowly linear-lanceolate, obtuse, with numerous simple eglandular hairs. Ligules yellow, concolorous. Stigmas yellow. Achenes 7-10 mm, brown, with a beak about as long as body, transversely muricate; pappus of 1 row of plumose hairs.{\i  C. & S. Italy, Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu ?Cr Gr It Ju Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. L. muelleri} (Schultz Bip.) Fiori in Fiori & Paol.,{\i  Fl. Anal. Ital.}{\b  3}: 396 (1904). Annual. Stems 1-4, 10-30 cm, simple or branched, glabrous; bracts 1-3. Leaves 10-60(-150) × 5-15 mm, oblong to oblanceolate, shallowly sinuate-dentate, gradually narrowed into the relatively long petiole, glabrous. Capitula 1-2, on long peduncles. Involucre 8-10 × 7-9 mm; bracts lanceolate, obtuse, glabrous. Ligules yellow, concolorous. Stigmas yellow. Achenes dark brown, strongly transversely muricate, of 2 kinds: outer 4-4·5 mm, narrowed into a beak, with a pappus of short scales; inner 6-7 mm, narrowed into a long beak, with a pappus of 1 row of c. 10 rigid, plumose hairs. {\i Sardegna, Sicilia.} Sa Si [*Lu]. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. L. salzmannii} (Schultz Bip.) Ball,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 16}: 545 (1878). Annual. Stems 1-3, 10-30 cm, branched, glabrous; bracts 0-3. Leaves 40-110 × 10-20 mm, oblong to oblanceolate, obtuse to subacute, sinuate-dentate to pinnatifid, gradually narrowed into the short petiole, glabrous. Capitula 2-3, on long peduncles. Involucre 10-12 × 8-12 mm; bracts narrowly lanceolate, obtuse, glabrous or with a few simple eglandular hairs in a median line. Ligules yellow, concolorous. Stigmas yellow. Achenes brown, strongly tuberculate-muricate, of 2 kinds: outer 2-3 mm, cylindrical, truncate at apex, without a pappus; inner 6-7 mm, narrowed at apex into a long beak, with a pappus of an inner row of c. 10 rigid, plumose hairs and an outer row of short scales. {\i Sandy places. S. Spain} ({\i rare}); {\i once recorded from S.E. Portugal.} Hs Lu. ({\i Morocco.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. L. hispidulus} (Delile) Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.} {\b 3}: 727 (1875) ({\i L. creticus} Boiss.). Annual. Stems numerous, 10-20 cm, usually branched, glabrous or with simple eglandular hairs below; bracts numerous. Leaves 30-90 × 3-20 mm, oblong to narrowly oblanceolate in outline, obtuse or acute, dentate to pinnatifid, narrowed to the obscure petiole, glabrous or with simple eglandular hairs. Capitula 1-3. Involucre 9-12 × 8-11 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, usually with soft simple eglandular hairs and sometimes also rigid ones, mainly in a median line. Ligules yellow, concolorous. Stigmas yellow. Achenes 7-8 mm, uniform, brown, with beak 1/3-1/2 as long as the rest of the body,
\par 

\par 
312}
\par