{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 29 At least some hairs on leaves sessile and stellate or
\par 
   stalked and 2- to 7-fid
\par 
34 Achenes with numerous short, rigid hairs at least above
\par 
35 Stems 1-4 cm; achenes narrowed at apex or obscurely beaked .... {\b 17. boryi}
\par 
35 Stems 7-40 cm; achenes with a distinct beak up to 
\par 
   about as long as remainder of achene
\par 
36 Leaves dentate to pinnatifid ........................................................ {\b 19. crispus}
\par 
36 Leaves entire or subentire .......................................................... {\b 21. incanus}
\par 
34 Achenes more or less muricate but not with short rigid hairs
\par 
37 Leaves with long-stalked 3- to 5-fid hairs, without 
\par 
   sessile stellate or short-stalked 3- to 7-fid hairs
\par 
38 Involucre 9-15 mm; achenes 5-8 mm ....................................... {\b 15. hispidus}
\par 
38 Involucre 15-18 mm; achenes 10-15 mm ................................... {\b 16. siculus}
\par 
37 Leaves with either sessile stellate hairs or short-
\par 
   stalked 3- to 7-fid hairs, or with both
\par 
39 Stems not more than 8 cm; all hairs on leaves sessile
\par 
   and stellate ............................................................................... {\b 20. hellenicus}
\par 
39 Stems 6-35 cm; some hairs on leaves obviously stalked
\par 
40 Capitulum solitary, involucre with simple eglandular
\par 
   and stalked 2-fid hairs .................................................................. {\b 21. incanus}
\par 
40 Capitula usually 2; involucre with dense sessile stellate
\par 
   and short-stalked 3- to 5-fid hairs ................................................. {\b 22. berinii}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. SCORZONEROIDES (Moench) Dumort. (Sect.{\i  Oporinia} (D. Don) Koch). Stems with few to numerous bracts which merge into those of the involucre. Hairs, when present, simple and eglandular. Pappus of 1(-2) rows of hairs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. pyrenaicus} Gouan, {\i Obs. Bot.} 55 (1773). Perennial with vertical or oblique, truncate stock. Stems 1-3, 4-50 cm, simple, thickened at apex, glabrous or nearly so below, with few to numerous dark simple eglandular hairs above; bracts 3-7. Leaves 10-80 × 3-20 mm, linear, narrowly elliptical or oblanceolate, entire, dentate or pinnatifid, with few to numerous hairs. Capitulum solitary. Involucre 9-13 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse, with few to numerous dark simple eglandular hairs intermixed with shorter whitish hairs. Ligules yellow, concolorous. Stigmas yellow. Achenes 5-10 mm, pale brown or pale chestnut-brown, cylindrical or narrowly fusiform, gradually narrowed at apex, weakly transversely muricate; pappus-hairs very pale brown, in 1 row and plumose, or in 2 rows, the outer not plumose, the inner longer and plumose. •{\i  Mountains of S. & S.C. Europe, from N. Portugal to W. Jugoslavia.} Au Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves entire or subentire ............................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b pyrenaicus} 
\par 
1 Leaves denticulate to dentate or pinnatifid
\par 
2 Petioles indistinct or up to 20 mm; involucre 9-10 mm
\par 
  ....................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b cantabricus}
\par 
2 Petioles 5-50(-80) mm; involucre 10-13 mm ................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b helveticus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pyrenaicus}: Stems 7-30 cm. Leaves 10-40 × 3-10 mm, entire or subentire; petioles (10-)20-80 mm, slender. Involucre 9-11 mm.{\i  Pyrenees}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cantabricus} (Widder) Finch & P. D. Sell,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 241 (1976) ({\i L. cantabricus} Widder): Stems 4-15 cm. Leaves 15-40 × 4-8 mm, denticulate to retrorse-dentate or -pinnatifid; petioles indistinct, or up to 20 mm. Involucre 9-10 mm.{\i  N.W. Spain, N. Portugal}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b helveticus} (Mérat) Finch & P.D. Sell, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i L. helveticus} Mérat): Stems 5-50 cm. Leaves 10-80 × 5-20 mm more or less dentate; petioles 5-50(-80) mm. Involucre 10-13 mm. 2n = 12.{\i  From S.C. France to W. Jugoslavia.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. croceus} Haenke in Jacq.,{\i  Collect. Bot.}{\b  2}: 16 (1789) Perennial with horizontal or oblique, truncate stock. Stems 1-3, 5-30 cm, simple, glabrous or with pale and dark simple eglandular hairs near the thickened apex; bracts 2-4. Leaves 25-170 × 3-20 mm, linear to narrowly oblanceolate, entire to denticulate, gradually narrowed to the petiole, glabrous or with sparse hairs beneath. Capitulum solitary. Involucre 10-14 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse, with numerous dark simple eglandular hairs intermixed with shorter whitish hairs. Ligules orange-yellow, concolorous. stigmas yellow. Achenes 5-6 mm, pale brown or pale chestnut-brown, cylindrical or narrowly fusiform, slightly narrowed at apex, weakly transversely muricate; pappus-hairs in 1 row, whitish, plumose. •{\i  E. Alps, E. & S. Carpathians, mountains of Bulgaria.} Au Bu It Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b croceus}: Leaves 25-170 × 5-20 mm, denticulate, with sparse hairs beneath. 2n = 24.{\i  E. Alps, E. & S. Carpathians.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b rilaensis} (Hayek) Finch & P. D. Sell,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 242 (1976) ({\i H. rilaensis} Hayek, {\i H. montanus} subsp. {\i rilaensis} (Hayek) Hayek): Leaves 25-70(-100) × 3-8 mm, entire, glabrous. 2n = 14.{\i  S. Carpathians, mountains of Bulgaria.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. montanus} Lam.,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  3}: 640 (1779). Perennial with oblique or vertical, truncate stock. Stems 1-2(-4), 1-20 cm, simple, with numerous, long simple eglandular hairs; bracts 0-2. Leaves 10-90 × 3-10 mm, linear to oblanceolate, dentate to runcinate-pinnatifid, narrowed at base to a winged petiole, with few to numerous long hairs. Capitulum solitary. Involucre 9-18 × 9-14 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse, with dense, long simple eglandular hairs. Ligules deep yellow, concolorous. Stigmas yellow. Achenes 6·5-7·5 mm, pale brown, cylindrical or slightly fusiform, slightly narrowed at apex, weakly transversely muricate; pappus-hairs in 1 row and plumose, or in 2 rows, the outer not plumose, the inner longer and plumose. •{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe from the Carpathians southwards to Pyrenees, C. Appennini and Albania}. Al Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems (3-)10-20 cm; involucre 9-12 mm;
\par  
  pappus-hairs yellowish ........................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b pseudotaraxaci}
\par 
1 Stems 1-10 cm; involucre 9-18 mm; pappus-hairs white or
\par 
  greyish
\par 
2 Terminal segment of leaf 8-20 mm; hairs of involucre 
\par 
  pale grey ......................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b montanus}
\par 
2 Terminal segment of leaf 4-10 mm; hairs of involucre 
\par 
  blackish .................................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b montaniformis}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b montanus}: Stems 1-10 cm. Leaves 20-70 × 3-10 mm, the terminal segment 8-20 × 3-10 mm. Involucre 12-18 × 10-14 mm, with pale grey hairs. Pappus-hairs white. 2n = 12.{\i  Pyrenees, W. & W.C. Alps}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b montaniformis} (Widder) Finch & P. D. Sell,{\i  Bot.Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 242 (1976) ({\i L. montaniformis} Widder, {\i L. illyricus} (Rohlena) K. Malý): Stems 3-7 cm. Leaves 10-40 × 3-8(-10) mm, the terminal segment 4-10 × 3-8(-10) mm. Involucre 9-15 × 8-11 mm, with blackish hairs. Pappus-hairs pale grey.{\i  C. & E. Alps; C. Appennini; mountains of Jugoslavia and Albania.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b pseudotaraxaci} (Schur) Finch & P. D. Sell, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i L. pseudotaraxaci} Schur): Stems (3-)10-20 cm. Leaves 20-90 × 4-8(-10) mm, the terminal segment (10-)15-18 × 4-8(-10) mm. Involucre 9-12 × 9-11 mm, with numerous dark hairs. Pappus-hairs yellowish. 2n = 12.{\i  Carpathians}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. autumnalis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 798 (1753). Perennial with branched oblique, truncate stock. Stems 1-numerous, 5-60 cm usually branched, glabrous or with few simple eglandular hairs bracts numerous, particularly just below the capitula. Leaves 20-200 × 3-30 mm, narrowly oblanceolate, acute, sinuate-dentate to deeply pinnatisect, the segments narrowly lanceolate or linear and usually patent or recurved, tapered into the petiole,
\par 

\par 
311}
\par