{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 more or less retrorsely aculeolate, but also hairy in places, or sometimes entirely glabrous and smooth; middle internodes 2-4 times as long as the leaves; leaves (8-)10-25(-30) × (0·8-)1·2-2(2·8) mm, in whorls of (7-)8-9(-10), 9-14 times as long as wide, thin to somewhat coriaceous, upper surface and margin antrorsely scabrid or hairy; inflorescence broadly pyramidal, branches from lower third of stem; pedicels 0·5-1·2 mm, flowers crowded; corolla 1·5-2·5 mm in diameter; fruit c. 1·5 mm, smooth to obtusely papillose, more or less shining. 2n = 22, 44. {\i Dry places. • N.E. Spain, E. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Octoploid individuals (2n = 88) with stems not retrorsely aculeolate form transitions to {\b 99}, especially in the mountains and on the N. side of the Pyrenees.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 98. G. pinetorum} Ehrend., {\i Sitz.-Ber. Akad. Wiss. Wien }({\i Math.Nat. Kl., Abt.} I) {\b 169}: 410 (1960). Plant greenish to brownish when dry, laxly caespitose, with stolons. Stems (5-)7-25(-40) cm, rather slender, usually glabrous and smooth, rarely hairy, never retrorsely aculeolate, usually reddish at the base; middle internodes 2-4 times as long as the leaves. Leaves (4-)5-12(-19) × (0·7-)0·9-1·2(-3·3) mm, in whorls of (6-)7-8(-10), lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, 5-12 times as long as wide, often somewhat coriaceous; upper surface and margin almost always antrorsely scabrid; hyaline apex 0·3-0·6 mm. Inflorescence pyramidal to ovoid-corymbose, many-flowered; pedicels 0·4-1 mm. Corolla (1·9-)2·1-2·8(-3·3) mm in diameter, white or pale yellow; lobes acute. Mean diameter of pollen grains 16-22 µm. Fruit 1·2-1·5 mm, more or less dull. 2n = 22, 44.{\i  Dry places. Mountains of Spain, extending to S. France} ({\i Corbières}). Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Very polymorphic in relation to both habitat and location. In transitional habitats, intermediates, apparently hybrids with {\b 92} and {\b 117}, and with {\b 97}, {\b 99} and {\b 100}, are found.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 99. G. marchandii} Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  3}: 528 (1818) ({\i G. lapeyrousianum }Jordan). Like {\b 98} but usually dark greybrown to blackish when dry, laxly to densely caespitose; stems (5-)7-20(-40) cm, rather stout, usually glabrous, scarcely reddish at the base; middle internodes often c. 1-2 times as long as the leaves; leaves (5-)7-17(-23) × (0·7)1·1-2·3(-2·9) mm, in whorls of (7-)8-9(-10), oblanceolate, widest in the distal quarter, 7-9 times as long as wide, thickish, antrorsely scabrid, rarely glabrescent or with patent hairs; inflorescence broadly pyramidal to corymbose; pedicels 1-1·5 mm; corolla (2-)2·5-3(-4) mm in diameter; mean diameter of pollen grains more than 22 µm; fruit c. 1·5 mm. 2n = 88.{\i  Woods and grassland. • Mountains of N. Spain and C. France.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Very polymorphic, and connected through transitional forms with {\b 96}, {\b 97} and {\b 98} and especially with {\b 103} north of the Pyrenees.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 100. G. nevadense} Boiss. & Reuter in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 3}({\b 2}): 115 (1856). Like {\b 98} but greenish when dry, caespitose; stems (5-)7-15(-20) cm, ascending, almost always glabrous and smooth, scarcely red at the base; middle internodes up to twice as long as the leaves; leaves (5-)6-10(-12) × (0·9-)1·1-1·9(-2·3) mm, in whorls of (6-)7(-9), oblanceolate, thin and membranous, 5-7 times as long as wide, usually antrorsely scabridulous on the margin only, or glabrescent; inflorescence ovoid to corymbose; pedicels 1-1·5 mm; corolla 2-2·6 mm in diameter, white to pale yellow; mean diameter of pollen grains less than 19 µm; fruit c. 1·1 mm. 2n = 22.{\i  Damp shady, rocky places. High mountains of S. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 101. G. timeroyi} Jordan, {\i Obs. Pl. Crit. }{\b 3}: 138 (1846) ({\i G. jordanii} Loret & Barrandon). Plant greenish when dry; stock with short, scarcely rooting stolons. Stems (7-)15-30(-40) cm, bushy, rather slender, almost always glabrous and smooth, reddish at the base; middle internodes 2-3(-4) times as long as the leaves. Leaves (5-)7-10(-15) × (0·5-)0·7-0·9(-1·7) mm, in whorls of (8-)9-10(-12), linear to narrowly lanceolate, mostly 9-11 times as long as wide, more or less coriaceous; upper surface and margin antrorsely scabrid or glabrescent; hyaline apex shorter than leaf-width. Inflorescence ovoid-elongate to narrowly pyramidal, many-flowered; pedicels 0·8-1 mm, more or less divaricate after flowering. Corolla 1·5-2(-2·4) mm in diameter; lobes acute. Fruit 1-1·3 mm, brownish. 2n = 22. {\i Dry places; somewhat calcicole. • S., C. & E. France.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 102. G. fleurotii} Jordan, {\i Cat. Jard. Grenoble}{\b  1849}: 2 (1849). Plant often dark or blackish when dry, densely caespitose, with numerous stolons. Stems 10-25(-50) cm, rather stout, glabrous, or with patent hairs, scarcely red at the base; basal internodes very short, with persistent leaves; middle internodes 2-4 times as long as the leaves. Leaves (5-)6-10(-13) × 0·5-1(-1·4) mm, in whorls of 8-9(-10), linear-lanceolate or narrowly oblanceolate and straight, 8-11 times as long as wide, more or less coriaceous, with patent or retrorse scabridity, or with patent hairs, or glabrescent. Inflorescence rather dense, ovoid-oblong to narrowly pyramidal, with short lateral branches; pedicels mostly 0·8-1 mm. Corolla 2·3-2·6 mm in diameter. Fruit c. 1·4 mm, more or less papillose. 2n = 44, 88.{\i  Calcareous screes and cliffs. • C. France to S. England.} Br Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    Close to {\b 101}, and sometimes difficult to distinguish from {\b 103}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 103. G. pumilum} Murray,{\i  Prodr. Stirp. Götting.} 44 (1770) ({\i G. asperum} Schreber, {\i G. laeve} Thuill., {\i G. sylvestre} Pollich, non Scop.). Like {\b 102} but greenish-brown when dry, laxly caespitose, with few stolons; stems (10-)15-30(-70) cm, not red at the base; basal internodes very short, with deciduous leaves; middle internodes mostly 2-4 times as long as the leaves; leaves (8-)10-16(-30) × (1-)1·2-1·6(-3) mm, in whorls of up to (7-)8-9(-10), usually narrowly oblanceolate and more or less falcate; inflorescence rather lax, usually with rather short branches for less than half its length; pedicels 1-1·5 mm; corolla 2-3 mm in diameter; fruit smooth to obtusely papillose. 2n = (66), 88. {\i Open woods and grassland. • W. & C. Europe, extending eastwards to the Kaliningradskaja Oblast'}. Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B) [Fe Su].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    Rather variable, approaching {\b 104}, and connected by hybrid intermediates with it, with {\b 88}, {\b 89}, {\b 99} and with octoploid populations of {\b 102} and {\b 112}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 104. G. valdepilosum} H. Braun in Form., {\i Beitr. Fl. Mittl. Südl. Mähr.} 43 (1886). Plant greenish when dry, somewhat caespitose, with few non-flowering shoots at anthesis, with stolons. Stems (9-)15-30( 40) cm, ascending to erect, mostly more than 0·7 mm in diameter, often with patent hairs, reddish at the base; basal internodes very short; middle internodes 1½-4½ times as long as the leaves. Leaves (9-)11-18(-24) × 0·8-2·3 mm, in whorls of (6-)7-8(-9), linear-lanceolate to narrowly oblanceolate, straight, (6-)8-16(-18) times as long as wide, rather thin. Inflorescence ovoid-elongate to broadly pyramidal, the partial inflorescences somewhat dense; pedicels 0·8-1·1 mm. Corolla 2-3·5 mm in diameter; lobes acute. Fruit 1-1·5 mm, obtusely to acutely papillose. 2n = 22, 44. {\i Dry grassland and open woods. • From S.E. Germany to W. Ukraine; S. & C. Denmark.} Au Cz Da Ge Po Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    A variable species with a disjunct distribution. The populations from Denmark have been distinguished as subsp. {\b slesvicense} (Sterner) Ehrend., {\i Pl. Syst. Evol.}{\b  124}: 177 (1975).
\par 

\par 
31}
\par