{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 hairs; bracts 0-3. Leaves 25-150 × 5-20 mm, linear-oblong to narrowly oblanceolate, more or less acute, entire, denticulate or rarely with a few irregular teeth, long-attenuate to the winged petiole, with numerous to dense, short- to long-stalked 2- to 7-fid hairs on both surfaces. Capitulum solitary. Involucre 10-15 × 8-11 mm; bracts linear to linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, with few to numerous simple eglandular and stalked 2-fid hairs. Ligules deep yellow. Stigmas yellow. Achenes 7-9 mm, brown, narrowed and with minute rigid hairs above, transversely muricate below; pappus of 2 rows of hairs, the inner plumose, the outer denticulate. •{\i  Mountains of C. Europe, N. Italy and N. & C. Jugoslavia.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po ?Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b incanus}: Leaves narrowly elliptical or narrowly oblanceolate, densely hairy. Pappus-hairs much longer than achene. 2n = 8.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tenuiflorus} (Gaudin) Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  6}({\b 2}): 1031 (1928): Leaves linear-oblong, less densely hairy than in subsp. ({\b a}) so that the leaf appears to be greener. Pappus-hairs about as long as achene.{\i  S. Alps}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. L. berinii} (Bartl.) Roth, {\i Man. Bot. }{\b 3}: 1129 (1830). Perennial with vertical or oblique, often branched stock. Stems 1-4, 6-30 cm, often branched, with numerous sessile stellate and short-stalked 2- to 4-fid hairs; bracts 0-3. Leaves 25-80 × 3-10 mm, narrowly oblanceolate, obtuse to acute, sinuate-denticulate, with numerous to dense small, sessile stellate and short-stalked 3- to 7-fid hairs on both surfaces. Capitula 1-2, on long peduncles. Involucre 10-14 × 10-14 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, with dense sessile stellate and short-stalked 3- to 5-fid hairs. Ligules yellow. Stigmas yellow. Achenes 6-7 mm, yellowish-brown, narrowed above, transversely muricate; pappus-hairs in 2 rows, the inner plumose, the outer denticulate. •{\i  N.E. Italy, N.W. Jugoslavia.} It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. L. tuberosus} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }799 (1753) ({\i Thrincia tuberosa} (L.) DC.). Perennial with long, slender tubers. Stems 1-6, 7-35 cm, simple, with few to numerous, rigid, simple eglandular or long-stalked 2- to 3-fid hairs; bracts 0-2. Leaves 20-140 × 5-25 mm, obovate to oblanceolate-oblong, more or less obtuse, retrorse-dentate to runcinate-pinnatifid, narrowed to a sometimes dentate petiole, with numerous rigid, long-stalked 2- to 3-fid hairs. Capitulum solitary. Involucre 9-15 × 6-10 mm; bracts oblong, narrowed to an obtuse apex, glabrous or with rigid, long-stalked 2-fid hairs often confined to a median line. Ligules yellow, the outer with a greenish stripe on the outer face. Stigmas yellow or discoloured. Achenes 3-7 mm, transversely rugose or muricate, of 2 kinds; outer curved, sometimes with a short beak and with a pappus of hairs not more than 0·5 mm; inner usually straight, beaked, the pappus of 2 rows of plumose hairs. 2n = 8.{\i  Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. L. maroccanus} (Pers.) Ball,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot}.) {\b 16}: 544 (1878). Annual. Stems 1-few, up to 25 cm, simple, with few to numerous, rigid simple eglandular or long-stalked 2-fid hairs; bracts absent. Leaves 100-140 × 30-40 mm, oblanceolate, obtuse, dentate, attenuate into a winged, sometimes dentate petiole, with numerous rigid, long-stalked 2-fid hairs. Capitulum solitary. Involucre 12-16 × 10-14 mm; bracts lanceolate, obtuse, with rigid simple eglandular or long-stalked 2-fid hairs mainly in a median line. Ligules yellow, the outer with a stripe on the outer face. Stigmas yellow. Achenes brown, of 2 kinds: outer shortly beaked, with the pappus of small scales; inner 9-10 mm, with beak 5-7 mm and pappus-hairs in 2 rows, plumose. 2n = 8.{\i  S. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. L. taraxacoides} (Vill.) Mérat, {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.}{\b  22}: 108 (1831). Stems 1-numerous, 2·5-35 cm, simple, with few to numerous simple eglandular or long-stalked 2- to 3-fid hairs; bracts 0-2. Leaves 20-150(-250) × 3-10 mm, narrowly oblanceolate to oblong-oblanceolate, obtuse to acute, entire, dentate to pinnatifid, attenuate into a short or long petiole, with numerous rigid, simple eglandular or long-stalked 2- to 3-fid hairs. Capitulum solitary. Involucre 7-11 × 4-9 mm; bracts narrowly lanceolate, obtuse to acute, with few to numerous, rigid simple eglandular or long-stalked 2-fid hairs. Ligules deep yellow, the outer greyish-violet on the outer face. Stigmas yellow. Achenes 4-5·5 mm, brown, transversely muricate, of 2 kinds: outer curved and with a pappus of small scarious scales; inner more or less beaked, with the pappus-hairs in 2 rows, the outer rigid and simple, the inner plumose.{\i  S., W. & C. Europe.} Al Au Az Be Bl Br Co Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Tu [Da Su].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b taraxacoides} ({\i L. nudicaulis} auct., non (L.) Banks ex Schinz & R. Keller,{\i  L. saxatilis} Lam., {\i Thrincia hirta} Roth): Perennial, rarely biennial, with short, vertical, truncate stock. Inner achenes with beak c. 1 mm. 2n = 8.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b longirostris} Finch & P. D. Sell,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 247(1976)({\i L. nudicaulis} subsp.{\i  rothii} auct., non (Ball) Schinz & Thell.): Usually annual. Inner achenes with beak 2-3 mm. 2n = 8. {\i S. Europe}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. L. filii} (Hochst.) Paiva & Ormonde,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2, {\b 46}: 447 (1972) ({\i Microderis filii} Hochst.). Perennial with oblique, truncate stock. Stems 20-50 cm, usually branched, with numerous rigid, simple eglandular and long-stalked 2- to 3-fid hairs; bracts 0-3. Leaves 30-170 × 15-45 mm, elliptical to oblanceolate, obtuse to subacute, long-attenuate at base into a winged petiole, dentate with narrow, patent teeth, with numerous rigid, simple eglandular or long-stalked 2-fid hairs. Capitula 1-4, on long peduncles. Involucre 10-13 × 7-10 mm; bracts linear, more or less obtuse, glabrous or with few to numerous, simple eglandular or long-stalked 2-fid hairs. Ligules yellow. Stigmas yellow or discoloured. Achenes 4·5-5·5 mm, pale brown, weakly transversely muricate, shortly beaked; pappus-hairs in 2 rows, the inner plumose, the outer scabrid. •{\i  Açores.} Az.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. L. rigens} (Aiton) Paiva & Ormonde,{\i  op. cit.} 448 (1972) ({\i Crepis rigens} Aiton). Perennial with oblique, truncate stock. Stems 15-60 cm, branched, with few to numerous, rigid simple eglandular and long-stalked 2-fid hairs; bracts numerous. Leaves 90-310 × 30-120 mm, elliptical, obtuse to subacute, narrowed into a winged petiole, regularly dentate with narrowly mammiform, patent teeth, with few to numerous, rigid, simple eglandular or long-stalked 2-fid hairs. Capitula 20-80, in a more or less corymbose panicle. Involucre 8-12 × 4-6 mm; bracts linear to linear-lanceolate, more or less obtuse, glabrous or with appressed soft hairs, sometimes with a few longer rigid hairs. Ligules yellow. Styles discoloured. Achenes 4·5-5·5 mm, pale brown, weakly transversely muricate, shortly beaked; pappus-hairs in 2 rows, the inner plumose, the outer scabrid. •{\i  Açores.} Az.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 160.           Picris}             L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.D. Sell.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs with rigid hairs, most of which have 2-4 small, hooked branches at the apex, sometimes also with spines. Stems usually solitary, usually branched. Leaves sinuate-dentate to pinnatisect; cauline often more or less amplexicaul. Capitula few to numerous. Involucral bracts in several imbricate rows. Receptacle pitted, without scales. Ligules yellow, the outer
\par 

\par 
315}
\par