{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 often with a reddish stripe on outer face. Achenes transversely muricate between the ribs, usually narrowed at apex or beaked; pappus of 2 rows of deciduous hairs, the inner plumose, the outer plumose or simple, the outer achenes rarely with short scarious pappus.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Outer involucral bracts ovate to ovate-lanceolate,
\par 
  usually wider than the inner
\par 
2 Peduncles thickened after anthesis; involucral bracts 
\par 
  not pectinate-ciliate or spiny-ciliate ................................................ {\b 1. aculeata}
\par 
2 Peduncles not thickened; at least some involucral bracts
\par 
  pectinate-ciliate or spiny-ciliate
\par 
3 Outer involucral bracts more than half as long as inner ............... {\b 2. echioides}
\par 
3 Outer involucral bracts not more than half as long as inner
\par 
4 Involucre 10-12 mm ...................................................................... {\b 5. spinifera}
\par 
4 Involucre 15-25 mm
\par 
5 Involucre (15-)20-25 mm; beak of achene c. ½ as long as body .... {\b 3. comosa}
\par 
5 Involucre 16-18 mm; beak of achene twice as long as body .... {\b 4. algarbiensis}
\par 
1 Outer involucral bracts linear-lanceolate to narrowly 
\par 
  lanceolate, similar to the inner
\par 
6 Outer achenes with a short scarious pappus, the inner 
\par 
  with pappus of plumose hairs .................................................. {\b 12. willkommii}
\par 
6 All achenes with pappus of plumose hairs
\par 
7 Involucral bracts distinctly pectinate-ciliate ............................ {\b 7. hispidissima}
\par 
7 Involucral bracts not pectinate-ciliate
\par 
8 Capitula 1-2; involucre 12-20 mm ............................................... {\b 6. hispanica}
\par 
8 Capitula more than 2; involucre 8-13(-15) mm
\par 
9 Achenes without a beak, not narrowed at apex ..................... {\b 11. sprengerana}
\par 
9 Achenes narrowed at apex or shortly beaked
\par 
10 Peduncles often thickened after anthesis; achenes more
\par 
   or less curved, strongly transversely muricate .......................... {\b 10. pauciflora}
\par 
10 Peduncles not thickened after anthesis; achenes 
\par 
   straight or slightly curved, weakly transversely 
\par 
   muricate
\par 
11 Leaves pinnatisect ................................................................... {\b 8. scaberrima}
\par 
11 Leaves entire to ± dentate ...................................................... {\b 9. hieracioides}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. HELMINTIA  O. Hoffm. Outer involucral bracts ovate to ovate-lanceolate, wider than inner.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. aculeata} Vahl,{\i  Symb. Bot.}{\b  2}: 89 (1791). Perennial. Stem 18-50 cm, with scattered spines and few to numerous rigid hairs. Leaves with short, bulbous-based spines and a few rigid hairs; basal 30-100 × 10-35 mm, oblanceolate to elliptical, obtuse, shallowly dentate, subpetiolate; cauline small, lanceolate to ovate, sessile, more or less amplexicaul. Capitula few; peduncles thickened after anthesis. Involucre 14-18 × 12-18 mm; bracts glabrous or with rigid hairs, the outer ovate, muricate, the inner lanceolate or oblong, about twice as long as outer. Achenes 8-9 mm, reddish-brown, more or less straight, the beak longer than the body.{\i  Dry places; calcicole. S. Italy, Sicilia.} It Si. ({\i N. Africa.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. echioides} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 792 (1753) ({\i Helmintia echioides} (L.) Gaertner). Annual or biennial. Stems 30-90 cm, with rigid, often tubercle-based hairs and often with some slender spines. Leaves with numerous unequal, rigid hairs, the larger thickened at the base or tubercle-based, and often with scattered spines; basal 35-250 × 15-100 mm, elliptical to oblanceolate or oblong-oblanceolate, obtuse to acute, sinuate to dentate, narrowed at base into a winged petiole; lower cauline similar to basal but with semiamplexicaul petioles, the upper lanceolate to ovate, sessile, amplexicaul. Capitula numerous. Involucre 12-20 × 10-15 mm; bracts with pectinate-ciliate margins, the outer ovate-cordate, acuminate the inner lanceolate, slightly longer than the outer. Achenes 5-7 mm, transversely muricate, with beak about as long as the body, the inner reddish-brown, more or less straight, the outer whitish, curved. 2n = 10.{\i  S. Europe; widely naturalized further north, though often inconstant in its appearances.} Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu *Rs (K) Sa Tu [Au Be Br Cz Ge Hb He Ho Hu Po Rm].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. comosa} (Boiss.) B.D. Jackson,{\i  Ind. Kew.}{\b  2}: 521 (1894) ({\i Helmintia comosa} Boiss.). Annual or biennial. Stems 30-70 cm, with scattered spines and few to numerous rigid hairs. Leaves with bulbous-based spines and rigid hairs; basal 50-150 × 35-50 mm, more or less elliptical, obtuse, entire to sinuate-dentate, subpetiolate; lower cauline similar to basal, the upper broader, sessile, amplexicaul. Capitula numerous. Involucre (15-)20-25 × 13-15 mm; outer bracts ovate-lanceolate, acute, with thickened midrib, spiny-pectinate margins, and also rigid hairs; inner bracts more than twice as long as outer, linear-lanceolate, acute, with a dorsal appendage much exceeding the apex of the bracts, with rigid hairs mainly along the median line. Achenes 8-10 mm, reddish-brown, transversely muricate, more or less straight; beak c. ½ as long as the body. {\i Dry scrub. S. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. algarbiensis} Franco, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 268 (1976). Like {\b 3} but biennial or short-lived perennial; stems 50-90 cm; leaves with scattered, short, bulbous-based spines and a few rigid hairs (mostly on the midrib beneath), the cauline small, oblong; involucre 16-18 × 8-13 mm, the outer bracts without rigid hairs, the inner 3 times as long as outer, linear-oblong, with a dorsal appendage scarcely exceeding the apex of the bracts; achenes olive-brown, the beak twice as long as the body.{\i  Woods. • S. Portugal.} Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. spinifera} Franco, {\i loc. cit.} (1976). ({\i Helmintia spinosa} auct., non DC., {\i Picris spinosa} auct. lusit., non (DC.) Poiret). Biennial. Stems 20-75 cm, with few to numerous spines and rigid hairs usually confined to the upper part. Leaves with numerous bulbous-based spines and rigid hairs; basal (45-)90-180 × (18-)20-60 mm, oblanceolate, subobtuse, entire, with a short petiole; lower cauline similar to basal but subsessile, the upper gradually becoming smaller, sessile and semiamplexicaul. Capitula numerous; peduncles with numerous spines, long rigid hairs and shorter, softer hairs. Involucre 10-12 × 10-12 mm; outer bracts oblong-elliptical, subobtuse, narrower than inner, with spiny-pectinate margins and a few strong spines along the median line, without rigid hairs; inner bracts twice as long as outer, oblong-lanceolate, acute, with rigid hairs along the median line and a short tomentum near the apex. Achenes with a short beak. {\i Dry, waste places. • C. & E.C. Portugal.} Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. PICRIS. Outer involucral bracts linear-lanceolate to narrowly lanceolate, similar to inner.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. hispanica} (Willd.) P.D. Sell, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 248 (1976) ({\i Apargia hispanica }Willd., {\i Leontodon hispanicus} (Willd.) Poiret). Perennial. Stems 4-20 cm, with numerous hairs, some rigid and broad-based, some soft. Leaves with numerous broad-based, rigid hairs; basal 25-80 × 10-25 mm, oblanceolate, pinnatisect, the lobes linear to narrowly triangular; cauline similar but smaller and narrower. Capitula 1 (-2). Involucre 13-20 × 10-15 mm; bracts lanceolate, obtuse, with short, wavy hairs and longer, rigid hairs mainly on the median line; outer bracts up to half as long as inner. Achenes 9-10 mm, dark brown, slightly curved, weakly transversely muricate, shortly beaked.{\i  Dry places; calcicole. C., E. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 
316}
\par