{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Achenes densely villous or lanate
\par 
2 Pappus-hairs scabrid ....................................................................... {\b 25. cretica}
\par 
2 Pappus-hairs plumose at least below
\par 
3 Rootstock with a globose tuber 2-5 cm below surface of  soil
\par 
4 Plant ± sericeous-lanate throughout; stems simple or 
\par 
  branched at base ............................................................................... {\b 27. lanata}
\par 
4 Plant sparsely tomentose with short, crispate hairs;
\par 
  stems branched at or above the middle ........................................ {\b 28. tuberosa}
\par 
3 Rootstock without a tuber
\par 
5 Involucre densely villous-lanate at least on outer
\par 
  bracts
\par 
6 Stems simple, leafy only at or near the base, with 
\par 
  2-3 scale-like leaves above; involucre 10-15 mm ........................ {\b 26. albicans}
\par 
6 Stems simple or branched, leafy for at least the lower
\par 
  half; involucre often more than 15 mm 
\par 
7 Pappus-hairs plumose throughout .................................................. {\b 25. cretica} 
\par 
7 Pappus-hairs plumose only below ............................................... {\b 22. ensifolia}
\par 
5 Involucre glabrous or shortly tomentose to very 
\par 
  sparsely villous at base
\par 
8 Hairs on achenes less than 3 mm; pappus purplish-brown ............... {\b 24. doria}
\par 
8 Hairs on achenes more than 3 mm; pappus pale reddish-brown 
\par 
9 Pappus 2½-3 times as long as achene ............................................ {\b 23. hirsuta} 
\par 
9 Pappus 1½-2 times as long as achene ............................................ {\b 25. cretica}
\par 
1 Achenes glabrous but sometimes scabrid or tuberculate-squarrose
\par 
10 Ligules lilac or purplish on both surfaces, very rarely white
\par 
11 Plant not more than 8 cm; leaves recurved ................................. {\b 6. purpurea}
\par 
11 Plant usually more than 8 cm, with straight leaves
\par 
12 Rootstock densely fibrous at apex .............................................. {\b 6. purpurea}
\par 
12 Rootstock not fibrous at apex ..................................................... {\b 5. undulata}
\par 
10 Ligules yellow inside, yellow, reddish or purplish outside
\par 
13 Achenes with a pale tubular base 1/10-1/3 as long as 
\par 
   rest of achene
\par 
14 Outer achenes 13-28 mm, with squamulose ribs; leaves 
\par 
   entire, sometimes undulate at margin
\par 
15 Stems 5-30 cm; leaves 5-15 cm, usually crowded in 
\par 
   middle or lower part of stem; involucre 18-27 mm .......................... {\b 3. mollis}
\par 
15 Stems less than 5 cm; leaves 3-6 cm, all basal; 
\par 
   involucre 10-15 mm ........................................................................... {\b 4. idaea}
\par 
14 Outer achenes 6-17 mm, with smooth ribs; leaves 
\par 
   usually pinnatisect
\par 
16 Monocarpic; ligules less than 1½ times as long as
\par 
   involucre, yellow outside .............................................................. {\b 2. laciniata}
\par 
16 Polycarpic; ligules 1½-2 times as long as involucre,
\par 
   reddish or purplish outside .................................................................. {\b 1. cana}
\par 
13 Achenes without a pale tubular base
\par 
17 Rootstock densely fibrous at apex
\par 
18 Stems usually leafless except for 3-6 scale-like 
\par 
   leaves; leaves at least 3 mm wide ................................................. {\b 8. austriaca}
\par 
18 Stems leafy throughout; leaves 1-2 mm wide .............................. {\b 20. pusilla}
\par 
17 Rootstock not fibrous at apex
\par 
19 Stems fistular, arising from a long-creeping, slender
\par 
   rootstock; leaves fistular ............................................................. {\b 19. fistulosa}
\par 
19 Stems and leaves not fistular; rootstock vertical or 
\par 
   shortly oblique 
20 All achenes with smooth ribs
\par 
21 Pappus-hairs plumose only at the base, reddish-brown ............... {\b 21. villosa}
\par 
21 Pappus-hairs mostly plumose for most of their length,
\par 
   dirty white
\par 
22 Achenes 15-25 mm 
\par 
23 Stems densely leafy almost to the apex ................................ {\b 7. graminifolia}
\par 
23 Stems leafy only in lower half or leafless 
\par 
24 Stems leafless; leaves 1-2 mm wide, suberect, with 
\par 
   densely crowded, rather prominent, rigid sheaths .................. {\b 12. transtagana}
\par 
24 Stems leafy at least near the base; leaves at least 
\par 
   2 mm wide, not densely crowded, without rigid sheaths .............. {\b 11. baetica}
\par 
22 Achenes less than 15 mm
\par 
25 Leaves less than 3 mm wide; rootstock with an ovoid tuber ....... {\b 20. pusilla}
\par 
25 Leaves at least 3 mm wide; rootstock without a tuber
\par 
26 Upper cauline leaves ovate-cordate at base; achenes 12-14 mm .. {\b 18. scyria}
\par 
26 Upper cauline leaves ± linear, not cordate at base;
\par 
   achenes 7-11 mm
\par 
27 Plant glabrous; ligules 1-1½ times as long as involucre ......... {\b 10. parviflora}
\par 
27 More or less arachnoid-lanate at least at base of stems,
\par 
   leaves and involucre; ligules 1½-2 times as long as involucre ....... {\b 9. humilis}
\par 
20 At least the outer achenes with rugose, scabrid or
\par 
   lamellate ribs 
\par 
28 Pappus-hairs reddish-brown ......................................................... {\b 21. villosa} 
\par 
28 Pappus-hairs dirty white
\par 
29 Plant ± densely arachnoid-tomentose or -lanate throughout;
\par 
   leaves usually crowded in middle or lower part of stem .................. {\b 3. mollis}
\par 
29 Plant subglabrous, or sparsely arachnoid-tomentose or 
\par 
   -lanate only at base of stems, leaves or involucre;
\par 
   leaves mostly basal 
\par 
30 Stems less than 5 cm (Kriti) ............................................................. {\b 4. idaea} 
\par 
30 Stems more than 10 cm
\par 
31 Stems leafless or with 1 small leaf
\par 
32 Outermost involucral bracts at least ½ as long as 
\par 
   inner-achenes c. 10 mm ................................................................ {\b 14. aristata}
\par 
32 Outermost involucral bracts less than ½ as long as 
\par 
   inner; achenes c. 20 mm ........................................................... {\b 17. brencaulis}
\par 
31 Stems with several to many leaves
\par 
33 Leaves densely crowded with prominent, erect, sheathing
\par 
   bases (Greece) ........................................................................... {\b 13. crocifolia}
\par 
33 Leaves not densely crowded, without prominent, erect bases
\par 
34 Stems simple or branched below the middle; leaves irregularly
\par 
   dentate, usually with at least some linear teeth ......................... {\b 16. crispatula}
\par 
34 Stems usually branched at or above the middle; leaves 
\par 
   entire to weakly dentate
\par 
35 Leaves up to 6 cm wide, not folded, sometimes undulate
\par 
   at margin .................................................................................... {\b 15. hispanica}
\par 
35 Leaves not more than 0·8 cm wide, folded, not undulate ............ {\b 11. baetica}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. PODOSPERMUM (DC.) Boiss. Leaves usually 1- to 2-pinnatisect. Achenes glabrous, with smooth ribs, with a pale, tubular base c. 1/3 as long as the rest of the achene.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. cana} (C.A. Meyer) O. Hoffm. in Engler & Prantl, {\i Natürl. Pflanzenfam.} {\b 4}({\b 5}): 365 (1893) ({\i Podospermum canum} C.A. Meyer). Subglabrous to floccose-tomentose perennial 5-60 cm, with short rootstock and taproot. Stems several, usually branched up to about the middle, erect or ascending, more or less trigonous and sulcate above. Basal leaves 3-20 × (0·2-)1-5 cm, pinnatisect with remote, linear to linear-lanceolate, entire, acute segments, rarely leaves linear, entire; cauline similar but often entire. Involucre 12-20 mm, up to 25 mm in fruit. Ligules 1½-2 times as long as involucre, pale yellow, reddish or purplish outside. Achenes 6-10 mm, cylindrical, with strong ribs, brownish or greyish. Pappus-hairs 1-2 times as long as achene, plumose, dirty or brownish-white. 2n = 14.{\i  E.C. & S.E. Europe, extending westwards to Sardegna.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, K,E ) Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. laciniata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 791 (1753) ({\i Podospermum laciniatum} (L.) DC.; incl.{\i  P. calcitrapifolium }(Vahl) DC.,{\i  P. willkommii }Schultz Bip., {\i Scorzonera resedifolia} L.). Like {\b 1} but annual, biennial or sometimes a monocarpic perennial; stems terete and finely striate above; leaf-segments sometimes obovate and subobtuse, sometimes pinnatisect; involucre 7-20 mm, up to 40 mm in fruit; ligules equalling or up to 1 1/3 times as long as
\par 

\par 
318}
\par