{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. hispidissima} (Bartl.) Koch, {\i Syn. Fl. Germ.} ed. 2, 484 (1844). Biennial. Stems 30-40 cm, with numerous unequal, rigid hairs. Leaves with numerous unequal hairs; basal 40-95 × 15-30 mm, narrowly elliptical to lanceolate in outline, pinnatisect with linear to narrowly triangular lobes, subpetiolate; cauline similar but smaller. Capitula numerous; peduncles thickened above but constricted immediately below apex. Involucre 11-15 × 10-12 mm; bracts lanceolate, acute, strongly pectinate-ciliate and with rigid hairs on the median line; outer bracts up to 2/3 as long as inner. Achenes 5-6 mm, dark brown, strongly transversely muricate, slightly narrowed at apex. •{\i  W. Jugoslavia, just extending to N.E. Italy}. ?Gr It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. P. scaberrima} Guss. in Ten., {\i Fl. Nap.}{\b  4}, {\i Syll}.: 113 (1830). Biennial. Stems 30-70 cm, with numerous unequal, rigid hairs. Leaves with numerous unequal, rigid hairs; basal 40-90 × 15-25 mm, narrowly elliptical or lanceolate in outline, pinnatisect with narrow lobes, subpetiolate; cauline similar but smaller. Capitula few, solitary at the ends of long branches. Involucre 9-10 × 6-8 mm; bracts lanceolate, acute, with dense, short tomentum and sometimes a few short, rigid hairs; outer bracts up to half as long as inner. Achenes 5-6 mm, dark brown, strongly transversely muricate, shortly beaked. {\i Dry calcareous places. • S. Italy; N.W. Jugoslavia }({\i Velebit}). It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. P. hieracioides} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 792 (1753). Biennial to perennial. Stems 15-100 cm, with few to numerous, unequal, rigid hairs. Leaves with few to numerous, more or less rigid hairs; basal and lower cauline 60-140 × 10-50 mm, lanceolate, ovate narrowly elliptical or oblong, obtuse to acute, entire to dentate narrowed into petiole; middle and upper cauline similar but smaller , sessile, more or less amplexicaul. Capitula few to numerous. Involucral bracts lanceolate to narrowly elliptical, obtuse to acute, the outer about half as long as inner. Achenes 3-6 mm, reddish-brown, weakly transversely muricate, shortly beaked. 2n = 10.{\i  Most of Europe}. All except Az Bl Cr Fa Hb Is No Sb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Capitula on very short peduncles, crowded at apex of stems; 
\par 
  lateral capitula often sessile or nearly so .......................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b spinulosa}
\par 
1 Capitula on ± long peduncles
\par 
2 Involucre 12-15 mm, with dark hairs ........................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b grandiflora}
\par 
2 Involucre 8-13 mm, with pale hairs
\par 
3 Involucre 8-11 mm .......................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b longifolia}
\par 
3 Involucre 10-13 mm
\par 
4 Involucre greenish ....................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b hieracioides}
\par 
4 Involucre blackish .............................................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b villarsii}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b longifolia} (Boiss. & Reuter) P.D. Sell, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 248 (1976) ({\i P. longifolia} Boiss. & Reuter): Capitula on more or less long peduncles. Involucre 8-11 mm, greenish, with dense short hairs and few to numerous, longer, pale, rigid, simple hairs. •{\i  Mountains of S. Spain and N. Portugal}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b hieracioides}: Capitula on erect, more or less long peduncles. Involucre 11-13 mm, greenish, with short hairs and few to numerous, longer, pale, rigid, simple hairs. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b spinulosa} (Bertol. ex Guss.) Arcangeli, {\i Comp. Fl. Ital.} 418 (1882): Capitula crowded at apex of stems on very short peduncles, the lateral capitula often sessile or nearly so. Involucre 9-11 mm, greenish, glabrous or sometimes with a few pale, rigid hairs mainly on the median line of each bract.{\i  S. & S.C. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b villarsii} (Jordan) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 467 (1819) ({\i P. pyrenaica} sensu Coste, non L.,{\i  P. hieracioides} subsp. {\i crepoides} (Sauter) Nyman & subsp.{\i  sonchoides} (Vest) Thell.): Capitula on erect, more or less long peduncles. Involucre 10-13 mm, blackish, glabrous or with sparse, pale hairs. •{\i  W. & C. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b grandiflora} (Ten.) Arcangeli, {\i Comp. Fl. Ital.} 418 (1882) (subsp.{\i  auriculata} (Schultz Bip.) Hayek, subsp. {\i paleacea} (Vest) Domin & Podp.): Like subsp. ({\b d}) but involucre 12-15 mm, with dense, dark hairs. •{\i  C. Europe, N. part of Balkan peninsula and Italy}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. P. pauciflora} Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 1557 (1803). Annual. Stems 10-50 cm, with numerous unequal, rigid hairs. Leaves with few to numerous, more or less rigid hairs; basal 30-120 × 5-15 mm, narrowly elliptical, oblong-elliptical or oblanceolate, entire to sinuate-dentate, narrowed into petiole; lower cauline similar to basal, the upper smaller, narrower, sessile, sometimes semiamplexicaul. Capitula few; peduncles long, slightly thickened after anthesis. Involucre 10-12 × 7-10 mm- bracts linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, mostly acute, with short stellate and longer rigid hairs mainly on the median line; outer bracts patent, up to half as long as inner. Achenes 4·5-5 mm, dark brown, more or less curved, strongly transversely muricate, shortly beaked.{\i  Balkan peninsula and Aegean region; Krym; S.E. France.} Al Bu Cr Ga Gr ?Hs Ju Rs (K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. P. sprengerana} (L.) Poiret in Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  5}: 310 (1804). Annual. Stems 10-50 cm, with numerous unequal, rigid hairs. Leaves with numerous rigid hairs; basal 40-90 × 6-20 mm, mostly oblanceolate, entire to sinuate-dentate, narrowed into petiole; lower cauline similar to basal, semiamplexicaul, the upper smaller, narrower and often entire. Capitula numerous; peduncles often short, not thickened after anthesis. Involucre 8-12 × 6-9 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, with dense rigid hairs, the outer up to half as long as inner. Achenes 2·5-3 mm, dark brown, more or less curved, strongly transversely muricate, without a beak.{\i  Balkan peninsula and Aegean region; N. Italy and S.E. France.} Al Bu Cr Ga Gr ?Hs It Ju Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. P. willkommii} (Schultz Bip.) Nyman,{\i  Syll.} 53 (1854-1855) ({\i Spitzelia willkommii} Schultz Bip.). Stem 10-50 cm, with rigid hairs. Leaves with rigid hairs; basal c. 30 × 5-6 mm, oblanceolate to oblong, sinuate-dentate to pinnatifid, narrowed into petiole; cauline long-acute, dentate or the upper entire. Capitula few; peduncles long, thickened after anthesis. Involucre 10-12 × 7-10 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, with rigid hairs mainly on the median line. Achenes 5-6 mm, tomentose, beaked; outer curved, with short, scarious pappus; inner with pappus of plumose hairs.{\i  Dry scrub. • S.W. Spain,} ?{\i S.E. Portugal.} Hs ?Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 161.        Scorzonera }           L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  (incl. {\i Gelasia} Cass., {\i Podospermum} DC.)
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.O. Chater.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Usually perennial herbs. Stems solitary to several. Leaves entire to pinnatisect. Capitula solitary to many. Involucral bracts in several rows. Receptacle without scales. Ligules yellow, whitish or purplish. Achenes usually cylindrical, not or obscurely beaked, without an annulus; pappus of several rows of hairs, usually all plumose at least at base, or the outermost (rarely all) simple and scabrid.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: S. J. Lipschitz,{\i  Fragmentae Monographiae Generis Scorzonerae.}{\b  1}. Moskva. 1935. {\b 2}. Moskva. 1939.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Because of uncertainty about the morphological nature of the underground parts in this genus, these are called {\i rootstocks} in this account.
\par 

\par 
317}
\par