{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 105. G. suecicum} (Sterner) Ehrend., {\i Sitz.-Ber. Akad. Wiss. Wien }({\i Math.-Nat. Kl., Abt.} 1){\b  169}: 417 (1960) ({\i G. pumilum} subsp.{\i  suecicum} Sterner). Plant greenish when dry, caespitose, with few non-flowering stems at anthesis. Stems 8-20(-30) cm, ascending to erect, slender, less than 0·7 mm in diameter, glabrous or with patent hairs; middle internodes 4-6 cm, 3-6 times as long as the leaves. Leaves 7-12(-15) × (0·6-)0·9-1·3(-1·7) mm, in whorls of (6-)7-8(-9), linear-oblanceolate, 7½-10½ times as long as wide. Inflorescence occupying more than half of the stem, laxly pyramidal, the partial inflorescences dense; pedicels c. 0·5 mm. Corolla 1-2·3(-3) mm in diameter. Fruit 1-1·2 mm, acutely papillose. 2n = 22. {\i Dry grassland and scrub. • N.E. Germany; S. & C. Sweden.} Ge Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 106. G. oelandicum} (Sterner & Hyl.) Ehrend.,{\i  op. cit.} 418 (1960) ({\i G. pumilum} subsp. {\i oelandicum} Sterner & Hyl.). Plant metallic green when dry, densely caespitose, with many non-flowering stems at anthesis. Stems (4-)6-15(-20) cm, ascending, less than 0·6 mm in diameter, glabrous, red at the base; middle internodes up to 4 cm, 3-5 times as long as the leaves. Leaves (4-)10 × 0·9-1·5 mm, in whorls of (8-)9(-10), linear-oblanceolate, 6-8 times as long as wide. Inflorescence pyramidal, lax; partial inflorescences dense; pedicels c. 0·5 mm. Corolla 2·2-2·8 mm in diameter. Fruit c. 1 mm, acutely papillose. 2n = 22. {\i Stony and grassy places. • Öland. }Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 107. G. cracoviense} Ehrend., {\i op. cit.} 419 (1960). Like {\b 106} but the middle internodes up to 2·5 cm, 1½-2½ times as long as the leaves; leaves mostly in whorls of 6-7; inflorescence corymbose; pedicels up to 0·9 mm. 2n = 22.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • S. Poland }({\i Olsztyn, near Krakow}). Po.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 108. G. sudeticum} Tausch, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 18}: 347 (1835). Plant usually blackish when dry, laxly caespitose, with some non-flowering stems at anthesis. Stems (5-)7-20(-30) cm, ascending to erect, stout, glabrous; middle internodes mostly 1½-2½ times as long as the leaves. Leaves (5-)8-14(-23) × (0·8-)1-1·2(-3·5) mm, in whorls of (6-)7(-8), oblanceolate, 5½-8½ times as long as wide, widest just below the hyaline apex, rather thick, those at the base soon deciduous, the margin almost always smooth. Inflorescence broadly obovoid, corymbose; pedicels 1·5-2 mm, more or less divaricate after flowering. Corolla c. 3 mm in diameter. Fruit c. 1·3 mm, blackish, papillose.{\i  Rocky places, often on basaltic or serpentine soils. • Mountains of N.W. Czechoslovakia and adjacent territories.} Cz Ge Po.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   The populations of the higher Sudeten mountains approximate to {\b 112}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 109. G. sterneri} Ehrend., {\i Sitz-Ber. Akad. Wiss. Wien }({\i Math.Nat. Kl., Abt.} I){\b  169}: 420 (1960). Plant usually dark to blackish when dry, caespitose, with many non-flowering stems at anthesis. Stems (5-)8-15(-25) cm, ascending, slender, usually glabrous, rarely with patent hairs, often red at the base; middle internodes 2-5 cm, usually 2-3½ times as long as the leaves. Leaves (5-)7-11 (-15) × 0·9-1·6(-2·3) mm, in whorls of (6-)7-8(-10), 6½-8½ times as long as wide, narrowly oblanceolate, widest above the middle, those at the base more or less persistent; apex hyaline. Inflorescence pyramidal; partial inflorescences lax; pedicels 1-2 mm. Corolla 2·3-3·3 mm in diameter. Fruit 1·1-1·4 mm, acutely papillose. 2n = 22,44. {\i Dry grassland and rocky ground. • N.W. Europe}. Br Da Fa Ge Hb No.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   A variable species. Slender diploid plants are found on the W. coast of Britain and in Ireland; elsewhere only tetraploids are known. The compact plants of the Faeroer are connected with {\b 110}. Hybrid intermediates with {\b 104} are known from Denmark, and with {\b 118} (with pentaploid and hexaploid chromosome numbers) from Britain.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 110. G. normanii} O.C. Dahl, {\i Skr. Vid.-Selsk. Kristiania }{\b 1914}({\b 4}): 136 (1915). Like {\b 109} but habit more compact; internodes usually 1½-2½ times as long as the leaves; leaves (3·5-)5-10 (-18) × (0·6-)1-1·8(-2·3) mm, broadly oblanceolate, usually 5-7 times as long as wide; corolla 3-4 mm in diameter, yellowish-white. 2n = 44. {\i Heaths and dry grassland. • Iceland; two stations in W. Norway.} Is No.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 111. G. austriacum} Jacq.,{\i  Fl. Austr.}{\b  1}: 51 (1773). Plant shining metallic green when dry, caespitose, with stolons. Stems (8-)12-20(-30) cm, scarcely more than 0·8 mm in diameter, usually glabrous and smooth, sometimes with patent hairs, red at the base; middle internodes (2-)3-4(-5) cm, 1½-2½ times as long as the leaves. Leaves (7-)10-20(-28) × 0·5-1·2(-2·2) mm, usually in whorls of 7-9, linear-lanceolate to linear, (10-)11-24(-27) times as long as wide, somewhat coriaceous; margin more or less revolute, with some patent or retrorse scabridity, sometimes glabrescent or hairy. Inflorescence with long branches almost from the base, broadly ovoid, many-flowered, the partial inflorescences lax; pedicels 1-2 mm. Corolla 1-3 mm in diameter, whitish; lobes acute. Fruit 1-1·5 mm, smooth or obtusely papillose. 2n = 22, 44. {\i Grassland and coniferous woodland; calcicole. • S.C. Europe, from the E. Alps to the W. Carpathians.} Au Cz Hu ?It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    Various eco-geographical diploid and tetraploid races may deserve the rank of subspecies. Plants transitional to {\b 112} occur in the Alps and Carpathians.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 112. G. anisophyllon} Vill., {\i Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 20 (1779). Plant greenish, brownish or blackish when dry, often not shining, caespitose, with stolons. Stems (3-)7-15(-25) cm, slender to stout, glabrous and smooth, or with patent hairs, scarcely reddish at the base; middle internodes often less than 3 cm, 1-2 times as long as the leaves. Leaves (4-)7-16(-21) × (0·5-)1-2(-3) mm, usually in whorls of 7-9, oblanceolate, usually 6-12 times as long as wide, widest in the upper 1/3 to 1/5, usually abruptly contracted to a short hyaline apex; margin more or less revolute, with patent or retrorse (or rarely antrorse) scabridity, rarely glabrescent or with patent hairs. Inflorescence corymbose to broadly ovoid, few- to many-flowered; pedicels 1-2 mm. Corolla 2-4 mm in diameter, usually yellowish-white. Fruit 1·2-1·8 mm, nearly smooth to obtusely (rarely acutely) papillose. 2n = 22, 44, 66, 88, 110. • {\i Mountains of S. & C. Europe from the Cevennes to Bulgaria and northwards to the C. Carpathians.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  A polymorphic polyploid complex. The cytotypes replace one another vicariously both ecologically and geographically, but morphologically are often scarcely distinguishable.{\b  G. tenue} Vill.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1779) (diploid),{\b  G. alpestre} Gaudin in Roemer & Schultes, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  3}: 225 (1818) (octoploid) and others have been described as species. It is possible that a classification into subspecies might be made. Separation is made additionally difficult by the occurrence of hybrid intermediates with other species, e.g. in the W. Alps with {\b 113} and {\b 115}, in the C. Alps with {\b 103} and {\b 90} and at lower altitudes of the E. Alps and the W. Carpathians with {\b 111}. {\b 99} is sometimes very similar.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 113. G. pseudohelveticum} Ehrend., {\i Sitz.-Ber. Akad. Wiss. Wien} ({\i Math.-Nat. Kl., Abt}. I) {\b 169}: 415 (1960). Plant rather dirty green when dry, densely caespitose, with stolons, a tap-root and numerous ascending non-flowering and flowering stems. Stems (5-)8-12(-15) cm, glabrous and smooth; middle internodes
\par 

\par 
32}
\par