{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 hairy. Involucral bracts c. 42. Ligules as long as corolla-tube. Achenes c. 3·75 × 1·2 mm, oblong-elliptical, rugose between the ribs, with wide margin; pappus c. 7·5 mm, deciduous. 2n = 18. {\i Marshes and other wet places. From England, S. Fennoscandia and N.C. Russia southwards to S. France, N. Italy and Bulgaria.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge †He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs ( ?N, B, C, W, K, E) Sa Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. crassifolius} Pourret ex Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 1509 (1803). Perennial; stem 10-40 cm, simple, glabrous. Leaves glabrous, auriculate, entire to pinnatifid, irregularly spinose-dentate, the lower spathulate, the upper oblong to oblong-elliptical, the uppermost triangular-ovate. Capitula axillary and terminal, subsessile. Involucral bracts c. 35. Ligules about as long as corolla-tube. Achenes 2-3 × 1-1·4 mm, elliptical to oblong-elliptical, rugose between the ribs; pappus 7-10 mm, persistent. {\i Damp saline or calcareous soils. • C. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. arvensis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 793 (1753). Perennial, far-creeping; stem 30-150 cm, simple or branched. Leaves glabrous, with dentate margins, the lower entire to pinnatipartite with triangular lobes, the upper larger, pinnatipartite to pinnatisect, with rounded, often dentate auricles. Capitula terminal, pedunculate. Involucral bracts 38-50. Ligules about as long as corolla-tube. Achenes 2·5-3·5 × 1-1·5 mm, elliptical, rugose between the ribs; pappus 10-14 mm, persistent. 2n = 36, 54. {\i Cultivated and waste ground, and on maritime sands and shingle. Throughout Europe except for parts of the south-west and some of the islands.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Sa Su Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  There seems to be no clear correlation in Europe between chromosome number and subspecific differentiation.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b arvensis}: Capitula and upper parts of peduncles densely glandular-hairy. Longest involucral bracts 14-17 mm. {\i Throughout the range of the species, except for parts of the Balkan peninsula}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b uliginosus} (Bieb.) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 433 (1879) ({\i S. uliginosus} Bieb.): Capitula and peduncles glabrous. Longest involucral bracts 10-15 mm.{\i  Throughout much of the range of the species, but absent from parts of the north and west.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. pustulatus} Willk. in Willk. & Lange,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  2}: 242 (1865). Perennial; stem 15-30 cm, branched, woody and with greyish-yellow bark below. Lower leaves few, the upper grouped below inflorescence, white-tomentose at base, pinnatisect, with ovate to elliptical, entire lobes. Involucral bracts c. 24. Ligules about twice as long as corolla-tube. Achenes 3·5-5 × 1·5 mm, narrowly rectangular or more or less elliptical, often curved, slightly rugose between the ribs; pappus c. 8 mm, most of the long hairs deciduous and the short cottony ones persistent.{\i  Calcareous rocks. S.E. Spain} ({\i near Almeria}). Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 167.           Cephalorrhynchus}             Boiss.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.D. Sell.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Biennial or perennial herbs, with more or less tuberous roots. Stems usually solitary, much-branched above. Leaves pinnatifid, the cauline often more or less amplexicaul. Capitula numerous. Involucral bracts in several rows. Receptacular scales absent. Ligules yellow. Achenes fusiform, beaked; pappus of 2 rows of simple hairs, the outer much shorter than the inner.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. tuberosus} (Steven) Schchian, {\i Not. Syst. Inst. Bot. Thbiliss.} {\b 23}: 99 (1963) ({\i C. glandulosus} Boiss., {\i Mycelis glandulosa} (Boiss.) Hayek, {\i M. hispida} (DC.) Hayek). Stem up to 1 m, glandular-hairy. Leaves 3-13 × 1-8 cm, glabrous, ovate to elliptical in outline, pinnatifid or the upper dentate or entire, the lobes dentate; lower leaves with winged petioles, the upper sessile. Involucre 10-13 mm, cylindrical; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse, glabrous or with a few glandular hairs. Achenes 6-8 mm, 5- to 15-ribbed, the pale beak 1/3-1/2 as long as the blackish-brown body.{\i  Rocky, mountain woods. C. part of Balkan peninsula, S.W. Romania; Krym.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs(K). ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 168.               Steptorhamphus}             Bunge
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V. Feráková & P.D. Sell.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs with tuberous roots. Stems solitary, simple or branched. Leaves entire to pinnatifid, amplexicaul. Capitula few to numerous. Involucral bracts in several rows. Receptacle without scales. Ligules yellow or violet. Achenes compressed, with a very long, slender beak; pappus of 2 rows of simple hairs, the outer few, forming a very short fringe.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. tuberosus} (Jacq.) Grossh., {\i Fl. Kavk.}{\b  4}: 258 (1934) ({\i Lactuca cretica} Desf.). Stem 40-60(-100) cm, sometimes branched above. Lower leaves entire to runcinate-pinnatifid, sagittate-amplexicaul, hairy; uppermost cauline lanceolate, entire. Capitula 1-2. Involucral bracts up to 40 mm, lanceolate to ovate, usually purplish-tinged, glabrous or nearly so. Ligules yellow. Achene 6-15 mm; body elliptical, 1- to 3-ribbed, minutely hairy and rugulose; beak pale, 1½-3 times as long as body.{\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula and Aegean region; Krym.} Bu Cr Gr Rs (K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants with lilac or purple ligules but otherwise similar to {\b 1} occur in S.W. Asia; they have been reported from Krym, but have not been seen there in recent years.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 169.              Lactuca}             L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  (incl.{\i  Scariola} F. W. Schmidt)
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V. Ferakova.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs. Stem usually solitary, branched. Leaves entire to pinnatifid, often prickly. Capitula few to numerous. Involucre cylindrical; bracts in several rows. Receptacle without scales. Ligules yellow or bluish. Achenes compressed, beaked, usually with ribs; pappus of 2 equal rows of simple hairs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  In the descriptions of achenes, the length includes the beak, and the number of ribs is given for one side.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b L. singularis} Wilmott,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 68}: 79 (1930) ({\i L. grosii} Pau & Font Quer), from near the E. end of the Sierra Nevada, S. Spain, is unlike any other European species of {\i Lactuca.} It has the stem up to 20 cm, leaves obovate, entire to shallowly dentate, and blue florets. The available material has only unripe achenes which have a short beak; in the absence of ripe achenes the sectional and even the generic position of the species is uncertain.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Body of achene darker than beak
\par 
2 Ligules blue or lilac; achenes with 1-3 ribs
\par 
3 Achenes obovate ....................................................................... {\b 16. tenerrima}
\par 
3 Achenes narrowly elliptical
\par 
4 Stem branched from the base; achenes greyish ............................. {\b 17. graeca}
\par 
4 Stem branched only in the upper part; achenes black ................ {\b 15. perennis}
\par 
2 Ligules yellow; achenes with at least 5 ribs
\par 
5 Achenes black or blackish
\par 
6 Lateral veins of underside of leaves smooth .................................. {\b 13. virosa}
\par 
6 Lateral veins of underside of leaves spinulose ............................... {\b 14. livida}
\par 
5 Achenes pale
\par 
7 Cauline leaves orbicular to broadly lanceolate;
\par 
  inflorescence usually a pyramidal panicle
\par 

\par 
328}
\par