{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 lose; beak 0·3-0·4 cm. Pappus 1·1-1·5 cm, usually shorter than achene. {\i S.E. Europe, from Turkey to Krym.} Bu Rs (K) Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Perhaps conspecific with {\i T. latifolius} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 1}({\b 4}): 23 (1844), from Anatolia.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. T. floccosus} Waldst. & Kit., {\i Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  2}: 116 (1802). Biennial or perennial with a vertical, cylindrical rootstock. Stems 20-50 cm, branched, more or less lanate. Leaves linear, widened at base, the margins undulate. Peduncles not inflated; involucral bracts 7-12. Ligules pale yellow. Achenes 2·3-3·5 cm; beak 0·1-0·3 cm; annulus shortly hairy. Pappus 1-1·5 cm, usually shorter than achene. •{\i  E.C. Europe, extending to the Baltic region.} Cz Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (B).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b floccosus}: Involucral bracts 8, equalling the ligules. Achenes muricate. 2n = 12.{\i  River-sands. Valley of middle and lower Danube}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b heterospermus} (Schweigger) C. Regel,{\i  Scripta Hort. Bot. Univ. Vyt. Magni}{\b  5}: 42 (1937) ({\i T. heterospermus }Schweigger): Involucral bracts 8-12, usually shorter than ligules. Achenes smooth. {\i Maritime sands. Baltic region, from Poland to Latvia}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. lithuanicus} (DC.) Boriss. in Bobrov & Tzvelev,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  29}: 162 (1964), and {\b T. gorskianus} Reichenb. fil., {\i Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  19}({\b 1}): 19 (1858), are imperfectly understood variants apparently related to {\b 18}({\b b}). Both were described from S. Lithuania, and perhaps extend into White Russia.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. T. ruthenicus} Besser ex Krasch. & S. Nikitin,{\i  Otc. Pocv.Bot. Kazakhst. Eksped.}{\b  4}({\b 2}): 292 (1930). Like {\b 18} but stems up to 75 cm; involucral bracts shorter than the dark yellow ligules; achenes 1-3 cm, without beak, the annulus sometimes glabrous; pappus 0·9-1·8 cm. {\i S. Russia and E. Ukraine.} Rs (C, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perennial; pappus shorter than achene ............................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b tanaiticus}
\par 
1 Biennial; pappus as long as or longer than achene
\par 
2 Achene 1·5-3 cm; pappus 1·5-1·8 cm ........................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b ruthenicus}
\par 
2 Achene 1-1·4 cm; pappus c. 1 cm ................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b donetzicus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ruthenicus}: Biennial 30-80 cm. Involucral bracts 7-12. Achenes 1·5-3 cm, with alternately smooth and minutely tuberculate ribs; annulus hairy. Pappus 1·5-1·8 cm.{\i  Sandy hillsides and river-valleys. S.E. Russia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b donetzicus} (Artemczuk) I.B.K. Richardson,{\i  Bot. Jour.Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 270 (1976) ({\i T. donetzicus} Artemczuk): Biennial 10-40 cm. Involucral bracts 7-8. Achenes 1-1·4 cm, weakly scabrid; annulus glabrous. Pappus c. 1 cm. {\i Sandy places, mostly in river-valleys. • N.E. Ukraine, S.C. Russia}.
\par 
 ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b tanaiticus} (Artemczuk) C. Regel, {\i Scripta Hort. Bot. Univ. Vyt. Magni} {\b 5}: 44 (1937) ({\i T. tanaiticus} Artemczuk): Perennial up to 75 cm. Involucral bracts 7(8). Achenes 2·5 cm, squamulose; annulus hairy. Pappus 0·9-1 cm. {\i Sandy steppes. • E. Ukraine, S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. T. hybridus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 789 (1753) ({\i Geropogon glaber} L., {\i G. hybridus} (L.) Schultz Bip.). Glabrous annual. Stems 20-50(-80) cm, simple or branched. Leaves long-linear, subamplexicaul. Peduncles inflated; involucral bracts 8, 2-3 times as long as ligules. Ligules pinkish-lilac. Achenes fusiform, sulcate, somewhat hispid on the ribs; outer 3·5-5 cm with beak 1·5-2 cm and pappus of 5 unequal, scabrid, rigid hairs 1-2 cm; inner c. 2·5 cm, with beak c. 1 cm and pappus of plumose hairs c. 2 cm. 2n = 14. {\i Stony pastures. S. Europe.} Al Bl Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 163.          Reichardia}            Roth.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Picridium} Desf.)
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.D. Sell.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs. Stems solitary to numerous, branched. Leaves entire to deeply pinnatisect, the cauline usually amplexicaul. Capitula few to numerous. Involucral bracts in several imbricate rows, at least the outer with scarious margins and often grading into the bracts of the peduncle. Receptacle without scales. Ligules yellow, the outer often with a reddish stripe on outer face, sometimes purplish at base. At least the outer achenes 4- to 5-angled and transversely rugose; inner achenes always paler, often smooth, probably often sterile; pappus of numerous rows of soft simple hairs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 All achenes transversely rugose; ligules purplish at base
\par 
2 Involucre 10-15 × 10-15 mm ....................................................... {\b 1. tingitana}
\par 
2 Involucre 15-22 × 15-30 mm ....................................................... {\b 2. gaditana} 
\par 
1 Inner achenes not transversely rugose; ligules yellow at base
\par 
3 Outermost involucral bracts 3-5 × 1·5-2·5 mm, with a 
\par 
  scarious margin not more than 0·5 mm wide ............................... {\b 3. picroides}
\par 
3 Outermost involucral bracts 4-7 × 2·5-3·5 mm, with a 
\par 
  scarious margin up to 1·25 mm wide ......................................... {\b 4. intermedia}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. tingitana} (L.) Roth, {\i Bot. Abh.} 35 (1787) ({\i Picridium tingitanum} (L.) Desf.). Glabrous annual to perennial. Stems 4-35 cm. Leaves smooth to densely white-papillose; basal leaves 2-17 × 0·5-7 cm, oblanceolate, obtuse to acute, dentate to pinnatifid, narrowed at base into a short, broadly winged petiole; cauline 1-6, similar to basal or linear, sessile and more or less amplexicaul. Capitula 1-4; peduncles long, thickened at the apex. Involucre 10-15 × 10-15 mm; bracts ovate, obtuse to acute, with wide scarious margins, glabrous. Ligules yellow, purplish at base, the outer with a red stripe on outer face, about twice as long as involucre. Achenes 1·5-2·5 mm, 4- to 5-angled, all strongly transversely rugose. 2n = 16. {\i Mediterranean region.} Bl Cr Gr Hs Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. R. gaditana} (Willk.) Coutinho, {\i Fl. Port.} 676 (1913) ({\i Picridium gaditanum }Willk.). Like {\b 1} but leaves never white-papillose, often with spinulose-denticulate margins; involucre 15-22 × 15-30 mm, the outer bracts with the scarious margins often pale brownish and plicate; ligules c. 1½ times as long as involucre; inner achenes less rugose than outer. 2n = 16. {\i Sandy and rocky places near the sea. • S.W. & N.W. Spain, W. & S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. R. picroides} (L.) Roth,{\i  Bot. Abh.} 35 (1787) ({\i Picridium vulgare} Desf.,{\i  R. macrophylla} Vis. & Pancic). Glabrous perennial. Stems 10-45 cm. Leaves smooth or more or less papillose; basal 2-13 × 0·5-2·5 cm, oblanceolate or linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, entire to pinnatisect with patent lobes, long-attenuate at base into a winged petiole; lower cauline similar to basal but sessile, amplexicaul, the upper smaller and often more or less entire. Capitula 1-5; peduncles long, with numerous small, ovate, acuminate bracts which have a scarious margin. Involucre 10-20 × 8-14 mm, glabrous; outermost bracts 3-5 × 1·5-2·5 mm, ovate, with a scarious margin up to 0·5 mm wide, the inner lanceolate, obtuse, usually with a narrow scarious margin. Ligules yellow, the outer usually with a dark stripe on outer face, 1½-2 times as long as involucre. Achenes 2-3 mm, the outer 4- to 5-angled, transversely rugose, the inner smooth and appearing sterile. 2n = 14. {\i Cultivated ground and waste places. S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. R. intermedia} (Schultz Bip.) Coutinho, {\i Fl. Port.} 676 (1913) ({\i Picridium intermedium} Schultz Bip.). Like {\b 3} but often annual;
\par 
 
\par 
325}
\par