{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 plumose only at the base, with short lateral hairs; it is probably a hybrid between {\b 23} and {\b 21}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. S. doria} Degen & Bald., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  46}: 417 (1896). Like {\b 23} but leaves less rigid and with less prominent veins; achenes with hairs less than 3 mm; pappus-hairs about twice as long as achene, purplish-brown.{\i  Dry, usually rocky places. • From S.W. Jugoslavia to N.W. Greece.} Al Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. S. cretica} Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 1504 (1803). Perennial 3-45 (-60) cm, subglabrous to densely villous-lanate especially at base of stems, leaves and involucre; rootstock vertical, cylindrical, not fibrous at apex. Stems solitary or few, rigid, simple or sparingly branched, ascending or erect, leafy in lower half or throughout. Leaves 5-30(-45) × 0·1-1 cm, linear, long-attenuate at apex, rigid or flaccid, often with prominent veins. Involucre 10-30 mm, up to 40 mm in fruit, glabrous to villous or lanate. Ligules 1¼-1¾ times as long as involucre, yellow, often reddish outside. Achenes 5-10 mm, oblong-cylindrical. Pappus-hairs 1½-2 times as long as achene, plumose or scabrid, pale reddish- or whitish-brown.{\i  Rocks and dry places. S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  An extremely variable species in need of detailed study.{\b  S. araneosa} Sibth. & Sm., {\i Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  2}: 123 (1813) (incl. {\i S. eximia} Rech. fil.), from the Kikladhes (the type being probably erroneously described as coming from Cyprus), is said to differ in having the involucre 20-30 mm in flower, achenes c. 10 mm with hairs less than 2 mm, and scabrid, pale whitish-brown pappus-hairs;{\b  S. cretica} itself (incl.{\i  S. lassitica} Vierh.), from Kriti, has the involucre 10-20 mm in flower, achenes 5-8 mm with hairs 3-5 mm, and plumose, pale reddish-brown pappus-hairs. {\b S. dependens} Rech. fil., {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  33}: 17 (1934), is a very robust plant with scabrid pappus-hairs, described from Kriti; it is uncertain whether it should be united with S. araneosa, if the latter is kept separate from {\i S. cretica} chiefly on the basis of the scabrid pappus-hairs, or whether the whole variation indicated above is of a much more complex nature and might justify the recognition of several isolated populations as species or subspecies.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. S. albicans} Cosson, {\i Not.Pl. Crit.} 119 (1851). Perennial 3-17 cm, more or less densely villous-lanate throughout; rootstock vertical, cylindrical, stout, not fibrous at apex. Stems usually several, simple, ascending, leafy only at or near the base, with 2-3 scale-like leaves above. Leaves 2-10 × 0·3-0·7 cm, linear-lanceolate, flat or folded. Involucre 10-15 mm. Ligules 1¼-1½ times as long as involucre, yellow. Achenes 5-7 mm, oblong-cylindrical, with hairs c. 3 mm. Pappus-hairs about twice as long as achene, plumose for most of their length, pale reddish-brown.{\i  Dry, rocky or sandy places. • S. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. S. lanata} (L.) Hoffm.,{\i  Comment. Soc. Phys. Med. Mosq.}{\b  1}: 9 (1806). Perennial 3-22 cm, more or less sericeous-lanate throughout; rootstock vertical, with a globose tuber 2-5 cm below surface of soil, not fibrous at apex. Stems solitary or few, simple or sparingly branched at the base, ascending to erect, leafy only below. Leaves 3-10 × 0·1-0·5(-0·8) cm, linear or linear-lanceolate. Involucre 10-15 mm, up to 20 mm in fruit. Ligules 1-1¼ times as long as involucre, yellow, reddish outside. Achenes c. 4 mm. Pappus-hairs 3-4 times as long as achene, plumose, pale reddish-brown.{\i  Dry, usually rocky places. E. part of Balkan peninsula, just extending to S.W. Romania.} Bu Gr Rm Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  The plants from Europe and Anatolia have been called {\b S. sublanata} Lipsch., {\i Fragm. Monogr. Scorzonerae}{\b  2}: 42 (1939), since typical{\i  S. lanata} from the Caucasus is more densely lanate and has often wider leaves and longer ligules; some European specimens, however, match material from the Caucasus very closely, and the two plants would seem to merit subspecific distinction at the most.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. S. tuberosa} Pallas,{\i  Reise}{\b  3}: 751 (1776). Perennial 3-10 cm with the habit of a {\i Gagea}, sparsely tomentose with short, crispate hairs throughout; rootstock vertical, with a globose tuber 2-5 cm below surface of soil, not fibrous at apex. Stems solitary or few, slender, branched at or above the middle, ascending or erect, leafy at least in lower half. Leaves 3-15 × 0·1-0·4 cm, linear. Involucre 8-12 mm. Ligules c. 1¼ times as long as bracts, yellow, reddish outside. Achenes c. 4 mm. Pappus-hairs c. 2½ times as long as achene, plumose, pale reddish-brown.{\i  Sandy steppes. S.E. Russia and W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   A single record for N.W. Spain is probably a misidentification.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 162.              Tragopogon}              L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  (incl. Geropogon L.)
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By I.B.K. Richardson.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, biennial or perennial herbs. Stems usually solitary, simple or sparingly branched. Leaves linear-lanceolate to linear, entire, the cauline sheathing. Capitula solitary or few. Involucral bracts in 1 row. Receptacle without scales. Ligules yellow or purplish. Achenes fusiform, with 5-10 more or less distinct ribs, usually beaked, the beak usually with an annulus separating it from the pappus; pappus of 1 row of mostly plumose hairs, or the outer achenes with a pappus of 1 row of scabrid, rigid hairs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: C. Regel, {\i Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges.}{\b  65}: 251-262 (1955)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Because of uncertainty about the morphological nature of the underground parts in this genus, these are called {\i rootstocks} in this account. Characters of leaves refer to the lower cauline leaves and of ligules and achenes (except where otherwise stated) to those of the outer florets. Length of achenes includes the beak, when present.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Outer achenes without an annulus and with a pappus of
\par 
  scabrid, rigid hairs ....................................................................... {\b 20. hybridus} 
\par 
1 All achenes with an annulus and with a pappus of plumose hairs
\par 
2 Outer ligules purplish
\par 
3 Peduncles distinctly inflated
\par 
4 Achenes with 5 rows of scales forming distinct wings ................. {\b 5. pterodes}
\par 
4 Achenes not winged
\par 
5 Beak about as long as body of achene, scarcely clavate;
\par 
  leaves broadly linear ................................................................... {\b 4. porrifolius}
\par 
5 Beak about twice as long as body of achene, distinctly
\par 
  clavate; leaves narrowly linear .................................................. {\b 7. longirostris}
\par 
3 Peduncles not distinctly inflated
\par 
6 Beak ± distinctly clavate; achenes not densely white-
\par 
  squamose
\par 
7 Involucral bracts 4-5, about equalling ligules ........................... {\b 6. balcanicus}
\par 
7 Involucral bracts 5-12, exceeding ligules ................................. {\b 8. crocifolius}
\par 
6 Beak not distinctly clavate; achenes densely white-squamose
\par 
8 Biennial; bracts exceeding ligules ............................................... {\b 3. cretaceus}
\par 
8 Perennial; bracts shorter than ligules
\par 
9 Achenes gradually narrowed into a beak 0·7-1 cm ........................... {\b 1. ruber}
\par 
9 Achenes abruptly narrowed into a beak 0·6 cm ................... {\b 2. marginifolius}
\par 
2 Outer ligules yellow, rarely lilac at apex (sometimes 
\par 
  drying reddish)
\par 
10 Peduncles distinctly inflated ........................................................ {\b 10. dubius}
\par 
10 Peduncles not or scarcely inflated
\par 
11 Beak more than ½ as long as body of achene
\par 
12 Beak longer than body of achene
\par 

\par 
322}
\par