{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 13 Ligules golden-yellow, exceeding the bracts ............................. {\b 13. hayekii}
\par 
13 Ligules pale yellow, about as long as bracts ........................ {\b 14. tommasinii}
\par 
12 Beak not longer than body of achene
\par 
14 Involucral bracts 5-7; leaves not or scarcely widened 
\par 
   at base ........................................................................................ {\b 8. crocifolius}
\par 
14 Involucral bracts 8(-12); leaves usually widened at base
\par 
15 Rootstock cylindrical to fusiform; achenes ± squamose .......... {\b 11. pratensis}
\par 
15 Rootstock ovoid to globose; achenes almost smooth .............. {\b 9. kindingeri}
\par 
11 Beak less than ½ as long as body of achene
\par 
16 Leaves mostly with flat margins
\par 
17 Achenes more than 2·5 cm;
\par  
     pappus about equalling achene  ....................................... {\b 16. dasyrhynchus}
\par 
17 Achenes not more than 2 cm; pappus usually shorter
\par 
   than achene
\par 
18 Stems less than 10 cm; achenes squamose-muricate ............. {\b 12. lassithicus}
\par 
18 Stems usually more than 10 cm; achenes smooth or
\par 
   tuberculate .............................................................................. {\b 15. brevirostris} 
\par 
16 Leaves mostly with undulate margins
\par 
19 Plant glabrous; beak of achene 0·3-0·4 cm .................................. {\b 17. elatior}
\par 
19 Plant ± lanate; beak of achene absent or up to 0·3 cm
\par 
20 Beak present; ligules pale yellow ........................................... {\b 18. floccosus}
\par 
20 Beak absent; ligules deep yellow .......................................... {\b 19. ruthenicus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. ruber} S. G. Gmelin,{\i  Reise Russl.}{\b  2}: 198 (1774). Glaucous perennial with a robust, cylindrical rootstock. Stems 8-25(-40) cm, floccose-lanate, glabrescent. Leaves linear-lanceolate, widened at base, with a whitish, scarious margin. Peduncles not inflated; involucral bracts 8-10, c. 2/3 as long as ligules. Ligules lilac-purple. Achenes 2-2·5 cm, densely white-squamose, somewhat sulcate; beak 0·7-1 cm, gradually widened into body, not clavate. Pappus c. 2·5 cm.{\i  Dry slopes and sandy wastes. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from the eastern part of the European range, with slightly inflated peduncles and involucral bracts about as long as ligules, have been separated as{\b  T. kasahstanicus} S. Nikitin, {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  7}: 268 (1937). They perhaps merit recognition as a subspecies.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. marginifolius} Pawl., {\i Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou} nov. ser., {\b 47}({\b 2}): 83 (1938). Like {\b 1} but leaves with a white, usually coriaceous margin; achenes deeply sulcate; beak 0·6 cm, abruptly widened into body.{\i  Rocky slopes and semi-deserts. S.E. Russia.} Rs (E). ({\i C. Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. T. cretaceus} S. Nikitin,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  7}: 264 (1937). Like {\b 1} but biennial; stems glabrous; leaves linear; involucral bracts 8-12, somewhat exceeding ligules; beak of achene about as long as body; pappus distinctly shorter than achene. {\i Chalky slopes. • S.E. Russia} ({\i near Vol'sk}). Rs (E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. T. porrifolius} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 789 (1753). Glabrous to somewhat floccose-lanate biennial with a cylindrical rootstock. Stems 20-125 cm. Leaves broadly linear, widened at base. Peduncles inflated; involucral bracts c. 8; ligules lilac to deep violet or reddish-purple. Achenes 3-4 cm, squamose-muricate; beak scarcely clavate. Pappus shorter than achene.{\i  Grassland. Mediterranean region, extending to E. Romania; widely cultivated for its edible root} ({\i salsify}){\i  and occasionally for ornament and naturalized in N., W. & C. Europe.} Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rm Sa Si Tu [Au Be Br Cz Da Ge Hb He Ho Su].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves lanate ....................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b cupani}
\par 
1 Leaves glabrous or puberulent
\par 
2 Ligules about as long as bracts ..................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b porrifolius}
\par 
2 Ligules c. ½ as long as bracts ........................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b australis}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b porrifolius} (incl. subsp. {\i sativus} (Gaterau) Br.-Bl., {\i T. eriospermus }Ten.): Glabrous. Stems 30-125 cm. Ligules almost as long as involucral bracts, lilac to reddish-purple. Beak abruptly widened into body of achene. 2n = 12.{\i  Perhaps native in the C. & E. Mediterranean region; cultivated throughout a large part of Europe and widely naturalized}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b australis} (Jordan) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 462 (1879) ({\i T. australis} Jordan): Often puberulent. Stems 20-50 cm. Ligules c. ½ as long as involucral bracts, deep violet. Beak gradually widened into body of achene. 2n = 12.{\i  Mediterranean region, extending northwards to E. Romania; occasionally casual elsewhere}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b cupani} (Guss. ex DC.) I.B.K . Richardson, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 270 (1976) ({\i T. cupani} Guss. ex DC.): Stems usually c. 10 cm. Leaves lanate. Ligules somewhat shorter than involucral bracts, purple. Beak gradually widened into body of achene. •{\i  S. Italy and Sicilia}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. T. pterodes} Pancic, {\i Fl. Princ. Serb., Addit.} 170 (1884). Like {\b 4}({\b c}) but involucral bracts 6-8; achenes with 5 rows of scales forming distinct wings, otherwise muricate, the beak about as long as the body. 2n = 12.{\i  Rocky places. • C. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. T. balcanicus} Velen.,{\i  Abh. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ser. 7, {\b 1}({\b 8}): 28 (1886). Biennial with a usually simple rootstock. Stems 15-60 cm, usually branched, glabrous or sparsely floccose. Leaves narrowly linear, widened at base. Peduncles not inflated; involucral bracts 4-5, about as long as ligules. Ligules purplish-violet. Achenes c. 2 cm, squamose-muricate; beak about as long as body, distinctly clavate. Pappus about as long as achene. 2n = 12.{\i  Rocky places. • N. & C. parts of Balkan peninsula; S.W. Romania.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. T. longirostris} Bischoff ex Schultz Bip. in Webb & Berth., {\i Phyt. Canar.}{\b  2}: 469 (1850). Like {\b 6} but peduncles inflated; involucral bracts 6-8, exceeding the ligules; beak up to twice as long as body of achene.{\i  Rocky grassland. Karpathos.} Cr. ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. T. crocifolius} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1191 (1759) (incl.{\i  T. flaviflorus} (Willk.) Willk.,{\i  T. stenophyllus} Jordan, {\i T. castellanus} Leresche & Levier, {\i T. badalii} Willk.). Annual or biennial with a fusiform rootstock. Stems 10-80 cm, simple or branched. Leaves narrowly linear, scarcely widened at base. Peduncles not inflated; involucral bracts 5-12; outer ligules violet, yellow at base, rarely either yellow or violet throughout; inner yellow, rarely violet. Achenes c. 2 cm, more or less strongly tuberculate; beak stout, distinctly clavate, about as long as body; annulus glabrous or hairy. Pappus about as long as achene.{\i  S. Europe from Portugal to the Balkan peninsula.} Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu ?Sa [Su].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b crocifolius}: Leaves floccose-lanate. Involucral bracts 5-12, exceeding the ligules.{\i  Waste places. From Portugal to Italy}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b samantani} (Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss.) I.B.K. Richardson,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 270 (1976) ({\i T. samaritani} Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss.): Leaves more or less glabrous. Involucral bracts 5-7, as long as the ligules.{\i  Rocky places on mountains. • C. & S. Italy; W. & S. parts of Balkan peninsula}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. T. kindingeri} Adamovic, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  55}: 236 (1905). Perennial with a tuberous ovoid to globose rootstock. Stems 30-40 cm, simple or branched above, glabrous or sparsely hairy. Leaves widened at base. Peduncles not or scarcely inflated; involucral bracts 8, about as long as ligules. Ligules
\par 

\par 
323}
\par