{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b crispa} (Bieb.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 464 (1879) ({\i S. crispa }Bieb.): Stems branched, with 2-4 capitula. Lamina of basal leaves not coriaceous, often with undulate margin, narrowly elliptical to ovate-lanceolate, gradually narrowed into a short or long petiole.{\i  Krym}.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from S.E. Russia and W. Kazakhstan, described as{\b  S. pratorum} (Krasch.) Stankov in Stankov & Taliev, {\i Opred. Vyss. Rast. Evrop. SSSR} 687 (1949), are somewhat intermediate between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}); they have usually branched stems and narrow basal leaves with flat margins.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b bupleurifolia} (Pouzolz) Bonnier, {\i Fl. Compl. Fr.}{\b  6}: 11 (1923) ({\i S. crispa} auct. gall., non Bieb.): Stems simple. Lamina of basal leaves somewhat coriaceous, usually with undulate margin, broadly elliptical, abruptly contracted into a petiole or subcordate at base. •{\i  S. France}; ?{\i N. Italy and W. Jugoslavia}.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. humilis} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }790 (1753) (incl.{\i  S. candollei} Vis.). Perennial 5-50(-120) cm, subglabrous to more or less arachnoid-lanate at base and apex of stem and at base of leaves and involucre; rootstock vertical, stout, not fibrous at apex. Stems solitary or few, simple or rarely with 1-2 branches, erect, with 1-7 leaves, the upper usually scale-like. Basal leaves 5-30 × 0·3-5 cm, linear to ovate-elliptical, acute or acuminate, flat, entire, gradually narrowed at base into a usually distinct petiole. Involucre 15-30 mm. Ligules 11/2-2 times as long as bracts, yellow or rarely whitish, sometimes brownish outside. Achenes 7-11 mm, cylindrical, with slender, smooth ribs, glabrous. Pappus-hairs slightly longer than achene, plumose, dirty white. 2n = 14, 15. •{\i  Much of Europe, but absent from the N., S. & E. margins.} Au Be *Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Su.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from N. Italy with acuminate (not subobtuse) involucral bracts and achenes with scabrid ribs have been called subsp.{\b  tenuifolia} (Schrader) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} 421 (1882) ({\i S. tenuifolia} Schrader); their status and relationships are uncertain.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. parviflora} Jacq.,{\i  Fl. Austr.}{\b  4}: 3 (1776). Glabrous perennial or biennial (10-)15-60 cm; rootstock oblique, stout, with stout fleshy roots, not fibrous at apex. Stems solitary or few, simple or with 1-3 branches, rather fleshy, erect, with 1-3 usually small leaves. Basal leaves 7-30 × 0*5-1*5 cm, linear-lanceolate, acute, entire, flat, often more or less petiolate. Involucre 12-25 mm. Ligules 1-11/2 times as long as bracts, pale yellow, sometimes purplish outside. Achenes 7-9 mm, cylindrical, with smooth ribs, glabrous. Pappus-hairs about twice as long as achene, plumose, dirty white. 2n = 14.{\i  Saline soils. From N.W. Czechoslovakia and S.C. Russia southwards to E.C. Spain, Bulgaria and Krym.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr Hs Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. baetica} (Boiss.) Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 382 (1841). Perennial 20-50 cm, sparsely tomentose at base of stems and involucre and more or less throughout the leaves; rootstock vertical, cylindrical, not fibrous at apex. Stems solitary, stout, simple or with 1-2 branches at about the middle, leafy only near base or in lower part. Basal and lower cauline leaves 10-30 × 0·2-0·8 cm, linear to linear-lanceolate, folded and keeled, not undulate, long-attenuate at apex, widened and sheathing at base. Involucre 27-35 mm, up to 50 mm in fruit. Ligules c. 11/4 times as long as involucre, yellow, sometimes purplish outside. Achenes 17-22 mm, cylindrical, attenuate above, with smooth ribs or rarely the outer achenes with weakly squamate-rugose ribs, glabrous. Pappus-hairs about as long as achene, plumose, dirty white. {\i S.W. Portugal, S. Spain.} Hs Lu. ({\i Morocco}.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. transtagana} Coutinho, {\i Fl. Port.} 690 (1913). Perennial 20-40 cm, subglabrous to sparsely and minutely tomentose at base of leaves and involucre; rootstock vertical, with a globose to fusiform tuber, not fibrous at apex. Stems usually solitary, simple or with a few branches at base or middle, erect, leafless. Leaves 10-20 × 0*1-0*2 cm, grass-like, entire, folded and keeled, suberect, with densely crowded, rather rigid sheaths. Involucre 20-30 mm. Ligules 11/4-11/2 times as long as involucre, yellow, reddish or purplish outside. Achenes 20-30 mm, cylindrical-ellipsoid, attenuate above, with smooth ribs or the outer achenes with squamate ribs, glabrous. Pappus-hairs all plumose, dirty white.{\i  Dry places. • S. Portugal, S.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. S. crocifolia} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  2}: 123 (1813). Perennial 15-45 cm, subglabrous or arachnoid-lanate at base of stems and leaves; rootstock vertical, cylindrical, stout, not fibrous at apex. Stems solitary or few, slender, rigid, usually with 1-3 branches near the base, erect, sparsely leafy below. Basal leaves 7-25 × 0*1-0*3(-0*6) cm, grass-like, rigid, densely crowded, with prominent erect sheaths. Involucre 15-30 mm; outer bracts 1/4-1/3 as long as inner. Ligules 11/4-2 times as long as bracts, yellow, often reddish outside. Achenes 15-20 mm, cylindrical, the outer with scabrid to squamate ribs, the inner with smooth ribs. Pappus-hairs about as long as achene, plumose, dirty white. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry, rocky places. • C. & S. Greece and Aegean region}. Gr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b S. serpentinica} Rech. fil., {\i Anzeig. Akad. Wiss.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 93}: 102 (1956), described from serpentine rocks on Evvoia, has more flaccid, less strongly veined leaves with scarcely crowded and much less prominent sheaths; it is also very similar to {\b 15}, and its status and relationships are uncertain.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. S. aristata} Ramond ex DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 4}: 922 (1805). Perennial 10-50 cm, subglabrous or arachnoid-tomentose on stems and at base of leaves and involucre; rootstock vertical, cylindrical, stout, not fibrous at apex. Stems solitary or few, rather fleshy, simple or rarely with one branch, erect, leafless or with one small leaf. Leaves 7-30(-40) × 0*1-0*4(-0*6) cm, linear or narrowly linear-lanceolate, without prominent, erect bases. Involucre 20-30 mm; outer bracts at least 1/2 as long as inner. Ligules 11/2-2 times as long as involucre, yellow, sometimes reddish outside and often reddish when dry. Achenes 9-11 mm, cylindrical-ellipsoid, the outer with strongly rugose or tuberculate-squamate ribs, the inner with smooth or rugulose ribs. Pappus-hairs 1-11/2 times as long as achene, plumose, dirty white. 2n = 14.{\i  Meadows and other grassy places in the mountains; calcicole. • C. & E. Pyrenees, S. Alps, N. & C. Appennini.} Au Ga Hs It Ju.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. S. hispanica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 791 (1753) (incl. {\i S. stricta} Hornem.). Perennial 25-100(-130) cm, subglabrous or sparsely arachnoid-lanate especially at base of stems, leaves and involucre; rootstock vertical, cylindrical or fusiform, not fibrous at apex. Stems solitary or few, rigid, usually branched at or above the middle, erect, leafy especially in lower half. Basal and lower cauline leaves 15-40 × (0·1-)0·3-6 cm, linear to ovate-elliptical, acuminate, entire or rarely weakly dentate, flat or sometimes undulate at margin, narrowed at base and sometimes petiolate; upper cauline leaves linear-lanceolate, scarcely widened at base. Involucre 20-30 mm, up to 40 mm in fruit; outer bracts 1/4-1/2 as long as inner. Ligules 11/4-2 times as long as involucre, yellow, sometimes purplish outside. Achenes 10-15(-20) mm, cylindrical, weakly attenuate above, the outer with prominent rugose to almost tuberculate-squamate ribs, the inner with usually smooth, weak ribs. Pappus-hairs as long as or slightly shorter than
\par 
\par 320}
\par