{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 abruptly narrowed to the subobtuse apex. Achenes 3-4·5 mm.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b microcephala} Rech. fil.,{\i  Phyton} ({\i Austria}) {\b 16}: 217 (1974): Leaves sinuate- to runcinate-dentate or sinuately lobed. Involucral bracts (8-)9-10(-11) × 1·5-2 mm, linear, abruptly narrowed to the subacute apex. Achenes 4-4·5 mm.{\i  Aegean region}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b willkommii} (Burnat & W. Barbey) Rech. fil.,{\i  op. cit.} 219 (1974) ({\i Crepis willkommii} Burnat & W. Barbey, {\i Aetheorhiza montana} Willk.): Leaves slightly sinuate-denticulate. Involucral bracts 13-15 × 1-1·8 mm, narrowly linear, long-attenuate to the acute apex. Achenes c. 5 mm. •{\i  Mallorca}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 166.             Sonchus}              L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By L. Boulos.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, biennial or perennial herbs, rarely woody at the base. Stems usually solitary, usually branched. Leaves denticulate to pinnatisect, often spiny, the cauline amplexicaul. Capitula few to numerous. Involucral bracts in 3 imbricate rows. Receptacle without scales. Ligules yellow. Achenes compressed, narrowed at both ends, with 1-4 ribs on each face, not beaked; pappus of 2 kinds of hairs: deciduous, rough solitary hairs and more or less persistent, softer hairs in fascicles.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem woody at base; achenes 3·5-5 mm .................................... {\b 8. pustulatus}
\par 
1 Stem not woody; achenes 2-3·75 mm 
\par 
2 Annual or biennial
\par 
3 Achenes smooth at least between the ribs, strongly 
\par 
  compressed and ± winged .................................................................. {\b 1. asper}
\par 
3 Achenes rugose or tuberculate between the ribs, neither
\par 
  strongly compressed nor winged
\par 
4 Leaf-lobes strongly constricted at base, or narrowly 
\par 
  linear; terminal lobe usually about as large as the 
\par 
  lateral lobes; ligules longer than corolla-tube;
\par 
  achenes abruptly contracted at base ........................................... {\b 2. tenerrimus}
\par 
4 Leaf-lobes (if present) not constricted at base;
\par 
  terminal lobe usually much larger than the lateral 
\par 
  lobes; ligules about as long as corolla-tube, achenes
\par 
  gradually narrowed at base .......................................................... {\b 3. oleraceus}
\par 
2 Perennial
\par 
5 Capitula subsessile; leaves with strong marginal spines ......... {\b 6. crassifolius}
\par 
5 Capitula distinctly pedunculate; leaves not or weakly spiny
\par 
6 Leaf-lobes strongly constricted at base, or narrowly linear ..... {\b 2. tenerrimus}
\par 
6 Leaf-lobes (if present) not constricted at base, not
\par 
  narrowly linear
\par 
7 Auricles of cauline leaves lanceolate, acute, denticulate ............. {\b 5. palustris}
\par 
7 Auricles of cauline leaves rounded, often dentate
\par 
8 Achenes strongly transversely rugose, capitula glandular-
\par 
  hairy or glabrous ............................................................................ {\b 7. arvensis}
\par 
8 Achenes not or weakly transversely rugose; capitula 
\par 
  glabrous or eglandular-tomentose at base .................................. {\b 4. maritimus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. asper} (L.) Hill, {\i Herb. Brit.}{\b  1}: 47 (1769). Annual or biennial, glabrous, but base of capitula and upper part of stem and peduncles often glandular-hairy; stem 10-120(-200) cm, sometimes branched. Leaves glabrous, the lower spathulate, entire to pinnatifid, the upper entire to pinnatisect, with triangular-ovate to linear, dentate lobes and rounded, sometimes dentate auricles. Involucral bracts 35-45. Ligules shorter than corolla-tube. Achenes 2-3 × 1 mm, strongly compressed and more or less winged, elliptical to broadly oblanceolate, smooth between the ribs, the margins and ribs often with recurved spinules. Pappus 6-9 mm, more or less deciduous.{\i  Cultivated ground and waste places. Almost throughout Europe.} All except Fa Is Sb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b asper}: Annual. Leaves mostly cauline, thin, sometimes without spiny margins. Achenes with sparse spinules on margins and ribs. Pollen-grains 35-42 µm. 2n = 18.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b glaucescens} (Jordan) Ball, {\i Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 16}: 548 (1878) ({\i S. glaucescens} Jordan): Biennial. Leaves often forming a rosette, coriaceous, with spiny margins. Achenes with dense, recurved spinules on margins and ribs. Pollen-grains 30-35·5 µm.{\i  S., W. & C. Europe.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. tenerrimus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 794 (1753). Annual, biennial or perennial; stem 10-80 cm, branched (except in some annual variants). Leaves with subobtuse to acuminate auricles, the lower glabrous, with few lobes, the upper larger, often white-tomentose when young, pinnatisect with many ovate to linear-lanceolate lobes strongly constricted at the base and entire or denticulate, or rarely with linear lobes. Base of capitula and upper part of peduncles white-tomentose, often glandular-hairy. Involucral bracts 25-30. Ligules longer than corolla-tube. Achenes 2·5-3·3 × 0·5-1·2 mm, narrowly oblanceolate, tuberculate or rugose between the ribs; pappus 6-8 mm, more or less persistent. 2n = 14.{\i  S. Europe.} Az Bl Co ?Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu ?Rm Sa Si ?Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. oleraceus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 794 (1753). Annual or biennial; stem 10-140 cm, simple or branched, often glandular-hairy in upper part and sometimes white-tomentose at base of capitula and on upper part of peduncles. Leaves glabrous, the lower undivided, with narrowly winged petiole, the upper larger, pinnatifid to pinnatisect, lyrate or sometimes runcinate with the lobes not or only slightly constricted at the base, with acute auricles. Involucral bracts 27-35. Ligules about as long as corolla-tube. Achenes 2·5-3·75 × 0·75-1 mm, oblanceolate, rugose between the ribs, weakly compressed; pappus 5-8 mm, more or less persistent. 2n = 32. {\i Cultivated ground and waste places. Almost throughout Europe.} All except Fa Is Sb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Often difficult to distinguish from {\b 2}, and believed to be an allopolyploid derived from {\b 1} and {\b 2}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. maritimus} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1192 (1759). Rhizomatous perennial; stem 15-60 cm, not or sparingly branched. Lower leaves glabrous, linear, entire to dentate, the upper slightly tomentose beneath when young, linear to oblong, undivided or rarely pinnatisect, with denticulate margins; auricles rounded, often dentate. Base of capitula and upper part of peduncles often white-tomentose, eglandular. Involucral bracts c. 27. Ligules much longer than corolla-tube. Achenes 2·2-3 × 1-1·6 mm, oblong to elliptical, weakly rugose between the ribs or smooth, with wide margin; pappus 5·5-9 mm, usually deciduous. 2n = 18. {\i S. & W. Europe, northwards to N.W. France and eastwards to Albania.} Al Bl Co Ga Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b maritimus}: Involucre c. 15 mm; outer bracts ovate-lanceolate, the inner lanceolate. Achenes oblong.{\i  Damp, saline soils. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b aquatilis} (Pourret) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 434 (1879) ({\i S. aquatilis} Pourret; incl. {\i S. loscosii} Willk.): Involucre c. 10 mm; all bracts lanceolate. Achenes elliptical.{\i  Damp but not saline soils. S.W. Europe}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. palustris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 793 (1753). Perennial; stem 100-250(-400) cm, simple, angled, the upper part, including the inflorescence, with dense glandular hairs. Basal leaves oblong-lanceolate, entire to pinnatifid; cauline with lanceolate, acute, denticulate auricles, the upper cauline smaller and linear-lanceolate. Capitula terminal, pedunculate, densely glandular-
\par 

\par 
327}
\par