{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 outer involucral bracts 4-7 × 2·5-3·5 mm, broadly ovate, with a scarious margin up to 1·25 mm wide. 2n = 14. {\i Cultivated ground and waste places. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Bl Cr Gr Hs It Lu Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 164.            Launaea}              Cass.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Zollikoferia} DC., non Nees,{\i  Microrhynchus} Less.)
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By L. Boulos.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Biennial or perennial herbs or spiny dwarf shrubs. Stems solitary or few, freely and dichotomously branched. Leaves mostly basal. Capitula few to numerous. Involucral bracts in several rows, imbricate, with scarious margins. Receptacle without scales. All florets hermaphrodite. Ligules yellow, often with an olive stripe. Achenes cylindrical or slightly compressed, ribbed, not beaked; pappus of several rows of simple hairs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  L. mucronata (Forskål) Muschler,{\i  Man. Fl. Egypt}{\b  2}: 1057 (1912), native of Egypt and W. Asia, has been doubtfully recorded from Macedonia.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spiny dwarf shrub
\par 
2 Apex of stock and axils of leaves lanate ........................................ {\b 5. lanifera}
\par 
2 Apex of stock and axils of leaves not lanate
\par 
3 Plant not more than 20 cm, intricately branched; capitula
\par 
   on long peduncles arising laterally from the branches ............ {\b 4. cervicornis}
\par 
3 Plant at least 20 cm, not intricately branched;
\par 
  capitula very shortly pedunculate, usually terminal ................ {\b 6. arborescens}
\par 
1 Unarmed herb
\par 
4 Involucre more than 10 mm wide; bracts 2·5-3·5 mm wide,
\par 
  with narrow scarious margins .......................................................... {\b 3. pumila}
\par 
4 Involucre less than 10 mm wide; bracts 1·5-3 mm wide,
\par 
  with wide scarious margins
\par 
5 Achenes 3-4 mm; leaf-margins white-spinulose ....................... {\b 2. nudicaulis}
\par 
5 Achenes 5-7 mm; leaf-margins not spinulose ........................... {\b 1. resedifolia}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. resedifolia} (L.) O. Kuntze,{\i  Revis. Gen.}{\b  1}: 351 (1891) ({\i Zollikoferia resedifolia} (L.) Cosson). Biennial or perennial herb 10-40 cm, often woody at the base. Leaves usually confined to lower half of stem, pinnatisect; lobes usually linear, entire, mucronate. Capitula terminal. Involucre 14-20 × 5-8 mm; bracts 1·5-3 mm wide, with wide scarious margins. Achenes 5-7 × 0·5-0·7 mm, cylindrical or somewhat narrowed at base, with 5-6 obscure ribs, papillose-puberulent to subglabrous; pappus 9-12 mm, persistent.{\i  Maritime sands and dry hillsides. C., E. & S. Spain; Sicilia.} Hs Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. nudicaulis} (L.) Hooker fil.,{\i  Fl. Brit. India}{\b  3}: 416 (1881) ({\i Microrhynchus nudicaulis }(L.) Less.). Biennial or perennial herb 20-50 cm, often woody at the base. Leaves mostly basal, usually lyrate- or runcinate-pinnatisect; lobes broadly triangular, white-spinulose at margin. Capitula terminal. Involucre 12-15 × 4-6 mm; bracts 1·5-2·5 mm wide, with wide scarious margins. Achenes 3-4 × c. 1 mm, slightly narrowed at both ends, with 4 prominent ribs, transversely rugulose, glabrous; pappus 7-9 mm, deciduous.{\i  S.E. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia, India}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. pumila} (Cav.) O. Kuntze, {\i Revis. Gen.}{\b  1}: 351 (1891) ({\i Zollikoferia pumila} (Cav.) DC.). Perennial herb 10-30 cm, woody at the base. Leaves usually confined to lower half of stem, pinnatisect; lobes linear to triangular, mucronate. Capitula terminal. Involucre 20-24 × 12-16 mm; bracts 2·5-3·5 mm wide, with narrow scarious margin. Achenes 4-7 × c. 0·7 mm, often curved, slightly narrowed at both ends, with 4 prominent ribs, papillose-puberulent; pappus 8-12 mm, persistent. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry, gypsaceous or saline soils. E. Spain}. Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. cervicornis} (Boiss.) Font Quer & Rothm., {\i Sched. Fl. Iber. Select., Cent.}{\b  1}: no. 99 (1934) ({\i Sonchus spinosus} var.{\i  cervicornis} (Boiss.) Lange). Spiny dwarf shrub 5-20 cm, with densely intricate branches. Leaves mostly basal, dentate to pinnatisect; lobes more or less triangular, entire, mucronate. Capitula long-pedunculate, lateral on the branches and not exceeding them. Involucre 8-10 × 3-4 mm; bracts 1-1·5 mm wide, with wide scarious margins, the outer with an appendage at the apex. Achenes 3·25-4 × 0·5-0·7 mm, cylindrical, often curved, slightly narrowed at both ends, with 4 prominent ribs, papillose-puberulent; pappus 4-5 mm, persistent. 2n = 18. {\i Rocky ground, mostly near the sea. • Islas Baleares.} Bl.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. lanifera} Pau,{\i  Mem. Mus. Ci. Nat. Barcelona} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 1}({\b 3}): 23 (1925) ({\i Sonchus spinosus} auct., non (Forskål) DC.). Spiny dwarf shrub 15-40 cm, lanate at apex of stock and in axils of leaves. Leaves mostly basal, dentate to pinnatisect; lobes triangular, entire or slightly spinulose. Capitula terminal. Involucre 12-14 × 5-7 mm; bracts 1-2·5 mm wide, with wide scarious margins. Achenes 4-5 × 0·6-0·8 mm, more strongly narrowed at apex than at base, with 4 prominent ribs, transversely rugulose, subglabrous; pappus 7-8 mm, persistent. 2n = 16.{\i  S.E. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N. Africa, Arabia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. arborescens} (Batt.) Murb.,{\i  Lunds Univ. Arsskr.} nov. ser.,{\b  19}({\b 1}): 65 (1923) ({\i Sonchus spinosus} auct., non (Forskål) DC.,{\i  S. freynianus} Huter). Like {\b 5} but more or less glabrous; leaves usually with narrowly linear lobes; involucre 10-12 mm; achenes 3·5-4 × c. 1 mm, more strongly narrowed at base than at apex, papillose-puberulent. {\i  S.E. Spain} ({\i near Almeria}). Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 165.                Aetheorhiza}             Cass.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.D. Sell.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs with rhizomes sometimes bearing whitish, subglobose tubers. Stems usually several, simple. Leaves usually all basal, entire or dentate. Capitula 1(-8). Involucral bracts in several rows, imbricate. Receptacle pitted, without scales. Ligules yellow, sometimes with a reddish-purple or greenish stripe on the outer face. Achenes pale brown, with 4 deep grooves; pappus white, of many rows of simple hairs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: K.H. Rechinger, {\i Phyton} ({\i Austria}){\b  16}: 211-220 (1974)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. bulbosa} (L.) Cass.,{\i  Dict. Sci. Nat.}{\b  48}: 426 (1827) ({\i Crepis bulbosa} (L.) Tausch). Glaucous perennial 7-55 cm, with leafy stolons and long rhizomes. Stems 1-3, each with 1(-8) capitula. Leaves usually glabrous; basal 10-250 × 4-35 mm, elliptical to obovate, mostly acute, gradually attenuate to the petiole, entire to sinuately lobed; cauline usually absent, but sometimes 1-2 near the base of the stem. Involucre 8-16 × 3-12 mm; bracts lanceolate, usually subobtuse, with blackish, clavate glandular hairs at the base and extending on to the stem. Achenes 3-5 × c. 0·5 mm, more or less attenuate at apex, with hollow, swollen base. 2n = 18.{\i  Cultivated fields, maritime sands and dry, rocky ground. Mediterranean region and W. coast of Europe, northwards to} 47° 45'{\i  in N. W. France.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucre 8-11 mm ................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b microcephala} 
\par 
1 Involucre 13-16 mm
\par 
2 Involucral bracts linear-lanceolate, c. 2 mm wide;
\par 
  achenes 4-4·5 mm ............................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b bulbosa}
\par 
2 Involucral bracts narrowly linear, 1-1·8 mm wide;
\par 
  achenes c. 5 mm ........................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b willkommii}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b bulbosa}: Leaves usually sinuate-denticulate. Involucral bracts (13-)14-15(-16) × c. 2 mm, linear-lanceolate,
\par 

\par 
326}
\par