{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 achene, plumose, dirty white. 2n = 14. {\i C. & S. Europe and S. part of U.S.S.R.; occasionally cultivated for its edible rootstock and locally naturalized.} Al Au *Bl Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) [He ?Po].
\par 

\par 
Extremely variable, especially in leaf-shape.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. S. crispatula} (Boiss.) Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 741 (1845). Like {\b 15} but 15-40 cm; stems simple or with a few branches usually below the middle; basal and lower cauline leaves 5-25 × 1-4·5 cm, lanceolate and long-attenuate at apex to obovate-elliptical and acuminate or obtuse and long-apiculate, dentate with usually some of the teeth linear, usually crispate or undulate at margin; involucre 25-45 mm; achenes 15-18 mm, usually strongly attenuate above.{\i  Dry places. • S. France, S. & E. parts of Iberian peninsula.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. S. brevicaulis} Vahl, {\i Symb. Bot.}{\b  2}: 88 (1791) ({\i S. coronopifolia} Desf.). Like {\b 15} but 15-50 cm; stems simple or with one branch at the base, leafless or with one small leaf; leaves 5-20 × 1-4 cm, linear to linear-lanceolate, long-attenuate at apex, variably lacerate-dentate with irregular linear lobes to crenulate-undulate at margin; involucre 25-40 mm; achenes c. 20 mm; pappus-hairs slightly shorter than achene. {\i Dry places. S. France; S.E. Spain.} Ga Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in shape and dissection of leaves; the plants from Spain have the leaves crenulate-undulate and never lacerate-dentate at the margin.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. S. scyria} M. Gustafsson & Snogerup, {\i Bot. Not. }{\b 125}: 323 (1972). Like {\b 15} but 20-35 cm, rather densely floccose-lanate in lower part of stem and on lower surface of leaves; basal and lower cauline leaves 5-15 × 1·5-3 cm, lanceolate to elliptical, entire, acute or subobtuse; upper cauline leaves ovate-acuminate, widely cordate at base; achenes with more or less weak, smooth ribs. 2n = 14.{\i  Limestone cliffs. • N. Aegean region }({\i Skiros}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. S. fistulosa} Brot., {\i Fl. Lusit.}{\b  1}: 329 (1804). Perennial 15-70 cm, glabrous except sometimes for base of involucre; rootstock long-creeping, branched, slender. Stems procumbent at base, ascending to erect above, simple or branched in lower half, fistular, leafy. Lower leaves 10-30 × 0·2-0·5 cm, fistular, more or less sulcate, subulate at apex, flattened and widened at base. Involucre 10-20 mm. Ligules 1½-2 times as long as involucre, yellow, purplish outside. Achenes c. 6 mm, narrowly elliptical, with smooth ribs. Pappus-hairs slightly longer than achene, dirty white. {\i Water-meadows and other seasonally wet places. • C. & S. Portugal, S.W. Spain; very local.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. S. pusilla} Pallas,{\i  Reise}{\b  2}: 744 (1773). Perennial 5-40 cm, subglabrous to more or less arachnoid-tomentose especially on leaves and at base of involucre; rootstock vertical, slender, with a deeply buried ovoid tuber, somewhat fibrous at apex. Stems usually several, slender, rigid, sinuous, usually branched in upper half, leafy throughout. Leaves 5-15 × 0·1-0·2 cm, linear, entire, the basal with dilated whitish sheaths. Involucre 10-25 mm, up to 40 mm in fruit. Ligules c. 1¼ times as long as involucre, yellow, purplish outside. Achenes 7-12 mm, cylindrical, with smooth ribs, glabrous. Pappus-hairs 2-2½ times as long as achene, plumose, dirty white. {\i Saline soils and stony or sandy steppes. S.E. Russia} ({\i near Astrakhan'}). Rs (E). ({\i Temperate Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. S. villosa} Scop., {\i Fl. Carn.} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 97 (1772). Perennial 20-60 cm, more or less hirsute to arachnoid-lanate especially at base of stems, leaves and on outer involucral bracts, more sparsely hairy or glabrous elsewhere; rootstock vertical, cylindrical, sometimes with a deeply buried ovoid tuber, not fibrous at apex. Stems solitary or few, rather rigid, simple or rarely with 1(-2) branches, leafy only in lower half. Leaves 10-25 × 0·2-0·3 cm, linear, entire, keeled, the basal with dilated whitish sheaths. Involucre 17-25 mm. Ligules 1¼-1½ times as long as involucre, yellow, reddish outside. Achenes 9-15 mm, cylindrical-ellipsoid. Pappus-hairs 1½-2 times as long as achene, pale reddish-brown.{\i  Grassy places. • C. Mediterranean region and N.W. part of Balkan peninsula.} ?Al It Ju Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Achenes with ± smooth ribs; leaves callose at apex ........... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b callosa}
\par 
1 At least the outer achenes with spinulose-dentate or acutely
\par 
   lamellate ribs; leaves not or scarcely callose at apex
\par 
2 Pappus-hairs scabrid with the projections c. 0·1 mm .......... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b villosa}
\par 
2 Pappus-hairs plumose at least at base with the lateral
\par 
  hairs at least 0·5 mm ........................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b columnae}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b villosa} ({\i Gelasia villosa} (Scop.) Cass.): Leaves not or scarcely callose at apex. At least the outer achenes with spinulose-dentate or acutely lamellate ribs. Pappus-hairs scabrid, the projections c. 0·1 mm. {\i Throughout the range of the species except S. Italy and the islands}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b columnae} (Guss.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 465 (1879): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but pappus-hairs plumose at base or in lower half, the lateral hairs more than 0·5 mm.{\i  C. & S. Italy, Sicilia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b callosa} (Moris) Chater, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 270 (1976) ({\i S. callosa} Moris): Leaves callose at apex. Achenes with smooth or very weakly rugose ribs, glabrous. Pappus-hairs plumose at base, the lateral hairs more than 0·5 mm.{\i  Sardegna}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. LASIOSPORA Less. Leaves entire. Achenes densely villous or lanate, with smooth ribs, without a tubular base.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. S. ensifolia} Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 235 (1808). Perennial 20-60 cm, densely villous at base of stems and on involucre, sometimes also on leaves and rest of stems; rootstock vertical, cylindrical, not fibrous at apex. Stems solitary or few, simple or sparingly branched, erect, leafy usually throughout. Leaves 5-25 × 0·2-0·6(-1) cm, linear-lanceolate, long-attenuate at apex, rigid, with prominent veins. Involucre 18-22 mm. Ligules c. 1½ times as long as involucre, yellow. Achenes 5-7 mm, cylindrical. Pappus-hairs 2-2½ times as long as achene, plumose below, pale reddish-brown. {\i Sandy places. S. part of U.S.S.R}. Rs(C,W,E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b S. biebersteinii} Lipsch., {\i Fragm. Monogr. Scorzonerae}{\b  2}: 95 (1939) ({\i S. eriosperma} Bieb., non Gouan), from the Caucasus, with subglabrous involucre and acute (not acuminate) bracts has been doubtfully reported from S.W. Ukraine.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. S. hirsuta} L.,{\i  Mantissa Alt.} 278 (1771). Perennial 10-45 cm, subglabrous to more or less sparsely villous; rootstock vertical, cylindrical, not fibrous at apex. Stems solitary or few, slender, rigid, simple or sparingly branched at about the middle, ascending, more or less densely leafy in lower half, usually leafless above. Leaves 5-20 × 0·1-0·4 cm, linear, long-attenuate at apex, rigid, with prominent veins. Involucre 13-20 mm, up to 30 mm in fruit, glabrous or very sparsely villous at base. Ligules 1¼-1½ times as long as involucre, yellow. Achenes 6-8 mm, oblong-cylindrical, with hairs 3-5 mm. Pappus-hairs 2½-3 times as long as achene, plumose throughout, pale reddish-brown. 2n = 12, 14.{\i  Dry places. • Italy and Sicilia, France northwards to}  c. 46° 30' {\i N., N.E. Spain. }Ga Hs It Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. villosiformis} (Fiori & Béguinot) Vierh., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  65}: 66 (1915), described from S. Italy, has the pappus-hairs
\par 

\par 
321}
\par