{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 yellow. Achenes 1·5-2 cm, almost smooth; beak about as long as body. Pappus about as long as achene.{\i  Pastures and waste places. • S. Jugoslavia} ({\i near Titov Veles}). Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. T. dubius} Scop.,{\i  Fl. Carn.} ed. 2,{\b  2}: 95 (1772) ({\i T. major} Jacq.; incl. {\i T. dubius} subsp.{\i  campestris} (Besser) Hayek). Annual or biennial with a cylindrical rootstock. Stems 25-50 cm, often simple, glabrous. Leaves linear-lanceolate, subamplexicaul. Peduncles strongly inflated; involucral bracts (5-)8-12(-18), exceeding ligules. Ligules yellow. Achenes 2·5-3·5 cm, squamose; beak about as long as body. Pappus about as long as achene. 2n = 12.{\i  Europe, from N. France and C. Russia southwards.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu [Be].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants with wide leaves, large capitula and 10-12(-18) involucral bracts have been called subsp.{\b  major} (Jacq.) Vollmann, {\i Fl. Bayern }772 (1914), but are not sufficiently distinct to warrant recognition even at subspecific rank.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. T. pratensis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 789 (1753). Annual to perennial with a cylindrical rootstock. Stems 30-70 cm, often simple, glabrescent. Leaves linear-lanceolate, more or less subamplexicaul at base. Peduncles not inflated. Involucral bracts c. 8. Ligules yellow. Achenes 1-2·5 cm, more or less squamose. {\i Dry grass and, roadsides and waste places. Most of Europe.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucral bracts about twice as long as ligules, often
\par 
  with a reddish margin ........................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b minor}
\par 
1 Involucral bracts shorter than or equalling ligules,
\par 
  with a pale or white margin
\par 
2 Ligules pale yellow; beak about as long as body of 
\par 
  achene ............................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b pratensis}
\par 
2 Ligules golden yellow; beak usually shorter than body 
\par 
  of achene ........................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b orientalis}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pratensis}: Involucral bracts shorter than or equalling ligules, with a pale or white margin. Ligules pale yellow. Beak about as long as body of achene. 2n = 12.{\i  Throughout much of the range of the species, but absent from parts of the east.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b minor} (Miller) Wahlenb., {\i Fl. Suec.} 481 (1826) ({\i T. minor} Miller): Involucral bracts about twice as long as ligules, often with a reddish margin. Ligules pale yellow. Beak about as long as body of achene. 2n = 12.{\i  W. & C. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b orientalis} (L.) Celak., {\i Prodr. Fl. Böhm.} 215 (1871) ({\i T. orientalis} L.; incl. {\i T. rumelicus} Velen.): Involucral bracts shorter than or equalling ligules, with a pale or white margin. Ligules golden yellow. Beak usually shorter than body of achene. 2n = 12.{\i  C. & E. Europe; rare or only casual in the west}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. T. lassithicus} Rech. fil.,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 105}({\b 2, 1}): 157 (1943). Like {\b 11}({\b a}) but stems 6-8 cm, simple; leaves linear, not or scarcely widened at base; involucral bracts 5; achenes 1·6-1·8 cm, squamose-muricate, with indistinct beak 0·1-0·2 cm.{\i  Mountain rocks. • E. Kriti} ({\i Dhikti Oros}). Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. T. hayekii} (Soó) I.B.K. Richardson, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 270 (1976) ({\i T. transsilvanicus} Hayek, non Schur, {\i T. orientalis }var.{\i  hayekii} Soó). Like {\b 11}({\b a}) but stems branched; ligules golden yellow, exceeding the bracts; beak of achene 1½-3 times as long as body. {\i Meadows. • C. Romania; Macedonia. }?Gr Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. T. tommasinii} Schultz Bip. in Bischoff, {\i Beitr. Fl. Deutschl.} 97 (1851). Like {\b 11}({\b a}) but stem branched, usually floccose-lanate; achenes squamose-muricate, the beak 1½-3 times as long as the body.{\i  Grassland. • N. & C. parts of Balkan peninsula, extending north-westwards to Slovenija and N. Italy.} Al Gr It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. T. brevirostris} DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  7}: 114 (1838). Biennial with a fusiform vertical rootstock. Stems up to 60(-110) cm, often branched below, usually sparsely hairy. Leaves linear, usually widened at base, the margins mostly flat. peduncles not inflated; involucral bracts 5-11, shorter than or equalling ligules. Ligules yellow. Achenes 1-2 cm, smooth or tuberculate; annulus hairy. Pappus usually shorter than achene.{\i  S. part of U.S.S.R., extending to E. Romania; S. Greece.} Gr Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Beak of achene absent ................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b brevirostris}
\par 
1 Beak of achene present
\par 
2 Leaves not widened at base, glabrous .......................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b longifolius}
\par 
2 Leaves widened at base, usually hairy
\par 
3 Bracts 7-11; beak of achene 0·5-0·7 cm;
\par 
  pappus 1·2-1·7 cm ....................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b bjelorussicus}
\par 
3 Bracts 5-8; beak of achene 0·3-0·4(-0·7) cm;
\par 
  pappus 0·8-1·3 cm
\par 
4 Pappus shorter than achene ............................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b podolicus}
\par 
4 Pappus as long as or longer than achene ......................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b volgensis}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b brevirostris} (incl.{\i  T. borystenicus} Artemczuk): Leaves widened at base, sparsely hairy. Bracts 5-8(-10). Beak absent. Pappus c. 1 cm.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b volgensis} (S. Nikitin) C. Regel,{\i  Scripta Hort. Bot. Univ. Vyt. Magni}{\b  5}: 40 (1937) ({\i T. volgensis} S. Nikitin): Leaves widened at base, sparsely hairy. Bracts 5-8. Beak 0·4 cm. Pappus 1·2 cm, longer than achene.{\i  Meadows and river-sands. By the lower Volga and Ural R}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b podolicus} (DC.) C. Regel,{\i  op. cit.} 39 (1937) ({\i T. podolicus} (DC.) Artemczuk; incl. {\i T. stepposus} (S. Nikitin) Stankov,{\i  T. ukrainicus} Artemczuk): Leaves widened at base, sparsely hairy. Bracts (7)8. Achenes smooth or weakly tuberculate; beak 0·3-0·4(-0·7) cm. Pappus 0·8(-1) cm, shorter than achene.{\i  Ukraine, S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b bjelorussicus} (Artemczuk) C. Regel, {\i op. cit.} 41 (1937) ({\i T. bjelorussicus} Artemczuk): Leaves widened at base, usually sparsely hairy. Bracts 7-11. Achenes tuberculate; beak 0·5-0·7 cm. Pappus 1·2-1·7 cm.{\i  River-sands and pine-woods. • S.E. White Russia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b longifolius} (Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss.) I.B.K. Richardson, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 270 (1976) ({\i T. longifolius} Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss.): Stems glabrous. Leaves not widened at base, glabrous. Achenes with small tubercles or smooth; beak c. 0·5 cm.{\i  Damp meadows. • S. Greece}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. T. dasyrhynchus} Artemczuk,{\i  Trav. Inst. Bot. }({\i Charkov}){\b  2}: 42 (1937). Biennial with a slender rootstock. Stems up to 130 cm, glabrous to floccose-tomentose. Leaves with flat margins. Peduncles not inflated; involucral bracts 7-8, shorter than the ligules. Ligules yellow. Achenes with beak 0·1-0·5 cm. Pappus c. 1·7 cm, about equalling the achene.{\i  Steppes and sandy ground. S.E. part of U.S.S.R}. Rs (K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b dasyrhynchus}: Stems up to 130 cm. Involucral bracts 7(8). Achenes c. 2·7 cm, squamose-tuberculate.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b daghestanicus} Artemczuk, {\i op. cit.} 44 (1937) ({\i T. daghestanicus} (Artemczuk) Kuthath.): Stems not more than 60 cm. Involucral bracts 8. Achenes c. 3·2 cm, more or less smooth.{\i  S.E. Russia}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. T. elatior} Steven,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  29}({\b 2}): 407 (1856) (incl.{\i  T. stribrnyi} Hayek). Glabrous biennial. Stems usually 90-125 cm, much branched. Leaves with undulate margins. Peduncles not inflated; involucral bracts 8, shorter than or equalling the ligules. Ligules yellow. Achenes c. 3 cm, squamu-
\par 

\par 
324}
\par