{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 8 Cauline leaves held vertically, spinulose on midrib;
\par 
  involucral bracts patent or deflexed in fruit .................................... {\b 9. serriola}
\par 
8 Cauline leaves not held vertically, smooth on midrib;
\par 
  involucral bracts erect in fruit .......................................................... {\b 10. sativa}
\par 
7 Cauline leaves oblong to linear; inflorescence usually
\par 
  a spike-like panicle
\par 
9 Stem glabrous; achenes subglabrous at apex ................................ {\b 11. saligna}
\par 
9 Stem setose below; achenes setose at apex ................................... {\b 12. altaica}
\par 
1 Body and beak of achene concolorous
\par 
10 Ligules blue or bluish
\par 
11 Leaves arachnoid-lanate beneath; capitulum with c. 8 
\par 
   florets ....................................................................................... {\b 7. watsoniana}
\par 
11 Leaves not arachnoid-lanate beneath; capitulum usually
\par 
   with more than 8 florets
\par 
12 Rhizome with underground stolons; at least the middle 
\par 
   cauline leaves usually lobed ........................................................... {\b 4. tatarica}
\par 
12 Rhizome without underground stolons; leaves usually 
\par 
   without lobes .................................................................................. {\b 5. sibirica} 
\par 
10 Ligules yellow
\par 
13 Stem glandular-hairy below ............................................................ {\b 8. aurea}
\par 
13 Stem glabrous or with eglandular hairs below
\par 
14 Achenes yellowish-brown; stem arachnoid-lanate at the
\par 
   base .......................................................................................... {\b 2. acanthifolia}
\par 
14 Achenes black; stem glabrous or with sparse hairs at the base
\par 
15 Leaves not decurrent ................................................................... {\b 6. quercina}
\par 
15 Leaves decurrent
\par 
16 Lower leaves pinnatifid to pinnatisect; undivided part
\par 
   of lamina less than 2 cm wide ....................................................... {\b 1. viminea}
\par 
16 Lower leaves laciniate-runcinate; undivided part of 
\par 
   lamina at least 2 cm wide ....................................................... {\b 3. longidentata}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. PHOENIXOPUS (Cass.) Bentham. Inflorescence a pyramidal or spike-like panicle with capitula solitary or in fascicles. Capitula with 4-8 florets. Achenes with 5-11 ribs, gradually contracted into a concolorous beak not longer than body.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. viminea} (L.) J. & C. Presl,{\i  Fl. Cechica }160 (1819). Usually glabrous biennial or perennial with fusiform root. Stems up to 100 cm, usually numerous. Leaves glaucous, decurrent with long, appressed, linear auricles; lower pinnatifid to pinnatisect with linear-lanceolate, often dentate segments, the undivided part of the lamina less than 2 cm wide; upper often entire. Inflorescence a much-branched or spike-like panicle. Capitula subsessile. Ligules pale yellow. Achenes 7-15 mm; body narrowly oblong-elliptical, 5- to 15-ribbed, black; beak shorter than or as long as body.{\i  Dry, rocky or stony places. S. & C. Europe, extending to C. France and S.E. Russia.} Al Au Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Achenes 7-9 mm; beak not more than ½ as long as body
\par 
2 Stem 7-25 cm ................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b alpestris}
\par 
2 Stem 30-80(-100) cm .............................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b chondrilliflora}
\par 
1 Achenes 9-15 mm; beak about as long as body 
\par 
3 Plant branched only in the upper part ............................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b viminea} 
\par 
3 Plant branched from the base ..................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b ramosissima}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alpestris} (Gand.) Feráková, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 268 (1976) ({\i Phoenixopus alpestris} Gand., {\i L. viminea} var. {\i decumbens} Halácsy): Stem 7-25 cm, with few branches in upper part. Achenes c. 8 mm, with beak c. ¼ as long as body. •{\i  Mountains of Kriti}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b viminea} ({\i Scariola viminea} (L.) F.W. Schmidt,{\i  L. contracta} Velen.): Stem 30-80(-100) cm, branched only in upper part. Achenes 12-15 mm, with beak about as long as body. 2n = 18.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except Corse.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b chondrilliflora} (Boreau) Bonnier,{\i  Fl. Compl. Fr.}{\b  6}: 79 (1923): Stem 30-80(-100) cm, branched throughout. Achenes 7-9 mm, with beak ¼-½ as long as body. {\i W. & C. Mediterranean region}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b ramosissima} (All.) Bonnier, {\i loc. cit.} (1923): Stems 20-30 cm, with numerous, short, divaricate branches. Achenes 9-11 mm, with beak about as long as body.{\i  Mediterranean region}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. acanthifolia} (Willd.) Boiss., {\i Fl. Or.}{\b  3}: 818 (1875) ({\i L. amorgina} Heldr. & Orph. ex Halácsy). Perennial. Rhizome large, covered with remains of leaves. Stem 30-100 cm, erect, striate, glabrous except for the arachnoid-lanate base. Lower leaves very variable in shape, oblong-ovate or spathulate in outline, lobed or pinnatifid, rarely entire, petiolate; upper pinnatipartite, auriculate; all densely arachnoid-lanate on the proximal side of petiole and sometimes on midrib, otherwise glabrous or subglabrous. Capitula subsessile in a spike-like panicle, solitary or in small fascicles. Involucral bracts lanate at apex. Ligules yellow. Achenes 8-9 mm; body oblong-lanceolate, 5- to 7-ribbed, yellowish-brown; beak ½ as long as to as long as body. 2n = 18.{\i  Shady rocks. S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. longidentata} Moris ex DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  7}: 139 (1838). Glaucous biennial. Stem up to 100 cm, erect, striate. Lower leaves obovate to lanceolate, laciniate-runcinate to pinnatipartite, narrowed into a petiole, with the undivided part of the lamina 2-8 cm wide; upper ovate in outline, deeply laciniate, dentate, acuminate, with decurrent-amplexicaul base. Inflorescence a pyramidal panicle with ascending branches. Capitula with 5-6(-8) florets. Ligules yellow. Achenes 7-9 mm; body oblong, 7- to 11-ribbed, black; beak 1/3 as long as body.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • Sardegna.} Sa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. MULGEDIUM (Cass.) C. B. Clarke. Inflorescence with ascending branches and few capitula; florets numerous. Achenes oblong-elliptical, many-ribbed, slightly compressed, narrowed into a very short, concolorous beak.
\par 

\par 
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 4. L. tatarica} (L.) C. A. Meyer, {\i Verz. Pfl. Cauc.} 56 (1831). Subglabrous perennial. Rhizome vertical, with underground stolons. Stem 30-80(-100) cm, erect, branched above. Lower leaves runcinate-pinnatifid, shortly petiolate; upper lanceolate, sessile, semiamplexicaul. Inflorescence a more or less branched panicle. Capitula with 16-23 florets. Ligules lilac-blue. Achenes 4·5-6·5 mm, yellowish to black; beak 1/3-1/2 as long as body. Pappus white. 2n = 18.{\i  Seashores, river-banks, and as a weed or ruderal. E. Europe, northwards to N.C. Russia; naturalized widely in N. and N.C. Europe.} Bu Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Tu [Cz Da Fe Ge Hb He Ho No Po Rs (N, B) Su].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. sibirica} (L.) Maxim.,{\i  Bull. Acad. Imp. Sci. Pétersb.}{\b  19}: 528 (1874). Glabrous perennial. Stem 30-100 cm, erect, usually simple. Leaves lanceolate, entire, mucronate-dentate or incisedentate (rarely pinnatifid), with semiamplexicaul, cordate base, the lowest narrowed to a short petiole. Inflorescence corymbose, with slender branches. Capitula large, with c. 20 florets. Ligules lilac-blue. Achenes 4·5-6 mm, yellowish-olive; beak about ¼ as long as body. Pappus greyish-white. {\i Woods and scrub, and on river-sands and gravels. N. Russia, N. & E. Fennoscandia.} Fe No Rs (N, B, C, ?E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. LACTUCOPSIS (Schultz Bip. ex Pancic) Rouy. Inflorescence usually corymbose; capitula of 6-15 florets. Achenes oblong-elliptical to ovate, 2- to 10-ribbed, narrowed into a concolorous beak ¼-½ as long as body.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. quercina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 795 (1753). Annual or biennial. Root tuberous. Stem 30-100(-150) cm, erect. Leaves thin, sagittate
\par 

\par 
329}
\par