{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 amplexicaul at base; lower lyrate-pinnatifid with large, ovate terminal segment, petiolate; upper oblong-elliptical to lanceolate, entire or pinnatifid to pinnatisect with oblong-ovate, dentate segments; all with sagittate-amplexicaul base. Inflorescence a dense, usually corymbose panicle. Capitula with 7-15(-22) florets. Ligules yellow. Involucral bracts often with appendages. Achenes 7-8 mm; body oblong-elliptical, setose at apex, 5-ribbed, black; beak 1/3-1/2 as long as body. Pappus white.{\i  C. & E. Europe, from Bulgaria northwards to C. Germany and S.C. Russia; S.W. Alps; one station in Gotland.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Su ?Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b quercina} ({\i L. stricta }Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  L. quercina} subsp.{\i  stricta} (Waldst. & Kit.) Hayek): Beak of achene less than 2-4 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Woods and scrub; nitrophile. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b wilhelmsian}.a (Fischer & C. A. Meyer ex DC.) Feráková,{\i  Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}) {\b 5}: 420 (1970) ({\i L. wilhelmsiana} Fischer & C. A. Meyer ex DC., {\i L. quercina }var.{\i  rostrata} Velen.): Beak of achene more than 2·4 mm.{\i  S.E. Europe.} ({\i Anatolia, Caucasus}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i  L. quercina} var.{\i  integrifolia} (Bogenh.) Bischoff ({\i L. chaixii} Vill., {\i L. quercina} subsp.{\i  chaixii }(Vill.) Celak.), differs from subsp. ({\b a}) only in its undivided cauline leaves and occurs almost throughout its range.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. L. watsoniana} Trelease,{\i  Ann. Rep. Missouri Bot. Gard.}{\b  8}: 127 (1897). Erect perennial. Stem 30-200 cm. Leaves sinuate-dentate, pruinose, arachnoid-lanate beneath; lower 30 × 15 cm, ovate, obtuse, contracted into a winged petiole; upper ovate-lanceolate, sessile, sagittate-amplexicaul. Inflorescence a corymbose panicle. Capitula with c. 8 florets. Ligules pale blue. Achenes 4-6 mm; body ovate, 5- to 8-ribbed, brownish-green with yellowish spots; beak 1/3-1/2 as long as body. {\i Scrub in volcanic craters. • Açores.} Az.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. L. aurea} (Schultz Bip. ex Pancic) Stebbins,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 75}: 14 (1937) ({\i Mycelis sonchifolia} (Vis. & Pancic) Hayek). Perennial. Stem 40-80 cm, erect, usually simple, densely glandular-hairy below. Leaves densely hairy, especially on the midrib and lateral lobes; lower pinnatifid, with large triangular terminal segment and 1 or 2 pairs of lateral ones; upper amplexicaul, subentire. Inflorescence a narrow panicle. Capitula with 8-18 florets. Involucral bracts triangular-lanceolate, glabrous. Ligules yellow. Achenes 7-8 mm; body oblong-elliptical, 10-ribbed, pale brown; beak about ¼ as long as body. 2n = 16.{\i  Scrub. C. & E. parts of Balkan peninsula, extending to S.W. Romania.} Bu Ju Rm Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. LACTUCA. Inflorescence a dense panicle of many capitula. Capitula with 10-50 florets. Achenes elliptical to obovate, 1- to 9-ribbed, narrowed in the upper part, with distinct, slender, pale beak usually at least as long as body.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. L. serriola} L., {\i Cent. Pl.}{\b  2}: 29 (1756) ({\i L. scariola} L.). Annual or biennial. Stem up to 180 cm, rigidly erect, glabrous or setose, branched. Leaves rigid, spinulose on the midrib beneath; basal narrowly obovate-oblong, usually deeply pinnatifid (rarely undivided); cauline less deeply lobed, held vertically. Inflorescence a long, pyramidal or spike-like panicle. Involucre patent or deflexed in fruit. Capitula with 7-15(-35) florets. Ligules pale yellow. Achenes 6-8 mm; body elliptical, setose at apex, 5- to 9-ribbed, greyish; beak as long as body. 2n = 18.{\i  Roadsides, waste places and sand-dunes. Much of Europe, but only as an alien in the north.} All except Fa Fe Hb Is No Rs (N) Sb; occurs in some of these as a casual.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants with densely setose inflorescence and spinose-ciliate leaves, restricted to the Mediterranean region, may be worthy of subspecific rank.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. L. sativa} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 795 (1753). Glabrous annual or biennial, with a slender tap-root, dense basal rosette and erect flowering stems 30-70(-100) cm. Basal leaves undivided or runcinate-pinnatifid, shortly petiolate; cauline simple, ovate to orbicular, cordate-amplexicaul, sessile, not held vertically. Inflorescence a dense, corymbose panicle. Involucre erect in fruit Capitula numerous, with 7-15(-35) florets. Ligules pale yellow, often violet-streaked. Achenes 6-8 mm; body obovate, often finely muricate at apex, 5- to 9-ribbed, greyish; beak as long as body. 2n = 18. {\i Cultivated as a vegetable almost throughout Europe; frequent as a casual, but seldom naturalized}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Probably originated in Egypt from{\i  L. serriola.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. L. saligna} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 796 (1753). Annual or biennial. Stem 30-100 cm, glabrous, erect, whitish, branched. Leaves often muricate on the midrib; lower undivided to pinnatifid with narrow distant lobes; upper oblong to linear with sagittate base. Inflorescence a spike-like panicle of numerous capitula. Capitula with 6-15 florets. Ligules pale yellow. Achenes 5-8 mm; body elliptical, finely muricate at apex, 7- to 8-ribbed, pale brown; beak 1½-3 times as long as body. 2n = 18.{\i  Europe, northwards to S. England, C. Germany & S.C. Russia.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu *Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. L. altaica} Fischer & C.A. Meyer, {\i Ind. Sem. Horti Petrop.}{\b  11}: 73 (1846). Annual or biennial. Stems 50-80(-120) cm, erect, often violet, setose below, sometimes branched. Lower leaves pinnatifid; upper linear-lanceolate or oblong, entire or spinulose-dentate. Inflorescence a spike-like panicle of numerous capitula. Capitula with 7-17 florets. Ligules pale yellow. Achenes 6-10 mm; body elliptical, setose at apex, 5- to 10-ribbed, brownish or greyish; beak as long as or longer than body.{\i  Steppes. S.E. Russia.} Rs (E). ({\i C. & S.W. Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. L. virosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 795 (1753). Annual or biennial, with foetid roots. Stem up to 200 cm, erect, glabrous or setose below. Leaves obovate-oblong, dentate to pinnatifid with wide lobes, spinulose on the midrib beneath. Bracts with appressed auricles. Inflorescence a long, pyramidal panicle; capitula with c. 15 florets. Ligules pale yellow. Achenes 6-10 mm; body elliptical, narrowly winged, rugose, 5-ribbed, blackish; beak as long as body. 2n = 18. {\i Dry, stony or sandy places. S., W. & C. Europe; cultivated as a medicinal plant and in some districts only naturalized}. Au Be ?Bl *Br Co Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si Tu [Po]
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. L. livida} Boiss. & Reuter in Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 742 (1845). Pruinose biennial. Stem erect, spinulose. Lower leaves oblong-spathulate, entire or lobed, narrowed into a long petiole; upper runcinate with sagittate base; all densely spinulose especially on the veins. Inflorescence a panicle with divaricate branches. Capitula with up to 25 florets. Ligules yellow. Achenes up to 7 mm; body narrowly winged, usually 5- or 6-ribbed, black; beak about as long as body. {\i Shady mountain rocks. • C. Spain} ({\i Montes de Toledo}). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. L. perennis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 796 (1753). Glabrous perennial. Stems (20-)30-80 cm, erect, branched above. Leaves pinnatifid or pinnatisect with lanceolate, entire or toothed segments, grey-green; lower shortly petiolate; middle and upper sessile or sub-
\par 

\par 
330}
\par