{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 sessile. Inflorescence a corymbose panicle with ascending branches. Capitula few, on peduncles 2-8 cm long, with 12-20 florets. Ligules blue to lilac. Achenes 10-14 mm; body narrowly elliptical, slightly tuberculate, 1-ribbed, black; beak almost as long as body. Pappus white, persistent. 2n = 18.{\i  Rocks and other dry places; calcicole. C. Europe, extending to Belgium and locally southwards to S. Spain, S. Italy and S.W. Bulgaria.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. L. tenerrima} Pourret, {\i Mém. Acad. Sci. Toulouse}{\b  3}: 321 (1788). Perennial. Stems 20-50 cm, erect, branched, setose below. Lower leaves shortly petiolate; middle and upper auriculate-amplexicaul with narrow, often linear segments, glabrous or spinulose especially on the veins. Inflorescence with long, ascending branches. Capitula usually solitary, with 12-20 florets. Ligules lilac. Achenes 8-12 mm; body obovate, 1- to 3-ribbed, dark brown; beak as long as body. Pappus yellowish, persistent. 2n = 16. {\i Shady rocks and screes. S.W. Europe.} ?Al Bl Ga Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. L. graeca} Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  3}: 812 (1875). Perennial. Stems 10-35 cm, glabrous, branched from the base. Lower leaves petiolate, pinnatifid to pinnatisect; upper sessile with auriculate base; all lanate, especially on the midrib, rarely glabrous. Inflorescence with divaricate, ascending branches up to 25 cm, with solitary capitula and few small bracts. Florets 6-15. Ligules blue. Achenes 10-12 mm; body narrowly elliptical, 1- to 3-ribbed, greyish; beak white, as long as or shorter than body. Pappus white, persistent.{\i  Mountain rocks and screes. • N. & C. Greece, S. Albania.} Al Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 170.           Cicerbita}             Wallr.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.D. Sell.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Stems usually solitary, branched. Leaves lobed, the cauline amplexicaul. Capitula numerous. Involucral bracts in several rows. Receptacle without scales. Ligules blue, lilac or violet. Achenes flattened, not beaked; pappus of 2 rows of simple hairs, the outer shorter than the inner.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   All species grow in damp or shady places.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: G. Beauverd,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Genève} ser. 2, {\b 2}: 99-144 (1910).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 At least the peduncles, and usually also the upper part
\par 
  of the stem and the involucre, glandular-hairy
\par 
2 Lower leaves with a triangular terminal lobe and few 
\par 
  pairs of small lateral lobes; capitula in an elongated
\par 
  panicle; achenes linear ...................................................................... {\b 1. alpina}
\par 
2 Lower leaves with a cordate terminal lobe and usually 
\par 
  only a single pair of lateral lobes; panicle wider,
\par 
  more or less corymbose; achenes narrowly elliptical ............. {\b 2. macrophylla} 
\par 
1 Plant glabrous
\par 
3 Midrib between leaf-segments with broad wing; achenes 
\par 
  flat, conspicuously narrowed at apex ............................................ {\b 3. plumieri}
\par 
3 Midrib between leaf-segments with narrow wing; achenes
\par 
  triangular in section, not narrowed to apex .................................... {\b 4. pancicii}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. alpina} (L.) Wallr., {\i Sched. Crit.} 434 (1822) ({\i Mulgedium alpinum }(L.) Less., {\i Sonchus alpinus} L.). Stem 50-250 cm, simple or branched, with dense, reddish glandular hairs on the upper part including peduncles and involucre. Leaves 80-250 × 20-120 mm, glabrous, glaucous beneath; lowest lyrate or runcinate-pinnatifid with a large, broadly triangular, acuminate terminal lobe and a few pairs of much smaller triangular lateral ones, with the base narrowed into a winged petiole; upper smaller and less divided, with a winged petiole widened into a cordate-amplexicaul base. Capitula in an elongated panicle. Involucre 10-15 × 7-10 mm; bracts linear. Ligules pale blue. Achenes 4·5-5 mm, linear. 2n = 18. {\i Fennoscandia; mountains of Europe southwards to the Pyrenees, N. Appennini and Bulgaria.} Al Au Br Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. macrophylla} (Willd.) Wallr., {\i loc. cit.} (1822). Like {\b 1} but leaves more or less setose, the lower more or less lyrate, with a large cordate terminal lobe and usually only a single pair of small lateral lobes; panicle wider and more or less corymbose; ligules lilac; achenes narrowly elliptical. {\i C. & E. Russia; naturalized elsewhere.} Rs (C, E) [Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb It No Su].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   The above description applies to subsp.{\b  uralensis} (Rouy) P.D. Sell,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 249 (1976) ({\i C. uralensis} (Rouy) Beauverd,{\i  Mulgedium uralense} Rouy). It is possible that some of the naturalized plants belong to subsp.{\i  macrophylla,} native of the Caucasus, which has dark violet ligules and the main branches of the panicle 2·5-3·5(-5) mm in diameter (not 1·5-2·5(-3) mm in diameter).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. plumieri} (L.) Kirschleger,{\i  Fl. Alsace}{\b  1}: 401 (1852) ({\i C. orbelica }(Velen.) Hayek, {\i Mulgedium plumieri} (L.) DC.,{\i  Sonchus plumieri} L.). Glabrous; stems 60-130 cm. Leaves 50-600 × 20-170 mm, lyrate-pinnatifid with a large triangular terminal lobe and several pairs of more or less ovate lateral ones which are shorter than, but at least as wide as, the terminal; lobes more or less undulate, with mammiform teeth; midrib between lobes and petiole with a broad wing. Capitula in a wide, more or less corymbose panicle. Involucre 10-17 × 9-12 mm; bracts lanceolate or linear-lanceolate. Ligules blue. Achenes 5·5-6·5 mm, flat, linear to narrowly elliptical, conspicuously narrowed at apex. •{\i  Pyrenees; mountains of France and W.C. Europe; S.W. Bulgaria.} Bu Ga Ge He Hs ?Ju [Br].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. pancicii} (Vis.) Beauverd,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Genève} ser. 2,{\b  2}: 121 (1910). Like {\b 3} but leaves with lateral lobes shorter and not as wide as the terminal; midrib between lobes with a narrow wing; lobes with prominent mammiform teeth; panicle narrower; achenes triangular in section, not narrowed at apex. •{\i  Mountains of Albania, Jugoslavia and Bulgaria.} Al Bu Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 171.             Prenanthes}             L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.D. Sell.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Stems usually solitary, much-branched. Leaves lobed, the cauline auriculate, amplexicaul. Capitula numerous. Involucral bracts in 2 or 3 rows. Receptacle without scales. Ligules purplish. Achenes compressed, not beaked; pappus of 2 or 3 equal rows of simple hairs, the outer not thickened near the base.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. purpurea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 797 (1753). Stems 25-150(-250) cm, glabrous. Leaves 40-180 × 5-40 mm, all cauline, elliptical, oblong or panduriform, sometimes linear (var.{\i  angustifolia} Koch), acute, entire to sinuate-dentate, rarely lyrate-pinnatifid, glaucous. Inflorescence a much-branched panicle of numerous, narrow capitula. Involucre 10-15 × 3-5 mm; bracts lanceolate, obtuse, the outer and median 1/3-1/2 as long as the inner. 2n = 18. {\i Woods and other shady places, mainly in mountain districts. From C. France and S. Poland southwards to N. Spain, C. Italy and Greece.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W) [Da].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 172.             Mycelis}               Cass.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.D. Sell.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Stems usually solitary, branched. Leaves lobed the cauline more or less amplexicaul. Capitula many. Involucral
\par 

\par 
331}
\par