{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. minimum} (Briganti ex Guss.) N. Terracc., {\i Atti Real Ist. Incoragg. Sci. Nat. Nap.} ser. 2,{\b  6}: 352 (1869). 2n = 16. Ga Gr Hs It Lu Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Sect. OBOVATA Van Soest.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. T. obovatum} group. Leaves 5-10 cm, obovate, entire or shallowly lobed, dark green, glabrous, horizontal; petiole short, wide, green. Scapes 5-10 cm, slender, lanate, glabrescent. Capitulum 25-30 mm in diameter. Involucre 5-9 × 7-10 mm; outer bracts ovate to ovate-lanceolate, slightly glaucous with a more or less pale margin, erect, shortly corniculate. Ligules yellow with a grey stripe. Achenes grey, cream, brownish or red; body 3·5-4 mm, strongly rugose; cone 0·5 mm, conical; beak 4-7 mm, stout. Apomictic. 2n = 32.{\i  S.W. Europe, extending eastwards to Sicilia.} Bl Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 2 species have been described for Europe:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. leucospermum} Jordan, {\i Cat. Jard. Dijon} 31 (1848) ({\i T. officinale} subsp.{\i  leucospermum} (Jordan) P. Fourn.). • Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. obovatum} (Willd.) DC., {\i Mém. Soc. Agric. Paris}{\b  11}: 83 (1809) ({\i T. taraxacoides} subsp.{\i  obovatum }(Willd.) Willk.). Bl Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Sect. MACROCORNUTA Van Soest.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. T. glaucanthum} group. Glabrous. Leaves 10-15 cm, few, oblanceolate, remotely sinuate-dentate or lobed, brownish- or grey-green, erect, fleshy; lateral lobes narrow, acute, patent or more or less recurved, entire or slightly dentate; terminal lobe very long, hastate. Scapes 15-25 cm, numerous, slender, erect. Capitulum 25-30 mm in diameter. Involucre 12-15 × 9-12 mm; outer bracts up to 8 mm, ovate, glaucous-pruinose with a conspicuous scarious margin, erect to appressed, corniculate. Ligules wide, pale yellow with a grey stripe. Achenes pale greyish-brown; body 3·5-4·5 mm, narrow, spinulose in upper part; cone 1-1·8 mm, cylindrical; beak 6-9 mm, white.{\i  Saline soils. S. part of U.S.S.R.} Rs (C, W, K, E) [Au Cz Ge Hu Rm].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 4 species have been recorded for Europe:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. glaucanthum} (Ledeb.) DC., {\i Prodr.} {\b 7}: 147 (1838). Rs (E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. hybernum} Steven,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  29}({\b 4}): 410 (1856). • Rs (K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. klokovii} Litv., {\i Ucen. Zap. Khar'kivsk. Derz. Univ.}{\b  2-3}: 150 (1935). •  Rs (C, W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. kok-saghyz} Rodin,{\i  Acta Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS} (Ser. 1) {\b 1}: 187 (1933). Formerly cultivated in E. & E.C. Europe for its latex and locally naturalized. [Au Cz Ge Hu Rm Rs (W, K, E).] ({\i C. Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Sect. CERATOPHORA Dahlst.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. T. ceratophorum} group. Leaves 8-20 cm, broadly lanceolate, lobed, dark green, rather thin, hairy; lobes large, more or less deltate, acute, dentate; petiole winged. Scapes 10-25 cm, stout, hairy. Capitulum 35-50 mm in diameter. Involucre 15-20 × 15-20 mm; outer bracts 7-12 mm, ovate to lanceolate, green, with a scarcely paler margin, erect, corniculate, sometimes conspicuously so. Ligules narrow, yellow with a red, purple or brown stripe. Achenes brownish; body 3·5-4 mm, rather wide, tuberculate in upper part; cone up to 0·8 mm, conical; beak 7-11 mm, slender. Apomictic. {\i N. Europe; Alps.} Au Fe Ga He Is No Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. ceratophorum} (Ledeb.) DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  7}: 146 (1838). Although this name has always been used for this group of plants in the aggregate sense, it has never been typified and it is uncertain to which of the segregates the name applies.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 13 species have been described for Europe, mainly from the Alps and N.W. Europe. The following are the 2 which are most widespread:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. brachyceras} Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot.}{\b  5}({\b 9}): 19 (1906) ({\i T. melanostylum} T.C.E. Fries,{\i  T. simulum} Brenner). Fe No Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. tornense} T.C.E. Fries, {\i Svensk Bot. Tidskr.}{\b  2}({\b 2}): 142 (1908) ({\i T. lactucaceum} Dahlst.). 2n = 32. Fe No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   Sect. SPECTABILIA Dahlst.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. T. spectabile} group. Leaves 5-25 cm, entire or shallowly lobed, dull green, often dark-spotted, hairy, sometimes horizontal; petioles narrow, usually purplish. Scapes 3-30 cm, stout, ascending, often purplish, often glabrous. Capitulum 35-45 mm in diameter. Involucre 15-25 × 15-20 mm; outer bracts ovate to lanceolate, sometimes purplish with a narrow, pale margin, appressed, ecorniculate. Ligules wide, bright deep yellow, with a red or purple stripe. Achenes straw-coloured; body 4-5·5 mm, oblong, smooth or slightly tuberculate; cone 0·2-0·6 mm, stout, conical; beak 7-9 mm, rather stout. Apomictic. {\i Wet places. N. & W. Europe}. Br Da Fa Hb Hs Is No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 38 species have been described for Europe, mainly from Fennoscandia and N.W. Europe. The following have a relatively wide distribution:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. eximium} Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot.}{\b  12}({\b 2}): 30 (1912). 2n = 40. • Br No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. faeroense} (Dahlst.) Dahlst., {\i Bergens Mus. Aarb.} {\b 1923-1924}({\b 6}): 12 (1925). 2n = 40. Br Fa Hb Is No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. reclinatum} M. P. Christiansen in Rosenvinge et al.,{\i  Bot. Iceland} {\b 3}({\b 3}): 293 (1942). • Br Is No.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. spectabile} Dahlst., {\i Bot. Not.}{\b  1905}: 159 (1905) ({\i T. cimbricum} Wiinst., {\i T. crispifrons} M.P. Christiansen, {\i T. dilutiroseum} M.P. Christiansen,{\i  T. subspectabile} M.P. Christiansen). 2n = 40. Br Da Fa Fe Hb Is No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. T. praestans} group. Leaves 5-30 cm, lobed to laciniate, dull green, often dark-spotted, often hairy; lobes usually narrow, acute, patent, acutely or acuminately dentate; petiole usually winged, dentate. Scapes 8-25 cm, erect, usually hairy. Capitulum 35-55 mm in diameter. Involucre 15-25 × 15-20 mm; outer bracts 6-12 mm, ovate-lanceolate, with a narrow pale margin, often glaucous on inner face, erect to patent, ciliate, ecorniculat or slightly callosed. Ligules rather pale yellow with a grey or brown stripe. Achenes straw-coloured or brown; body 3-4 mm tuberculate in upper part; cone 0·3-0·8 mm, conical; beak 7-10 mm, slender. Apomictic. {\i Wet places. N. & W. Europe.} Br D Fa Fe Ge Hb Ho Hs Is No Rs (N, B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 42 species have been described for Europe, mainly from Norway and Iceland. The following have a relatively wide distribution
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. euryphyllum} (Dahlst.) M.P. Christiansen, {\i Bot. Tidsskr.}{\b  45}: 154 (1940). 2n = 32. • Br Da Ge Hb Ho No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. lainzii} Van Soest, {\i Trab. Jard. Bot. Univ. Santiago Comp.}{\b  7}: 5 (1954). 2n = 24. Br Hb Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. landmarkii} Dahlst.,{\i  Bergens Mus. Aarb.}{\b  1923-1924}({\b 6}): 14(1925). 2n = 32. • Br Hb No.
\par 

\par 
335}
\par