{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. maculigerum} H. Lindb. fil., {\i Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  29}({\b 9}): 35 (1907). 2n = 32. Br Da Fe Ge Hb Ho No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. naevosiforme} Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot.}{\b  12}({\b 2}): 49 (1912) ({\i T. johnstonii} Dahlst., {\i T. unguilobiforme} Dahlst.). 2n = 32. • Br Hb No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. naevosum} Dahlst. in Warming, {\i Bot. Faeroes}{\b  3}: 840 (1908) ({\i T. asperum} M.P. Christiansen,{\i  T. atroglaucum} M.P. Christiansen, {\i T. brachylobum} M.P. Christiansen, {\i T. brevilobum} M.P. Christiansen,{\i  T. dilutisquameum} M.P. Christiansen, {\i T. galeipotens} M.P. Christiansen, {\i T. rubellum} M.P. Christiansen, {\i T. scabrum} M.P. Christiansen). 2n = 32. Br Fa Fe Is No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. praestans} H. Lindb. fil., {\i Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  29}({\b 9}): 24 (1907) ({\i T. opeatolobum} Dahlst.). 2n = 32. • Br Da Fe Hb No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. purpuridens} Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot. }{\b 12}({\b 2}): 25 (1912). • Fe No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. sagittifolium} H. Lindb. fil. ex Dahlst., {\i Kungl. Svenska Vet.Akad. Handl.}{\b  9}({\b 2}): 74 (1930). • Fe Rs (N) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. stictophyllum} Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot. }{\b 12}({\b 2}): 38 (1912). 2n = 32. • Br Fa Is No.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. T. unguilobum} group. Like {\b 13} but leaves never spotted; leaf-lobes strongly deflexed, dentate; petiole more or less unwinged; outer involucral bracts pale green, tipped with pink; ligules unstriped or with pale pink stripe; achenes pinkish to pale reddish-brown, with shortly spinulose body 2·5-3 mm and beak 6-8 mm. {\i Wet places. • N.W. Europe.} Br Hb No.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 2 species have been described:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. fulvicarpum} Dahlst.,{\i  Trans. Proc. Bot. Soc. Edinb.}{\b  29}: 420 (1927). 2n = 32. Br.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. unguilobum} Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot.}{\b  12}({\b 2}): 57 (1912). 2n = 32. Br Hb No.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. T. croceum} group. Leaves 5-13 cm, lobed or almost entire, often bright green, sometimes spotted, glabrous to hairy; lobes short, patent or somewhat recurved, somewhat dentate; petioles often widely winged, entire, green or dull purple. Scapes 5-12 cm, stout, usually green, sparsely hairy, ascending or erect. Capitulum 35-45 mm in diameter. Involucre 12-20 × 12-18 mm; outer bracts 7-12 mm, lanceolate, dark green, often with paler margins, sometimes paler or glaucous on inner face, patent to erect, sometimes ciliate, ecorniculate. Ligules narrow, deep or orange-yellow, with a grey or brown stripe. Achenes straw-coloured, occasionally reddish; body 3·5-4 mm, shortly spinulose; cone 0·6-1 mm, subcylindrical; beak 7-9 mm, slender. Apomictic.{\i  N. Europe.} Br Fa Fe Is No Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 96 species have been described for Europe, mainly from Iceland and Norway. The following have a relatively wide distribution:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. ceratolobum} Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot.}{\b  12}({\b 2}): 12 (1912) ({\i T. acidotum} M.P. Christiansen). Br Is No Rs (N) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. craspedotum} Dahlst., {\i Bergens Mus. Aarb.}{\b  1923-1924}({\b 6}): 9 (1925). 2n = 32. • Br Fa No.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. croceum} Dahlst., {\i Bihang Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.}{\b  26}({\b 3}), {\b 1}: 12 (1900) ({\i T. lapponicum} Kihlman ex Hand.-Mazz.). 2n = 32. • Br Fa Fe Is No Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. cymbifolium} H. Lindb. fil. ex Dahlst., {\i Kungl. Svenska Vet.Akad. Handl.} ser. 3,{\b  9}({\b 2}): 73 (1930) ({\i T. acromaurum} Dahlst.). 2n = 32. • Br Fa Is No Sb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. pycnostictum} M.P. Christiansen in Rosenvinge et al.,{\i  Bot. Iceland}{\b  3}({\b 3}): 266 (1942) ({\i T. stictophoreum} M.P. Christiansen). 2n = 32. Br Fa Is.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. repletum} (Dahlst.) Dahlst.,{\i  Ark. Bot. }{\b 12}({\b 2}): 17 (1912) ({\i T. anisolobum} G. Hagl., {\i T. rufescens} M.P. Christiansen, {\i T. subrepletum} G.Hagl.). 2n = 40. • Is No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. rhodolepis} Dahlst., {\i op. cit.} 92 (1912) ({\i T. grammolepis} Dahlst.). • Fe No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. T. adamii} group. Leaves 4-25 cm, narrowly lanceolate, lobed, often bright green; rarely spotted, glabrous or hairy; lobes patent, more or less entire, terminal lobe small; petiole narrowly winged, subentire. Scapes 6-20 cm, green, purplish, stout, glabrous or slightly hairy, usually exceeding the leaves. Capitulum 30-50 mm in diameter. Involucre 12-15 × 15-18 mm; outer bracts 7-10 mm, lanceolate, dark green, sometimes pruinose, ciliate or denticulate, stiff, erect, ecorniculate. Ligules rather narrow, yellow with a grey, red or purple stripe. Achenes brown; body 3·5-4 mm, tuberculate to spinulose; cone 0·4-0·8 mm, conical; beak 8-10 mm, slender. Apomictic.{\i  Wet places. • N. & W. Europe.} Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Lu No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 15 species have been described. The following have a relatively wide distribution:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. adamii} Claire,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Rochel.}{\b  12}: 49 (1891) ({\i T. britannicum} Dahlst., {\i T. gelertii} Raunk.). 2n = 24. Be Br Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Lu No Rs (B)Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. litorale} Raunk.,{\i  Dansk Ekskurs.-Fl.} ed. 2, 256 (1906). 2n = 24. Br Da Fe Ge No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. nordstedtii} Dahlst.,{\i  Ark. Bot. }{\b 10}({\b 11}): 27 (1911). 2n = 48. Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs Lu Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Sect. PALUSTRIA Dahlst.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. T. palustre} group. Leaves 5-20 cm, linear to linear-lanceolate, entire to lobed, erect to patent, glabrous or glabrescent; lobes, if present, entire, more or less linear, and frequently obtuse; petiole long, narrow, entire, often purple. Scapes 6-15 cm, usually glabrous, often purple, ascending to erect, rarely exceeding the leaves before fruiting. Capitulum 25-50 mm in diameter. Involucre 12-15 × 15-20 mm; outer bracts up to 7 mm, ovate, more or less broadly acuminate, often suffused with violet or purple, with very wide, pale or scarious margins, appressed, ecorniculate. Ligules wide, sometimes involute, rather pale yellow, sometimes with a grey or purple stripe. Achenes straw-coloured to brown; body 3·2-4·2 mm, smooth to shortly spinulose in the upper part; cone 0·3-1·5 mm, conical or subcylindrical; beak 6-9 mm. Apomictic. {\i Wet places. Throughout a large part of Europe, but absent from the south-west, many of the islands and most of the U.S.S.R.} Al Au Bu Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, ?W) Si Su Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 56 species have been described for Europe, mainly from C. Europe. The following have a relatively wide distribution:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. anglicum} Dahlst.,{\i  Rep. Bot. Exch. Club Brit. Is.}{\b  5}: 561 (1920) ({\i T. angliciforme} Dahlst.). • Be Br Ga Ge He Ho.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. austrinum} G. Hagl., {\i Bot. Not.}{\b  1946}: 343 (1946). 2n = 24, 32. Be Br Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Po.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. balticiforme} Dahlst.,{\i  Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges.}{\b  42}: 719 (1933). 2n = 24. • Au Ga Ge He It.
\par 

\par 
336}
\par