{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 bracts in 2 rows. Receptacle pitted, without scales. Ligules yellow. Achenes more or less flattened, beaked; pappus of 2 rows of simple hairs, the outer shorter than the inner.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. muralis} (L.) Dumort.,{\i  Fl. Belg.} 60 (1827) ({\i Lactuca muralis} (L.) Gaertner). Glabrous. Stem 20-100 cm. Lower leaves 50-220 × 35-90 mm, lyrate-pinnatifid, with long, winged petioles, the terminal lobes often hastately three-lobed and larger than the rhombic or hastate lateral lobes; middle and upper leaves sessile, becoming gradually smaller and less divided upwards. Capitula narrowly cylindrical, in a large, open panicle. Involucre 7-10 × 1·5-3 mm, the outer bracts very small, lanceolate, patent, the inner linear. Achenes 3-4 mm, blackish, with a short, pale beak. 2n = 18.{\i  Woods, usually on base-rich soils; also on rocks and walls, and in waste places and cultivated ground.} Most of Europe. All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Lu Rs (N) Sb, but only as a naturalized alien in Hb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 173.               Taraxacum}              Weber
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.J. Richards & P.D. Sell.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs with tap-root. Stems few to many, simple. Leaves all basal, entire to laciniate-dentate or lobed. Capitulum solitary. often flat-topped. Involucral bracts in 2 rows, glabrous or ciliate; inner erect, more or less linear; outer shorter, usually wider, often with paler margins, sometimes with a small lump ({\i callosed}) or small appendage ({\i corniculate}) just below the apex. Receptacle more or less flat, without scales. Ligules usually yellow, often with a darker stripe beneath. Achenes fusiform to oblanceolate, often spinulose near apex, usually with a slender beak and a more or less clearly demarcated swollen region ({\i cone}) between beak and body. Pappus of many rows of simple, rough, usually white hairs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  The posture of the outer involucral bracts is of taxonomic importance and this should be ascertained when the plant is living.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Most species flower in spring or early summer; they sometimes also have a secondary flowering in autumn but then lack many of their diagnostic characters. A few species are mainly if not entirely autumn-flowering and for these this peculiarity is noted in the descriptions. Ripe achenes are necessary for the determination of the species.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Most European species of{\i  Taraxacum} are apomictic polyploids (2n = 24, 32, 40, 48) or occasionally aneuploids (e.g. 2n = 25, 26, 27). Wholly sexual species (1-3) are always diploid (2n = 16); a few other diploid sexual species are found under{\b  8}, {\b 24}, {\b 28} and {\b 30}. Facultative apomixis is found in a few triploid species under {\b 24} and {\b 30}. Sexual and facultatively apomictic plants are recognizable by their small, regular pollen and often imperfect setting of seed. Obligately apomictic plants have irregular pollen (or lack pollen altogether) and set seed well. Hybrids occur rarely, and only where sexual or facultatively apomictic plants grow together, or occur with pollen-bearing apomicts.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  In this account, 30 species or groups of species have been numbered and described. A selection of the more widespread of the c. 1200 species described from Europe has been listed under the groups to which they belong (though where fewer than 12 such species have been described in any group all have been listed). The index contains in addition all the species that have been recorded from Europe (with the exception of some of those in the {\i T. officinale} group); these entries are in roman type and are equated with the groups to which they belong. In the case of the {\i T. officinale} group, because of the very large number of species involved, only those which occur in Standard Floras or are especially widespread have been included.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Names of synonyms of species which do not appear in the text are given in italics in the index and equated simply with the groups to which they belong. In some cases the sectional names used in this account are nomenclaturally incorrect, but they have been retained here because they are familiar and helpful and because the correct sectional nomenclature has yet to be worked out.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Since H. von Handel-Mazzetti,{\i  Monographie der Gattung} Taraxacum. Leipzig & Wien. 1907, there has been no complete monograph; most of the species have been described since this date. There is a recent monograph of the {\b 17}. {\i T. palustre} group (Sect. {\i Palustria}) by J.L.van Soest, {\i Acta Bot. Neerl.}{\b  14}: 1-53 (1965), and useful accounts of {\b 7} and {\b 18-22} can be found in J. L. van Soest (1969) (see below). A list of species in {\b 24-27} is given in J. L. van Soest, {\i A Catalogue of} Taraxacum{\i  Section} Erythrosperma {\i Dt. em. Lb.} Leiden. 1966, and these are monographed by R. Doll,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  84}: 1-180 (1973).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Detailed accounts of the species in particular regions include: J. L. van Soest,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. Bruxelles}{\b  26}({\b 2}) (1956); {\b 31}({\b 3}) (1961) (Belgium). A. J. Richards, {\i Watsonia }{\b 9} (Suppl.) (1972) (British Isles). K. Jessen & K. Wiinstedt in C. Raunkiaer,{\i  Dansk Ekskursions-Flora,} ed. 5, 302-318. København.1934. (Denmark). J. L. van Soest, {\i Veröff. Geobot. Inst. Rübel} ({\i Zürich}) {\b 42} (1969) (Switzerland). M. P. Christiansen in L. K. Rosenvinge et al., {\i The Botany of Iceland}{\b  3}({\b 3}). Copenhagen & London. 1942. (Iceland). J. L. van Soest,{\i  Acta Bot. Neerl.}{\b  4}: 82-107 (1955); {\b 6}: 74-92 (1957) (Netherlands). B.K. Schischkin in E.G. Bobrov & N. N. Tzvelev,{\i  Flora URSS}{\b  29}: 405-560. Leningrad & Mosqua. 1964. (U.S.S.R.). H. Dahlstedt in C.A.M. Lindman,{\i  Svensk Fanerogamflora} 559-589. Stockholm. 1918. (Sweden).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Recent accounts of the cytology, micro-evolution and breeding systems in the genus can be found in A. J. Richards,{\i  New Phytol.}{\b  69}: 761-774, 1103-1121 (1970) and{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 47-59 (1972).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Achenes without a beak, or with a short beak not more 
\par 
  than ¼ the length of body ............................................................... {\b 1. glaciale}
\par 
1 Achenes with a distinct beak at least ¾ the length of body
\par 
2 Achenes without a cone, smooth or nearly so; pappus
\par 
  yellowish; flowering in autumn
\par 
3 Leaves linear-lanceolate in outline; capitula 15-20 mm 
\par 
  in diameter ............................................................................ {\b 2. bessarabicum}
\par 
3 Leaves obovate-lanceolate in outline; capitula 30-40 mm
\par 
  in diameter ............................................................................. {\b 3. serotinum} group
\par 
2 Achenes with a cone, usually more or less rugose or
\par 
  spinulose; pappus whitish; usually flowering in spring
\par 
4 Beak of achene stout, not or scarcely longer than body;
\par 
  leaves entire or shallowly lobed (arctic-alpine)
\par 
5 Achenes blackish; body spinulose throughout ........... {\b 4. phymatocarpum} group
\par 
5 Achenes straw-coloured, red or brownish; body smooth or
\par 
  rugose
\par 
6 Achenes dark red, almost smooth ........................................... {\b 5. glabrum} group
\par 
6 Achenes straw-coloured or brownish, rugose .......................... {\b 6. pacheri} group
\par 
4 Beak of achene slender, often much longer than body;
\par 
  leaves usually lobed, often deeply dissected
\par 
7 Body of achene 4-5·5 mm, smooth or nearly so ............... {\b 12. spectabile} group
\par 
7 Body of achene 2·3-4·5 mm, usually rugose, at least 
\par 
  above
\par 
8 Outer involucral bracts with wide pale or scarious
\par 
  margins comprising at least ¼ of area of bract
\par 
9 Leaves many, with persistent bases; outer involucral 
\par 
  bracts with brown midrib .......................................................... {\b 22. dissectum}
\par 
9 Leaves few, with bases not persistent; outer involucral
\par 
  bracts without brown midrib 
\par 
10 Leaves oblanceolate to obovate; usually autumn 
\par 
   flowering ............................................................................ {\b 8. bithynicum} group
\par 

\par 
332}
\par