{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min19}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min20}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords808}{\nofchars4607}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 T. balticum}{\fs28  Dahlst., }{\i\fs28 Bot. Not.}{\b\fs28  1905}{\fs28 : 162 (1905). 2n = 24, 31, 32. Au Da Fe Ge Po Rs (B) Su.
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28 T. crocodes}{\fs28  Dahlst.,}{\i\fs28  Ark. Bot.}{\b\fs28  7}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 6}{\fs28 ): 18 (1907). 2n = 40. \bullet  Fe No Su.
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28 T. decolorans}{\fs28  Dahlst.,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\b\fs28  29}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 18}{\fs28 ): 8 (1925). \bullet  Ge Rs (B) Su.
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28 T. divulsifolium}{\fs28  Van Soest, }{\i\fs28 Acta Bot. Neerl.}{\b\fs28  14}{\fs28 : 28 (1965). \bullet  Ga Ge He.
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28 T. frisicum}{\fs28  Van Soest,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\b\fs28  5}{\fs28 : 96 (1956). \bullet  Be Ge Ho.
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28 T. germanicum}{\fs28  Van Soest, }{\i\fs28 op. cit.}{\fs28  14: 32 (1965). \bullet  Ga Ge He It.
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28 T. heleonastes}{\fs28  G. Hagl.,}{\i\fs28  Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges.}{\b\fs28  60}{\fs28 : 236 (1950). \bullet  Ga Ge He It.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28 T. hollandicum}{\fs28  Van Soest, }{\i\fs28 Nederl. Kruidk. Arch.}{\b\fs28  52}{\fs28 : 226 (1942). \bullet  Be Ga Ge He Ho.
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28 T. illyricum}{\fs28  Dahlst. ex Van Soest,}{\i\fs28  Acta Bot. Neerl.}{\b\fs28  14}{\fs28 : 35 (1965). 2n = 29. \bullet  Cz Hu Ju.
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28 T. limnanthes}{\fs28  G. Hagl.,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Not.}{\b\fs28  1946}{\fs28 : 343 (1946). Da Ge Ho Rs (B) Su.
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28 T. lividum}{\fs28  (Waldst. & Kit.) Peterm.,}{\i\fs28  Deutschl. Fl.}{\fs28  337 (1849) (}{\i\fs28 T. lissocarpum}{\fs28  (Dahlst.) Dahlst.). Au Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ge Ho Hs Hu Po Rm Rs (B) Su.
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28 T. neoaellenii}{\fs28  Van Soest,}{\i\fs28  Acta Bot. Neerl. }{\b\fs28 14}{\fs28 : 42 (1965). \bullet  Be Ga He.
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28 T. palustre}{\fs28  (Lyons) Symons,}{\i\fs28  Syn. Pl. Brit.}{\fs28  172 (1798) (}{\i\fs28 T. commutatum }{\fs28 Jordan,}{\i\fs28  T. gremlii}{\fs28  Appel, }{\i\fs28 T. lanceolatum}{\fs28  Poiret, }{\i\fs28 T. paludosum}{\fs28  (Scop.) Schlecht. ex Crepin,}{\i\fs28  T. scorzonera}{\fs28  Reichenb.). 2n = 40. \bullet  Be Br Ga Hb Ho.
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28 T. scaturiginosum}{\fs28  G. Hagl., }{\i\fs28 Ark. Bot.}{\b\fs28  26A}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28 ): 26 (1933) (}{\i\fs28 T. albanicum}{\fs28  Van Soest, }{\i\fs28 T. murbeckianum}{\fs28  G. Hagl.). Al Gr It Po Tu.
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28 T. suecicum}{\fs28  G. Hagl., }{\i\fs28 G\'f6teb. Kungl. Vetensk. Vitterh. Samh. Handl.}{\fs28  ser. }{\b\fs28 6}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 B}{\fs28 ), 7: 364 (1952). Ga Ge Rs (B, ?W) Su.
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28 T. turfosum}{\fs28  (Schultz Bip.) Van Soest,}{\i\fs28  Acta Bot. Neerl.}{\b\fs28  10}{\fs28 : 281 (1961). 2n = 24. Au Cz Ge He It Rm.
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28 T. udum}{\fs28  Jordan, }{\i\fs28 Pug. Pl. Nov.}{\fs28  114 (1852). \bullet  Ga He It.
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28 T. vindobonense}{\fs28  Van Soest,}{\i\fs28  Acta Bot. Neerl.}{\b\fs28  14}{\fs28 : 50 (1965). \bullet  Au Cz Ge.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  Sect. ALPINA G. Hagl.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 18. T. apenninum}{\fs28  group. (}{\i\fs28 T. alpinum}{\fs28  Hegetschw.,}{\i\fs28  T. officinale}{\fs28  subsp. }{\i\fs28 alpinum}{\fs28  (Hegetschw.) Chenevard). Leaves 3-10 cm, variable, entire or lobed, mid-green, subglabrous to arachnoid, horizontal; lobes, if present, narrow, recurved, acute, 4-5 on each side; petiole narrow, short, entire. Scapes 1-5 cm, slender, procumbent or ascending (to erect), usually not exceeding the leaves. Capitulum 15-20 mm in diameter. Involucre 8-12 \'d7 11-14 mm, narrow; outer bracts up to 8 mm, lanceolate to ovate, mid or dark green, rarely purplish, usually without a pale margin, erect to appressed, ecorniculate or slightly callosed. Ligules short, narrow, with a grey or brown stripe. Achenes brownish; body 3-4\'b73 mm, shortly spinulose; cone 0\'b72-0\'b77 mm, conical; beak 5-8 mm, slender. Apomictic. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Mountains of C. & S. Europe.}{\fs28  Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Po Rm.
\par 
\par 23 species have been described, mainly from the Alps. The following have a relatively wide distribution:
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28 T. apenninum}{\fs28  (Ten.) Ten., }{\i\fs28 Cat. Piante Orto Bot. Napoli }{\fs28 70 (1845). It.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 T. carinthiacum}{\fs28  Van Soest,}{\i\fs28  Acta Bot. Neerl.}{\b\fs28  8}{\fs28 : 83 (1959). Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 T. helveticum}{\fs28  Van Soest, }{\i\fs28 op. cit.}{\fs28  85 (1959). 2n = 32. Au Cz Ga Ge He It Po.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 T. mattmarkense}{\fs28  Van Soest, }{\i\fs28 op. cit.}{\fs28  86 (1959). Au Ga He.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 T. panalpinum}{\fs28  Van Soest,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\fs28  88 (1959). Al Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Lu Rm.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 T. parsennense}{\fs28  Van Soest,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\fs28  91 (1959). Au Ga He.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 T. petiolulatum}{\fs28  Van Soest, }{\i\fs28 op. cit.}{\fs28  93 (1959). Au Ge It.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 T. saasense}{\fs28  Van Soest, }{\i\fs28 op. cit.}{\fs28  95 (1959). Ga He It.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 T. venustum}{\fs28  Dahlst., }{\i\fs28 Ark. Bot.}{\b\fs28  7}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 5 (1908) (}{\i\fs28 T. alpinum}{\fs28  var. }{\i\fs28 kalbfussii}{\fs28  (Schultz Bip.) Hand.-Mazz.). 2n = 32. Au Ge He It.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 T. vetteri}{\fs28  Van Soest, }{\i\fs28 Acta Bot. Neerl.}{\b\fs28  8}{\fs28 : 101 (1959). Au Ga Ge He It.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  Sect. ALPESTRIA Van Soest.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 19. T. nigricans}{\fs28  group. Leaves 8-15 cm, lobed, bright to pale medium green, erect, sparsely hairy or glabrescent; lobes variable, few, acute, often dentate with acuminate teeth; petiole often green, long, winged, sometimes with long, narrow teeth. Scapes 8-18 cm, rather slender, sparsely hairy to subglabrous, usually exceeding the leaves. Capitulum 25-35 mm in diameter. Involucre 10-15 \'d7 8-14 mm, dark, often more or less violet-purple, pruinose; outer bracts lanceolate, dark, without a pale margin, patent to erect, ecorniculate. Ligules narrow, dark yellow to orange-yellow, with a grey or purple stripe. Achenes straw-coloured, more rarely reddish; body 3\'b75-4\'b75 mm, narrow, shortly spinulose; cone 0\'b76-1 mm, subcylindrical; beak 6-9 mm, slender. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Alps; Carpathians; mountains of Bulgaria.}{\fs28  Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 
\par 32 species have been described for Europe, mainly from the Alps. The following have a relatively wide distribution:
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 T. aestivum}{\fs28  Van Soest,}{\i\fs28  Acta Bot. Neerl.}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 8}{\fs28 : 117 (1959). 2n = 32. Au He It.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 T. cordatifolium}{\fs28  Van Soest, }{\i\fs28 Ver\'f6ff. Geobot. Inst. R\'fcbel}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Z\'fcrich}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 42}{\fs28 : 119 (1969). Au He It.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 T. nigricans}{\fs28  (Kit.) Reichenb.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Germ. Excurs.}{\fs28  270 (1813). 2n = 24, 32. Bu Cz Po Rs (W).
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 T. perfissum}{\fs28  Van Soest, }{\i\fs28 Acta Bot. Neerl.}{\b\fs28  8}{\fs28 : 129 (1959). Au Ga He It.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 T. reophilum}{\fs28  Van Soest,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\fs28  132 (1959). Au He It.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 T. rhaeticum}{\fs28  Van Soest,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\fs28  134 (1959). 2n = 24. Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 T. rufocarpum}{\fs28  Van Soest,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\fs28  124 (1959). Au Ga He It Ju.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28 Sect. FONTANA Van Soest.
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 
\par    }{\b\fs28 20. T. fontanum}{\fs28  group. Leaves 4-12 cm, very wide, entire to dentate or lobed, bright green, ascending or erect, hairy; lobes, if present, variable, few, wide, acute, dentate with acuminate teeth, the terminal lobe large, wide, more or less obtuse; petiole widely winged, long-dentate. Scapes 5-15 cm, rather robust, green, hairy, exceeding the leaves. Involucre 10-15 \'d7 10-15 mm; outer bracts 6-12 mm, lanceolate, green, without a pale margin, erect or recurved, usually glabrous. Ligules long, narrow, orange-yellow, with a stripe. Achenes brownish; body 3-4 mm, tuberculate in the upper part; cone 0\'b72-0\'b77 mm, conical; beak 7-10 mm,
\par 
\par 337}
\par }