{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. braunblanquetii} Van Soest, {\i Vegetatio}{\b  5-6}: 524 (1954). Co Ga Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. commixtum} G. Hagl. in Hyl.,{\i  Fört.Skand. Vaxter} 156 (1941)({\i T. commutatum} Dahlst., non Jordan). • Br Da Ga Ge Ho Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. decipiens} Raunk.,{\i  Bot. Tidsskr.}{\b  25}: 139 (1903) ({\i T. laevigatum }subsp.{\i  glaucescens} var.{\i  decipiens} (Raunk.) Hayek, {\i T. linguatifrons} Marklund). Da Fe Ge Ju No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 T. disseminatum G. Hagl.,{\i  Svensk Bot. Tidskr.}{\b  41}: 85 (1947). 2n = 24. Au Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho No Su [Br].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. dunense} Van Soest, {\i Acta Bot. Neerl.}{\b  5}: 95 (1954). 2n = 24. • Be Br Ho Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. glaucinum} Dahlst.,{\i  Bot. Not. }{\b 1909}: 177 (1909). • Br Fe Ge He Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. gotlandicum} (Dahlst.) Dahlst., {\i op. cit.} 171 (1909). • Br Hb No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. gracillimum} Van Soest, {\i Veröff. Geobot. Inst. Rübel} ({\i Zürich}) {\b 42}: 112 (1969). • Au Ga He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. isophyllum} G. Hagl.,{\i  Bot. Not. }{\b 1938}: 499 (1938). 2n = 24. • Au Cz Da Fe Ge No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. lacistophyllum} (Dahlst.) Raunk., {\i Dansk Ekskurs.-Fl.} ed. 2, 257 (1906). 2n = 24, 25. • Be Br Co Da Ga Ge He Ho Lu No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. laetiforme} Dahlst.,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1909}: 174 (1909). • Au Br Da Ga Ge Ho Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. laetum} (Dahlst.) Dahlst. in Semander et al.,{\i  Bot. Stud.} ({\i Kjellman}) 183 (1906). 2n = 24. • Br Da Fe Ge Ho No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. limbatum} Dahlst., {\i Bot. Not. }{\b 1909}: 173 (1909) ({\i T. reflectens} Dahlst.). • Fe No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. marginatum} (Dahlst.) Dahlst. in Semander et al.,{\i  Bot. Stud.} ({\i Kjellman}) 183 (1906). • Da Fe Ge No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. montesignum} Van Soest, {\i Collect. Bot.} ({\i Barcelona}) {\b 4}: 25 (1954). • Ga Hs It Sa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. obscurans} (Dahlst. ex H. Lindb. fil.) G. Hagl. in Hyl.,{\i  Fört. Skand. Växter }156 (1941) ({\i T. abietifolium} Saarson, {\i T. diversiflorum} M.P. Christiansen). • Da Fe Is No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. pindicola} (Bald.) Hand.-Mazz.,{\i  Monogr. Taraxacum} 107 (1907) ({\i T. laevigatum} subsp.{\i  pindicola} (Bald.) Hayek). • Al Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. plumbeum} Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot.}{\b  10}({\b 6}): 2 (1911). • Au Cz Fe Ge He It Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. polyschistum} Dahlst.,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1909}: 178 (1909). 2n = 24. • Be Ga He Ho Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. proximum} (Dahlst.) Dahlst. in Semander et al.,{\i  Bot. Stud.} ({\i Kjellman}) 183 (1906) ({\i T. conjugens} H. Lindb. fil.). 2n = 24. Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho No Rs (B, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. rubicundum} (Dahlst.) Dahlst. in Semander et al., {\i Bot. Stud.} ({\i Kjellman)} 183 (1906) ({\i T. rubicundum} subsp. {\i monspeliense} Dahlst., subsp.{\i  pulvigerum} H. Lindb. fil.). 2n = 24. • Au Be Br Co Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho It Ju Sa Si Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. saphycraspedum} Saarson & G. Hagl., {\i Ark. Bot.} ser. 2,{\b  4}: 521 (1963). • Ge Ho Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. scanicum} Dahlst.,{\i  Ark. Bot.}{\b  10}({\b 11}): 21 (1911). 2n = 25. Au Be Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho It Ju No Po Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b T. silesiacum} Dahlst. ex G. Hagl.,{\i  Bot. Not. }{\b 1938}: 500 (1938). 2n = 24. Au Be Br Co Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu It Po Rm Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b T. taeniatum} G. Hagl. ex Holmgren,{\i  Blekinges Fl.} 326 (1942). 2n = 24. • Be Da Fe Ho No Rs (E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b T. tenuilobum} (Dahlst.) Dahlst.,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1909}: 172 (1909). 2n = 24, 25. • Da Ge He Ho No Po Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b T. xerophilum} Marklund,{\i  Acta Bot. Fenn.}{\b  23}: 87 (1938). • Rs (B, C) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. T. simile} group. Leaves 4-15 cm, usually patent to erect, more or less deeply lobed; lobes 3-5 on each side, narrow, or rarely broadly triangular; petioles sometimes winged, often purplish. Scapes 4-15 cm, erect, often stout, exceeding the leaves. Capitulum 25-50 mm in diameter. Involucre 8-12 × 5-10 mm outer bracts green, with a pale margin, erect to appressed, corniculate. Ligules usually long and narrow, pale to bright yellow, with a grey, brown or purple stripe. Achenes straw-coloured or greyish-brown; body 2·5-3·5 mm, spinulose; cone 0·8-1·2 mm, cylindrical; beak 7-13 mm, white. Apomictic.{\i  Dry places. • N., W. & C. Europe; Corse.} Au Be Br Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho It No Rs (B, C, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 26 species have been described. The following have a relatively wide distribution:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b T. canulum} G. Hagl., {\i Acta Bot. Fenn.}{\b  26}: 134 (1940). Be Br Fe Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b T. degelii} G. Hagl.,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1935}: 430 (1935). Br Ga Hb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b T. dissimile} Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot.}{\b  10}({\b 11}): 8 (1911) ({\i T. parvilobum} Dahlst.). 2n = 24. Be Da Fe Ge Ho No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b T. falcatum} Brenner,{\i  Meddel. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  34}: 25 (1908) ({\i T. pectinosum }G. Hagl.). ?Be Da Fe He Is No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b T. isthmicola} H. Lindb. fil.,{\i  Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  29}({\b 9}): 42 (1907). Da Fe Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b T. microlobum} Marklund,{\i  Acta Bot. Fenn.}{\b  23}: 84 (1938). Fe No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b T. placidum} A. J. Richards, {\i Watsonia} {\b 9} ({\i Suppl}.): 96 (1972). 2n = 24. Br Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b T. proximiforme} Van Soest,{\i  Lejeunia} nov. ser.,{\b  8}: 2 (1962). 2n = 24. Be Br Ga Ge Ho.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b T. pseudocastaneum} Van Soest,{\i  Proc. Koninkl. Nederl. Akad. Wetensch.} ser. C, {\b 69}({\b 4}): 447 (1966). Co Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b T. pseudolacistophyllum} Van Soest,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. Bruxelles}{\b  26}: 228 (1956) ({\i T. affine} G. Hagl., non Jordan). 2n = 24. Au Be Br Da Ga Ge He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b T. purpureomarginatum} Van Soest,{\i  Bull. Soc. Fr. Ech. Pl. Vasc. }{\b 11}: 23 (1964). 2n = 24. Au Cz Ga He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b T. schizophyllum} Dahlst.,{\i  Bergens Mus. Aarb.}{\b  2}({\b 16}): 20 (1920) ({\i T. dentosum} M.P. Christiansen). Au Cz Da He No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b T. simile} Raunk.,{\i  Dansk Ekskurs.-Fl.} ed. 2, 257 (1906). 2n = 32. Br Da Ga Ge Ho No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b T. subdissimile} Dahlst.,{\i  Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges.}{\b  42}: 719 (1933). Au Be Ga He ?Ho It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b T. tanyolobum} Dahlst., {\i op. cit.} 720 (1933). Au Be Da Ga Ge He Ho.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b T. tortilobum} Florström,{\i  Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  39}({\b 4}): 11 (1914). 2n = 24. Be Br Co Fe Ga Ge He Ho It Rs(B) Su.
\par 

\par 
339}
\par