{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 white. Autumn-flowering. Sexual. 2n = 16.{\i  Saline soils. C.& E. Europe; one station in S.C. France. }Au Bu Cz Ga Hu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Sect. SEROTINA Van Soest.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. T. serotinum} group. Leaves 5-15 cm, obovate-lanceolate, entire to shallowly lobed, more or less cartilaginous-denticulate, thick, fleshy, horizontal. Petiole short, wide, pale. Scapes 3-15 cm, slender, green, more or less woolly. Capitulum 30-40 mm in diameter. Involucre 10-15 × 10-15 mm; outer bracts linear, glaucous, or suffused with brown, with a pale margin, thin, soft, erect, more or less ciliate, sometimes corniculate. Ligules clear pale yellow, usually with a red stripe. Achenes greyish-brown; body 4·5-6 mm, fusiform, more or less smooth; beak 4-8 mm, stout; cone absent. Pappus greyish-white. Autumn-flowering. Sexual.{\i  Dry places. S., C. & E. Europe.} Au Bu Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 2 species have been described for Europe:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. pyropappum} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Diagn. Pl. Nov. Nisp.} 19 (1842) ({\i T. tomentosum} Lange). • Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. serotinum} (Waldst. & Kit.) Poiret in Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot., Suppl.}{\b  4}, 420 (1817) ({\i T. crispum} Heuffel, {\i T. gracile} Form., {\i T. haussknechtii} Uechtr. ex Hausskn., {\i T. neyrautii} Debeaux). 2n = 16. Au Bu Cz Ga Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   Sect. ARCTICA Dahlst.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. T. phymatocarpum} group. Dwarf, glabrous plants. Leaves 2-7 cm, narrowly spathulate, entire to shallowly triangular-lobed, bright green. Scapes 4-10 cm. Capitulum 15-25 mm in diameter. Involucre 10-15 × 6-12 mm; outer bracts up to 6 mm, ovate, greyish-green to nearly black with paler margins, appressed, sometimes shortly corniculate. Ligules short, wide, white or yellow with a grey, violet or purple stripe. Achenes blackish; body 4-5·5 mm, spinulose; cone short, conical; beak stout, shorter to slightly longer than body. Apomictic.{\i  Arctic Europe; Alps.} Au He No Rs (N) Sb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. phymatocarpum} J. Vahl, {\i Fl. Dan.}{\b  13}({\b 39}): t. 2298 (1840) occurs only in Greenland and Alaska.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 4 species have been described for Europe:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. arcticum} (Trautv.) Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot.} {\b 2}({\b 8}): 8 (1905) ({\i T. phymatocarpum} auct. eur., non J. Vahl). Rs (N) Sb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. dovrense} (Dahlst.) Dahlst.,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} ser. 3,{\b  6}({\b 3}): 56 (1928). • No.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. handelii} J. Murr,{\i  Allgem. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 1904}: 71 (1904) ({\i T. officinale} subsp.{\i  handelii} (J. Murr) Hegi). • Au He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. reichenbachii} Huter ex Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot.}{\b  7}({\b 1}): 3 (1908) ({\i T. officinale} subsp.{\i  reichenbachii }(Huter ex Dahlst.) Hegi). • Au.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. T. glabrum} group. Like {\b 4} but capitulum 30-40 mm in diameter; outer involucral bracts ovate-lanceolate, dark, without a pale margin, ecorniculate; ligules narrow, deep yellow with a dull violet stripe; achenes dark red, with smooth body, 3·5-4 mm.{\i  N.W. Russia} ({\i Kol'skij Poluostrov}). Rs (N).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 3 species have been described for Europe:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. glabrum} DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  7}: 147 (1838). Rs (N).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. nivale} Lange ex Kihlman, {\i Meddel. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  16}: 67 (1889). Rs (N). ({\i Siberia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. turiense} Orlova in Bobrov & Tzvelev, {\i Fl. URSS}{\b  29}: 742 (1964). • Rs (N).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. T. pacheri} group. Leaves 3-5 cm, narrow, more or less spathulate, lobed, bright green, thin, subglabrous; lobes regular, shallow, more or less obtuse. Scapes 3-5 cm, slender, hairy just below capitulum. Capitulum 20-30 mm in diameter. Involucre 8-10 × 7-8 mm; outer bracts up to 6 mm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, black, dark green or olive-green, with more or less pale margins, erect or appressed, ecorniculate. Ligules yellow, with a brown or grey stripe. Achenes straw-coloured or brownish body 3-4 mm, rugose in the upper part; cone short, conical; beak 1-1½ times as long as body, rather stout. 2n = 32. •{\i  E. Alps; mountains of S. Spain and Corse.} Au Co Ga He Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 3 species have been described for Europe:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. litardieri} Van Soest, {\i Acta Bot. Neerl.}{\b  6}: 416 (1957). Co Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. nevadense} H. Lindb. fil., {\i Acta Soc. Sci. Fenn.} nov. ser. B, {\b 1}({\b 2}): 172 (1932). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. pacheri} Schultz Bip., {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 31}: 170 (1848). Au He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Sect. RHODOCARPA Van Soest.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. T. schroeteranum} Hand.-Mazz.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 55}: 461 (1905). Glabrous. Leaves 5-15 cm, few, narrowly spathulate, entire to shallowly lobed, with deflexed, acute, entire lobes; petiole long, narrow, red. Scapes 10-20 cm, few, about equalling leaves. Capitulum c. 30 mm in diameter. Involucre 12-15 × 7-8 mm; outer bracts ovate, acuminate, greyish-green, often suffused reddish, without pale margins, appressed, more or less ecorniculate. Ligules yellow. Pollen absent. Achenes deep reddish-purple; body 3·5-4 mm, narrow, rugose in upper part; cone 0·5-0·7 mm, conical; beak 6-8 mm, rather stout. Apomictic. 2n = 24. •{\i  Alps; C. Spain.} Ga He Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Sect. SCARIOSA (Hand.-Mazz.) Dahlst.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. T. bithynicum} group. Leaves 5-15 cm, oblanceolate to obovate, entire to lobed, horizontal, thick, glabrous or hairy beneath; lobes 6-7 on each side, patent, broad-based, often obtuse, dentate; petiole often purplish. Scapes 5-10 cm, numerous, slender, ascending or procumbent, glabrescent. Capitulum 10-25 mm in diameter. Involucre 9-12 × 7-10 mm; outer bracts broadly ovate, acuminate, ½ to entirely scarious, suffused red or purple, more or less appressed, often conspicuously reticulate-veined, corniculate. Ligules short, wide, pale yellow with a red, purple or brown stripe. Achenes greyish-brown or straw-coloured; body 3·5-4 mm, more or less tuberculate often throughout; cone short, conical; beak 4-7 mm, rather stout. Mainly autumn-flowering. Sexual or apomictic. {\i S. Europe.} Al Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. bithynicum} DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  7}: 149 (1838). Although this name has always been used for this group of plants in the aggregate sense, it has never been typified and it is uncertain to which of the segregates the name applies.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 13 species have been described for Europe, mainly from S.W. & S.E. Europe. The following are the only 2 which are widespread:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. megalorrhizon} (Forskål) Hand.-Mazz.,{\i  Monogr. Taraxacum }35 (1907). Al Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (W) Sa Tu.
\par 

\par 
334}
\par