{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 10 Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate; spring-flowering ......... {\b 17. palustre} group
\par 
8  Outer involucral bracts with at most a narrow pale or
\par 
   scarious margin comprising less than ¼ of area of bract
\par 
11 Achenes reddish (red, purple, violet, reddish or 
\par 
   pinkish-brown)
\par 
12 Achenes with conical cone less than 1/5 as long as body
\par 
13 Achenes deep reddish-purple, with body 3·5-4 mm; leaf-
\par 
   lobes usually entire ............................................................. {\b 7. schroeteranum}
\par 
13 Achenes pinkish to pale reddish-brown, with body 
\par 
   2·5-3 mm; leaf-lobes dentate ........................................... {\b 14. unguilobum} group
\par 
12 Achenes with cylindrical cone 1/3-1/5 as long as body
\par 
14 Petiole distinctly winged; ligules deep yellow
\par 
15 Achenes reddish-purple or brownish, with cone 1-1·5 mm,
\par 
   and beak 8-12 mm ........................................................... {\b 28. hoppeanum} group
\par 
15 Achenes straw-coloured, or sometimes reddish, with 
\par 
   cone 0·6-1 mm, and beak 6-9 mm
\par 
16 Involucre usually dark, often ± violet-purple,
\par 
   pruinose ................................................................................ {\b 19. nigricans} group
\par 
16 Involucre green .................................................................... {\b 15. croceum} group
\par 
14 Petiole unwinged; ligules pale or medium yellow
\par 
17 Plant relatively robust; body of achene 3·5 mm or more {\b 28. hoppeanum} group
\par 
17 Plant slender; body of achene 2·3-3·5 mm
\par 
18 Achenes red, purple or violet .................................. {\b 24. erythrospermum} group
\par 
18 Achenes reddish-brown or pink
\par 
19 Leaves patent, deeply and narrowly lobed; achenes 
\par 
   reddish- or pinkish-brown ....................................................... {\b 26. fulvum} group
\par 
19 Leaves erect, often entire to shallowly lobed,
\par 
   sometimes dissected; achenes pink or reddish .................. {\b 27. gasparrinii} group
\par 
11 Achenes brown, yellow, cream or greyish, without red 
\par 
   or pink tint
\par 
20 Outer involucral bracts corniculate
\par 
21 Leaves 3-15 cm, dissected; body of achene not more than 3·5 mm
\par 
22 Leaf-lobes 6-8; ligules golden-yellow, often involute;
\par 
   cone less than 0·5 mm, conical ........................................... {\b 23. obliquum} group
\par 
22 Leaf-lobes 3-5; ligules pale to medium yellow, never
\par 
   involute; cone more than 0·6 mm, cylindrical .......................... {\b 25. sunile} group
\par 
21 Leaves 5-25 cm, entire or shallowly lobed; body of 
\par 
   achene 3·2-4·5 mm
\par 
23 Leaves glabrous, more or less coriaceous, not or
\par 
   scarcely lobed
\par 
24 Leaves dark green, obovate, not denticulate ...................... {\b 9. obovatum} group
\par 
24 Leaves grey-green, oblanceolate, denticulate .............. {\b 10. glaucanthum} group
\par 
23 Leaves rarely glabrous, never coriaceous, usually lobed
\par 
25 Outer involucral bracts with a distinct pale margin;
\par 
   cone of achene 1-1·5 mm ................................................ {\b 28. hoppeanum} group
\par 
25 Outer involucral bracts without a distinct margin;
\par 
   cone of achene not more than 0·8 mm ......................... {\b 11. ceratophorum} group
\par 
20 Outer involucral bracts ecorniculate, but sometimes
\par 
   with a slight callosity
\par 
26 Leaves with dark spots
\par 
27 Outer involucral bracts erect or appressed; body of 
\par 
   achene more than 4 mm ..................................................... {\b 12. spectabile} group
\par 
27 Outer involucral bracts patent; body of achene less
\par 
   than 4 mm
\par 
28 Plant bright green; ligules deep yellow; cone of 
\par 
   achene 0·6-1 mm, cylindrical ............................................... {\b 15. croceum} group
\par 
28 Plant dull or dark green; ligules medium yellow; cone
\par 
   of achene 0·3-0·8 mm, conical ............................................ {\b 13. praestans} group
\par 
26 Leaves unspotted
\par 
29 Petioles winged; ligules deep yellow, orange-yellow or
\par 
   yellowish-brown (arctic-alpine)
\par 
30 Ligules yellowish-brown, involute ................................. {\b 21. cucullatum} group
\par 
30 Ligules deep yellow or orange-yellow, flat
\par 
31 Cone of achene c. 1 mm, sub-cylindrical (arctic) .............. {\b 15. croceum} group
\par 
31 Cone of achene less than 1 mm, conical (alpine)
\par 
32 Leaves narrow, lobed; involucre dark, often ± violet-
\par 
   purple, pruinose ................................................................... {\b 19. nigricans} group
\par 
32 Leaves wide, entire or shallowly lobed; involucre green . {\b 20. fontanum} group
\par 
29 Petioles winged or unwinged; ligules pale or medium yellow
\par 
33 Outer involucral bracts patent or deflexed (rarely erect)
\par 
34 Outer involucral bracts 6-12 mm, patent, sometimes 
\par 
   glaucous on inner face; body of achene c. 3·5 mm ............ {\b 13. praestans} group
\par 
34 Outer involucral bracts 11-20 mm, erect to deflexed,
\par 
   never glaucous on inner face; body of achene 2·5-3·5 mm
\par 
35 Robust plant of N. Fennoscandia; outer involucral 
\par 
   bracts very pale on inner face; leaves with elongate 
\par 
   terminal lobes; petioles pale, wide ...................................... {\b 29. crassipes} group
\par 
35 Usually on disturbed ground; variable, but without the
\par 
   above combination of characters ........................................ {\b 30. officinale} group
\par 
33 Outer involucral bracts erect or appressed
\par 
36 Beak c. 1½ times as long as body of achene; small 
\par 
   alpine plant
\par 
37 Leaves many; leaf-bases persistent; outer involucral
\par 
   bracts with a brown midrib ...................................................... {\b 22. dissectum}
\par 
37 Leaves few; leaf-bases not persistent; outer involucral
\par 
   bracts without a brown midrib ......................................... {\b 18. apenninum} group
\par 
36 Beak more than 1 4/5 times as long as body of achene;
\par 
   plant of wet places
\par 
38 Body of achene 3-4 mm, brown ............................................ {\b 16. adamii} group
\par 
38 Body of achene 4-5·5 mm, straw-coloured ...................... {\b 12. spectabile} group
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Sect. GLACIALIA (Hand.-Mazz.) Van Soest.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. glaciale} Huet ex Hand.-Mazz.,{\i  Monogr. Taraxacum} 15 (1907). Dwarf, glabrous plant. Leaves 2-6 cm, entire to pinnatisect. Scapes 3-7 cm. Capitulum 10-15 mm in diameter. Involucre 8-12 × 2-4 mm; outer bracts linear, narrower than inner, black on outer surface, glaucous on inner surface, erect, long-corniculate. Ligules with a grey or red stripe. Achenes 4-5 mm, fusiform, pale grey; beak absent or very short (not more than ¼ as long as body); cone absent. Sexual. •{\i  Appennini; mountains of Greece.} Gr It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Sect. LEPTOCEPHALA Van Soest.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. bessarabicum} (Hornem.) Hand.-Maz.,{\i  op. cit.} 26 (1907) ({\i T. serotinum} subsp.{\i  bessarabicum} (Hornem.) Hegi). Leaves 5-25 cm, linear-lanceolate in outline, lobed, fleshy, greyish- or reddish-green, sparsely arachnoid-hairy; lobes many, narrow, patent, short, acute. Scapes 5-20 cm. Capitulum 15-20 mm in diameter. Involucre 10-15 × 8-10 mm, often tinged pink; outer bracts 7-8 mm, lanceolate, dark green, with a very wide, pale, more or less scarious margin, erect to appressed, ecorniculate. Ligules golden-yellow with a silvery-grey stripe, or concolorous. Achenes greyish; body 3-4·5 mm, fusiform, more or less smooth; beak 4-6 mm, stout; cone absent. Pappus greyish-
\par 

\par 
333}
\par