{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 often white, slender. Apomictic. •{\i  Alps, W. Carpathians; Corse.} Au Co Cz Ga He It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 18 species have been described, mainly from the Alps. The following have a relatively wide distribution:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. croceicarpum} Van Soest,{\i  Veröff. Geobot. Inst. Rübel} ({\i Zürich}){\b  42}: 118 (1969). He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. fontanicola} Van Soest, {\i Acta Bot. Neerl. }{\b 8}: 108 (1959). Au Cz He It Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. fontanosquameum} Van Soest, {\i op. cit. }110 (1959). 2n = 25. Au Ga He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. fontanum} Hand.-Mazz.,{\i  Monogr. Taraxacum }100 (1907). Au He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. magnopyramidophorum} Van Soest, {\i Veröff. Geobot. Inst. Rübel} ({\i Zürich}) {\b 42}: 118 (1969). He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. pohlii} Van Soest,{\i  Acta Bot. Neerl.}{\b  8}: 113 (1959). 2n = 32. Au He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   Sect. CUCULLATA Van Soest.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. T. cucullatum} group. Leaves 12-25 cm, lobed, dark, bright green, hairy, erect; lobes short, more or less deltate, acute, patent, dentate; petiole winged. Scapes 15-25 cm, hairy, exceeding the leaves. Capitulum 30-45 mm in diameter. Involucre 12-18 × 6-10 mm; outer bracts ovate-lanceolate, dark green, often suffused purple, with more or less pale margin, laxly appressed, ecorniculate. Ligules very long, involute, yellow-brown, fading to white on the margins, unstriped or with a purple stripe. Stigmas sometimes purple. Achenes brownish; body 3·5-4 mm, shortly spinulose in the upper part, rugose below; cone 0·5-0·7 mm, conical; beak 6-8 mm, slender. •{\i  Alps; Corse.} Au Co Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 10 species have been described:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. aureocucullatum} Van Soest, {\i Veröff. Geobot. Inst. Rübel} ({\i Zürich}) {\b 42}: 126 (1969). He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. concucullatum} A. J. Richards,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.} {\b 65}: 40 (1972). 2n = 24. Au.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. cucullatiforme} Van Soest,{\i  Acta Bot. Neerl.}{\b  6}: 417 (1957). Co.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. cucullatum} Dahlst., {\i Acta Horti Berg.} {\b 4}({\b 2}): 25 (1907). Au Ga He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. fontaniforme} Van Soest, {\i Acta Bot. Neerl.} {\b 8}: 122 (1959). He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. inclusum} Walo Koch,{\i  Veröff. Geobot. Inst. Rübel} ({\i Zürich}) {\b 42}: 126 (1969). He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. luteocucullatum} Walo Koch & Van Soest,{\i  op. cit. }127 (1969). He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. oreophilum} G. Hagl., {\i Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges.} {\b 60}: 238 (1950). He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  T. sulger-bueelii Van Soest, {\i Veröff. Geobot. Inst. Rubel} ({\i Zürich}) {\b 42}: 125 (1969). He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. tiroliense} Dahlst.,{\i  Acta Horti Berg.}{\b  4}({\b 2}): 23 (1907). Au He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   Sect. DISSECTA Van Soest.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. T. dissectum} (Ledeb.) Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Ross.}{\b  2}: 814 (1846). Leaves 3-25 cm, lanceolate or more or less spathulate, much dissected, mid to dark green, very numerous, glabrous or hairy beneath; lobes variable, often narrow, linear, patent, more or less obtuse, dentate or nearly 2-pinnatifid, with up to 7 or 8 teeth on each side; petiole short, green, narrow; leaf-bases of previous year persistent. Scapes 3-20 cm, erect, slender, green, glabrous more or less exceeding the leaves. Capitulum 20-30 mm in diameter. Involucre 10-25 × 15-25 mm; outer bracts narrowly ovate, green, with a brownish vein and scarious margin, appressed, ecorniculate. Ligules pale yellow with a red or grey stripe. Achenes grey; body 3-3·5 mm, more or less tuberculate in upper part, abruptly contracted into a cylindrical cone 1 mm; beak 3-6 mm.{\i  Alps; Pyrenees; Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Ga He Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc    Sect. OBLIQUA Dahlst.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. T. obliquum} group. Leaves 3-8 cm, narrow, short, lobed to much dissected, bright or dark green, rather thick, glabrous, horizontal; lobes 6-8 on each side, short, patent, entire, obtuse, interspersed with similar lobules; petiole short, narrow. Scapes 3-10 cm, more or less equalling the leaves, glabrous, purple, ascending. Involucre 8-10 × 7-10 mm; outer bracts dark green, with a pale margin, appressed, slightly corniculate. Ligules short, often involute, golden yellow with a reddish-purple stripe. Achenes pale brown; body 2·5-3 mm, spinulose in the upper part; cone c.1 mm, conical-cylindrical; beak 5-8 mm. Apomictic. •{\i  N. Europe}. Br Da Ge Ho No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 2 species have been described:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. obliquum} (Fries) Dahlst.,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1905}: 192 (1905). 2n = 24. Br Da Ge Ho No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. platyglossum} Raunk.,{\i  Dansk Ekskurs.-Fl.} ed. 2, 256 (1906) ({\i T. obliquum} subsp.{\i  platyglossum} (Raunk.) Nordh.). Br Da Ge No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   Sect. ERYTHROSPERMA Dahlst.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. T. erythrospermum} group. Leaves 4-15(-20) cm, lobed, usually horizontal; lobes narrow, very variable; petiole narrow, green, red or purple. Scapes 4-15 cm, ascending to erect, slender, often purplish. Capitulum 15-35 mm in diameter. Involucre 6-12 × 5-9 mm; outer bracts up to 6 mm, often glaucous and purplish, with a pale margin, appressed to patent (rarely recurved), usually corniculate. Ligules short, wide, pale yellow with a grey, brown or purple stripe. Achenes red, purple or violet; body 2·3-3·3 mm, spinulose in the upper part; cone 0·7-1·2 mm, cylindrical; beak 6-11 mm, white, slender. Apomictic or sexual.{\i  Dry places. Almost throughout Europe.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Sb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. erythrospermum} Andrz. ex Besser, {\i Enum. Pl. Volhyn. }75 (1822). Although this name has always been used for this group of plants in the aggregate sense, it has never been typified and it is uncertain to which of the segregates the name applies.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 68 species have been described for Europe. The following have a relatively wide distribution:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. austriacum} Van Soest,{\i  Proc. Koninkl. Nederl. Akad. Wetensch.} ser. C, {\b 69} ({\b 4}): 434 (1966). 2n = 16, 24. • Au Cz Ge Hu It Ju [Br].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. badium} Van Soest,{\i  Veröff. Geobot. Inst. Rübel} ({\i Zürich}) {\b 42}: 111 (1969). Cz Ga He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. brachyglossum} (Dahlst.) Dahlst. in Semander et al.,{\i  Bot. Stud}. ({\i Kjellman}) 183 (1906). 2n = 16, 24. • Au Be Br Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho It Ju No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 
338}
\par