{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 1-2·5 cm. Leaves (5-)7-11(-14) × 1-2(-2·2) mm, inwhorls of 7-8, mostly 5-6½ times as long as wide, cuneate-oblanceolate, somewhat thick and fleshy, more or less dull; margin antrorsely ciliolate, flat; hyaline apex c. 0·3 mm. Inflorescence corymbose, rather few-flowered and with few bracts, the ultimate branches often ebracteate; pedicels 1·6-2·2 mm, more or less erect and scarcely elongating after flowering. Corolla 3-4 mm in diameter, yellowish-white; lobes acute. Fruit 1·4-1·7 mm, more or less smooth, reddish-brown. 2n = 44. {\i Calcareous and schistose screes. • S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   An allopolyploid species, not always clearly separable from the diploid and tetraploid plants of {\b 112} and {\b 114}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 114. G. megalospermum} All.,{\i  Pl.Pedem. }{\b 1}: 9 (1785) ({\i G. helveticum} Weigel). Like {\b 113} but flowering and non-flowering stems decumbent; flowering stems scarcely more than 10 cm; internodes usually less than 2 cm; leaves 4-11 × 1-2·1 mm, in whorls of 6-7(-8), 3½-5 times as long as wide, broadly oblanceolate to narrowly obovate, dull; hyaline apex less than 0·3 mm; inflorescence ovoid, bracteate to the ultimate branches; pedicels more than 2·2 mm, deflexed and elongated after flowering; fruit 2-2·5 mm. 2n = 22, 44. {\i Calcareous and schistose screes. • Alps.} Au Ga Ge He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Diploid and tetraploid plants are morphologically almost indistinguishable; the tetraploids are at present known only from the W. Alps.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 115. G. pusillum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 106 (1753). Densely caespitose, with many stems, usually glabrous and shining (rarely more or less hairy), with or without stolons. Stems (3-)4-8(-12) cm, stiff; middle internodes short, up to as long as the leaves. Leaves 4-10(-13) × 0·3-0·9(-1·2) mm, linear to acicular, almost always more than 10 times as long as wide, coriaceous, smooth (rarely scabridulous or hairy); margin more or less flat, thickened; midrib thickened, occupying 1/3-1/2 of the width of the leaf; hyaline apex 0·5-0·9 mm. Inflorescence rather few-flowered, corymbose. Corolla 2-3 mm in diameter, white or yellowish; lobes acute. Fruit 1-1·5 mm, more or less smooth, dull. 2n = 22, 88. {\i Mountain rocks; calcicole. • S.E. France, N.W. Italy.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable. {\b G. hypnoides} Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  2}: 323 (1787) and {\b G. jussiei} Vill., {\i Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 20 (1779), which belong here, may deserve the rank of subspecies. When there is contact with {\b 112}, intermediates may be found.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 116. G. brockmannii} Briq., {\i Annu. Cons. Jard. Bot. Genève}{\b  10}: 107 (1907). Densely caespitose, densely hairy, without stolons. Stems 5-7 cm, stiff; middle internodes ¾-1½ times as long as the leaves. Leaves 4-7(-9) × 0·5-0·9(-1·4) mm, linear-lanceolate, mostly 7-8 times as long as wide, coriaceous; margins more or less revolute; midrib thickened, occupying c. 1/5 of the width of the leaf; hyaline apex 0·6-0·8 mm. Inflorescence rather few-flowered, corymbose. Corolla 1·9-2·3 mm in diameter, white or suffused with pink. Fruit c. 1·5 mm, more or less smooth. 2n = 22.{\i  Calcareous rock-crevices. • N.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 117. G. idubedae} (Pau ex Debeaux) Pau ex Ehrend.,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Akad. Wiss. Wien} ({\i Math.-Nat. Kl., ,Abt.} I) {\b 169}: 412 (1960) ({\i G. valentinum} var. {\i idubedae} Pau ex Debeaux). Caespitose, usually glabrous and shining, with short stolons. Stems (3-)5-25(-35) cm; middle internodes shorter than or up to twice as long as the leaves. Leaves 5-12(-16) × 0·3-0·6(-1·2) mm, acicular, 13-20 times as long as wide; margin more or less thickened, flat; midrib somewhat thickened, occupying c. ¼ of the width of the leaf; hyaline apex (0·3-)0·6-1 mm. Inflorescence few- to many-flowered, more or less corymbose. Corolla 2-2·5(-3·5) mm in diameter. Fruit 1-1·5 mm, weakly papillose. 2n = 22. {\i Rocks and screes. • Mountains of C. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in habit. Occasionally intermediates with{\b  98} are found.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 118. G. saxatile} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 106 (1753) ({\i G. harcynicum }Weigel). Laxly caespitose, blackish-brown when dry, with slender tap-root and filiform, more or less rooting stolons. Stems (8-)15-35(-40) cm, ascending, glabrous and smooth; middle internodes mostly 3-5 times as long as the leaves. Leaves 4-11(-15) × (0·5-)1·5-2·5(-3·5) mm, in whorls of (5-)6-7(-8), the lower obovate, the upper oblanceolate, widest in the uppermost quarter, abruptly contracted into a short hyaline awn, thin; margin almost always antrorsely ciliolate, weakly revolute; midrib slender, distinct. Inflorescence elongate-interrupted, ovoid, with short branches. Pedicels 2-5 mm, divaricate after flowering. Corolla 2·5-4 mm in diameter, white, indistinctly infundibuliform at the base; lobes flat, patent, acute. Fruit 1-1·6 mm, acutely papillose. 2n = 22, 44. {\i Pastures, heaths and scrub; calcifuge. • W. & W.C. Europe, extending eastwards very locally to N.W. Russia and C. Carpathians.} Au Az Be Br Cz Da Fa Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Ju Lu No Po Rs (C, W) Su [*Fe].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Diploid plants are smaller in all parts with internodes not more than 3 cm, leaves not more than 5 mm, and fruits c. 1 mm; they seem to be limited to the mountains of C. & N. Portugal and N.W. & C. Spain and have been separated as subsp. {\b vinanum} (Kliphuis) Ehrend., {\i Pl. Syst. Evol.}{\b  124}: 176 (1975).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 119-123}). {\b G. baldense} group. Plants blackish when dry, caespitose, glabrous and smooth. Tap-root and stock slender, with stolons. Stems not more than 15 cm, not much branched, with short internodes. Lower leaves in whorls of 5-10, broadly oblanceolate to linear, somewhat fleshy and rather thick, wrinkled and often shining when dry; margin more or less flat, not scabridulous; midrib scarcely visible; apex short, cartilaginous. Inflorescence small but relatively many-flowered, the branches with bracts which are not leaf-like. Corolla rotate, yellowish-white; lobes acute. Fruit nearly smooth to obtusely papillose.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lower leaves ovate, densely papillose, upper linear-
\par 
  lanceolate, smooth ........................................................... {\b 121. margaritaceum} 
\par 
1 Upper and lower leaves similar, linear to lanceolate, smooth
\par 
2 Middle cauline leaves oblanceolate; inflorescence 
\par 
  broadly ovoid; pedicels divaricate after flowering
\par 
3 Densely caespitose, with short stolons; inflorescence oblong;
\par 
  pedicels slender in fruit ................................................................. {\b 119. tendae}
\par 
3 Laxly caespitose, with long stolons; inflorescence compact;
\par 
  pedicels thickened in fruit ..................................................... {\b 120. magellense}
\par 
2 Middle cauline leaves narrowly lanceolate; inflorescence
\par 
  narrowly pyramidal; pedicels erect after flowering
\par 
4 Largest leaves less than 1 mm wide; mean diameter of
\par 
  pollen grains 20·5-21·5 µm ....................................................... {\b 122. baldense}
\par 
4 Largest leaves more than 1 mm wide; mean diameter of
\par 
  pollen grains 22-24 µm .............................................................. {\b 123. noricum}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 119. G. tendae} Reichenb. fil., {\i Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  17}: 97 (1855). Densely caespitose; stolons very short. Stems 7-15 cm, slender. Leaves 6-10 × 1-1·5 mm, in whorls of (5-)6-8(-9), oblanceolate, smooth. Inflorescence ovoid-oblong, many-flowered; pedicels slender, divaricate. Corolla 2·5-3 mm in diameter. 2n = 22.{\i  Siliceous rock-crevices. S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 120. G. magellense} Ten., {\i Succ. Relaz. viagg. Abruzzo}{\b  48} (1832). More or less laxly caespitose; stolons very long. Stems 5-9 cm. Leaves (5-)6-8(-9) × 1-1·5 mm, in whorls of (6-)7-9(-10), oblanceolate, smooth. Inflorescence broadly ovoid, compact, many-flowered; pedicels thickened, more or less divaricate.
\par 

\par 
33}
\par