{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min20}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min21}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1024}{\nofchars5841}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 101 Involucre 10-19 mm; achenes 4-9 mm, 20- to 25-ribbed ........ }{\b\fs28 5. pygmaea}{\fs28 
\par 101 Involucre 7-13 mm; achenes 5-6 mm, 15- or 16-ribbed
\par 102 Involucral bracts obtuse ........................ }{\b\fs28 9. aurea}{\fs28 
\par 102 Involucral bracts acuminate ................. }{\b\fs28 33. macedonica}{\fs28 
\par 100 Up to 150 cm, with long stems and comparatively short
\par     peduncles; leaves amplexicaul
\par 103 Achenes 6-11 mm; plant rhizomatous ..... }{\b\fs28 1. sibirica}{\fs28 
\par 103 Achenes 5-8 mm; plant not rhizomatous
\par 104 Involucral bracts with a median line of long eglandular hairs .................................................................... }{\b\fs28 17. pyrenaica}{\fs28 
\par 104 Involucral bracts \'b1 tomentose, without longer hairs ........... }{\b\fs28 23. pannonica}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  Sect. HAPALOSTEPHIUM (D. Don) Froelich. Rhizomatous usually pubescent perennials. Stems robust, with few branches mostly above the middle. Lower leaves large, petiolate, the upper becoming gradually smaller. Capitula with many florets. Ligules yellow. Receptacle with glabrous or shortly ciliate pits.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. C. sibirica}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  807 (1753). Stems 30-150 cm. Leaves more or less hairy especially on the veins beneath; basal fugacious; cauline 10-40 \'d7 4-9 cm, ovate, oblong or lanceolate, more or less acute, sinuate-dentate; lower cauline with long, winged, dentate petioles; upper cauline sessile and amplexicaul. Capitula 1-6; peduncles stout, straight or arcuate. Involucre 13-20 \'d7 10-25 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, more or less acute, glabrous or with long, eglandular hairs especially in the middle, the outermost not more than 2/3 as long as inner. Achenes 6-11 \'d7 1-1\'b73 mm, fusiform, straight or curved, brown, more or less attenuate at the apex, c. 20-ribbed. 2n = 10.}{\i\fs28  Scrub and open woods. U.S.S.R.; C. Romania; E. Czechoslovakia.}{\fs28  Cz ?Po Rm Rs (N, C, W, E).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. C. geracioides}{\fs28  Hausskn.,}{\i\fs28  Mitt. Th\'fcr. Bot. Ver}{\fs28 . nov. ser.,}{\b\fs28  7}{\fs28 : 52 (1895). Stems 35-75 cm. Basal leaves up to 24 \'d7 6 cm, obovate to oblanceolate, obtuse to acute, deeply runcinate-pinnatifid or sublyrate, gradually attenuate into a narrowly winged petiole, shortly hairy on the margin and veins, glabrescent; lower cauline leaves like the basal but more or less amplexicaul; upper cauline lanceolate or linear and entire, or bract-like. Capitula 1-4; peduncles very long, stout, erect. Involucre 11-13 \'d7 5-10 mm; bracts narrowly linear-lanceolate, acute, with numerous eglandular hairs, the outermost not more than 2/3 as long as the inner. Achenes 5\'b75-6\'b75 \'d7 1 mm, pale brown, fusiform, the marginal strongly curved near the base, the inner nearly straight, c. 30-striate. 2n = 12.}{\i\fs28  Damp places. \bullet  Mountains of Albania and N. Greece.}{\fs28  Al Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. C. viscidula}{\fs28  Froelich in DC.,}{\i\fs28  Prodr.}{\b\fs28  7}{\fs28 : 166 (1838). Stems 25-60 cm. Leaves glabrous or glabrescent; basal up to 17 \'d7 5 cm, elliptical, coarsely and retrorsely dentate or lyrate, fugacious; cauline oblanceolate, lanceolate or ovate, acuminate, very sharply dentate or denticulate, sessile, amplexicaul. Capitula 1-5 in a corymb; peduncles stout, erect. Involucre 11-13 \'d7 c. 8 mm bracts linear to linear-lanceolate, acute, the outermost very unequal, not more than \'bd as long as inner, with numerous unequal, glandular hairs. Achenes 5\'b75-8\'b75 \'d7 0\'b77-1 mm, brown fusiform, straight or slightly curved, 25- to 35-striate. 2n = 12. }{\i\fs28 Meadows and open woods,}{\fs28  1100-2300}{\i\fs28  m. \bullet   Mountains of Romania and C. part of Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28  Al Bu Ju Rm.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. C. paludosa}{\fs28  (L.) Moench, }{\i\fs28 Meth.}{\fs28  535 (1794). Stems 25-100 cm. Leaves dark green, glabrous; basal 8-28 \'d7 3-5 cm, oblanceolate, subacute, sinuate-dentate or denticulate, narrowed to a winged petiole, fugacious; lower cauline like the basal or sessile; middle cauline lanceolate to ovate or panduriform, acute or acuminate, sessile, rounded-auriculate, amplexicaul; uppermost linear and bract-like. Capitula up to 25, in lax corymbs or compound corymbs; peduncles long, rather slender and usually arcuate. Involucre 9-12 \'d7 3-10 mm; bracts linear or linear-lanceolate, acute, the outer not more than 1/3 as long as inner, usually with unequal glandular hairs. Achenes 4\'b75-5\'b75 \'d7 0\'b775 mm, pale yellow, cylindrical, 10-ribbed; pappus pale yellowish, brittle. 2n = 12.}{\i\fs28  Damp or shady places. N. & C. Europe, extending southwards to N. Spain, S. Italy, S. Bulgaria and S.C. Russia.}{\fs28  Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par 
\par   Sect. OMALOCLINE (Cass.) Babcock. Small, rhizomatous, mat-forming, tomentose perennials with slender stems. Leaves rather small and long-petiolate, the upper only slightly smaller. Capitula with many florets. Ligules yellow, often reddish-purple on outer face. Receptacle with shortly ciliate pits.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. C. pygmaea}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  805 (1753). Stems 4-20 cm. Leaves more or less tomentose; basal 3-11 \'d7 1-3 cm, lyrate-pinnatifid with a large, elliptical, orbicular to ovate terminal lobe and 2-4 remote lateral lobes; terminal lobe sinuately denticulate or subentire; lateral lobes sometimes absent, making the leaf simple and spathulate; petiole narrowly winged, 1-3 times as long as the terminal lobe; cauline smaller. Capitula up to 8; peduncles long, erect or arcuate, arising from the axils of cauline leaves or from near the base of the stem. Involucral bracts linear-lanceolate; outer up to \'bd as long as inner, tomentose and often with longer pubescence. Marginal ligules often reddish-purple on outer face. Achenes cylindrical or ellipsoid. Calcareous screes. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Mountains of S.W. Europe, S. Alps, S. Appennini.}{\fs28  Ga He Hs It.
\par 
\par   (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 pygmaea}{\fs28 : Involucre 10-15 mm. Achenes 4-6\'b75 mm, 20- to 25-ribbed, the ribs nearly equal; pappus 7-8 mm. 2n = 12.}{\i\fs28  Throughout the range of the species except Sierra de M\'e1gina}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 anachoretica}{\fs28  Babcock,}{\i\fs28  Univ. Calif. Publ. Bot.}{\b\fs28  22}{\fs28 : 245 (1947): Involucre 16-19 mm. Achenes c. 9 mm, 20-ribbed, the ribs alternately wide and narrow; pappus c. 10 mm. 1800-2050}{\i\fs28  m. S. Spain}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Sierra de M\'e1gina}{\fs28 ).
\par 
\par   Sect. SUCCISOCREPIS Schultz Bip. ex Bischoff. More or less pubescent perennials with a short, praemorse rhizome; stem branched or simple. Leaves pinnatifid or dentate, petiolate, the upper gradually or abruptly reduced in size. Capitula solitary or few, with many florets. Ligules usually yellow. Receptacle with glabrous or hairy pits.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. C. terglouensis}{\fs28  (Hacq.) A. Kerner,}{\i\fs28  Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 61 (1881). Stems 2-6 cm. Leaves glabrous or sparsely hairy; basal 2-7 \'d7 0\'b76-1\'b75 cm, oblanceolate, runcinately dentate to pinnatifid, the lobes triangular to semicircular; cauline few, like basal or linear and entire, crowded. Capitulum solitary. Involucre 7-15(-20) \'d7 4-15(-20) mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute or acuminate, the outer \'bd-\'be as long as inner, with numerous, dark, simple eglandular hairs. Achenes 3\'b75-5 \'d7 1-1\'b725 mm, yellow, cylindrical or narrowly obovoid, truncate at both ends, 10- to 13-ribbed. 2n = 12.}{\i\fs28  Screes, }{\fs28 1800-2800}{\i\fs28  m; calcicole. \bullet  C. & E. Alps.}{\fs28  Au Ge He It.
\par 
\par Very similar in appearance to }{\i\fs28 Leontodon montanus}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 7. C. jacquinii}{\fs28  Tausch, }{\i\fs28 Flora}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Regensb}{\fs28 .) }{\b\fs28 11}{\fs28  (Erg\'e4nz. 1): 79 (1828). Stems 5-20(-25) cm. Leaves glabrous or sparsely hairy; basal 3-15 \'d7 0\'b72-1\'b77 cm, oblanceolate to linear, entire to pinna-
\par 
\par 347}
\par }