{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 5-40 cm, stout, erect or ascending, usually hairy. Capitulum 25-75 mm in diameter, often convex. Involucre 12-25 × 15-25 mm; outer bracts up to 17 mm, linear-lanceolate, usually rather dark, more or less glaucous green, paler on inner surface, pale margin often present but never conspicuous, erect to deflexed, ecorniculate or slightly callosed. Ligules long, narrow, medium yellow, usually with a brownish stripe. Achenes brownish; body 2·5-3·5 mm, tuberculate or spinulose; cone 0·2-0·7 mm, conical; beak 7-15 mm, slender. Apomictic; more rarely sexual. {\i Disturbed ground, meadows and woods. Throughout Europe. All except Sb, where it has been reported as recently introduced}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Numerous species have been described for Europe. The following have a relatively wide distribution:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. acutangulum} Marklund, {\i Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  55}({\b 5}): 18 (1926) ({\i T. oxyodon} M.P. Christiansen). Be Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Lu No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. aequilobum} Dahlst.,{\i  Ark. Bot.}{\b  9}({\b 10}): 42 (1910). 2n = 24. • Be Br Da Fe Ge He Ho Hs No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. alatum} H. Lindb. fil.,{\i  Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.} {\b 29}({\b 9}): 20 (1907) ({\i T. semiprivum} Dahlst.). 2n = 24. • Be Br Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. ancistrolobum} Dahlst.,{\i  Bergens Mus. Aarb.}{\b  1923-1924}({\b 1}): 27 (1925). • Be Br Da Fe He Ho No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. angustisquameum} Dahlst. ex H. Lindb. fil.,{\i  Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.} {\b 29}({\b 9}): 23 (1907). • Be Da Fe Ga Ge Is No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. arrhenii} Palmgren, {\i op. cit.} {\b 34}({\b 1}): 25 (1910) ({\i T. amoenum} Marklund ex Puolanne). • Da Fe No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. atrovirens} Dahlst.,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1935}: 100 (1935) ({\i T. pruinatum} M.P. Christiansen). • Be Da Fe Ge No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. aurosulum} H. Lindb. fil.,{\i  Meddel. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  35}: 14 (1909). • Be Br Fe Ga He Ho No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. biformatum} H. Lindb. fil., {\i op. cit.}{\b  36}: 5 (1910) ({\i T. albicollum} Dahlst.). Fe No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. borgvallii} Dahlst. ex G. Hagl., {\i Acta Horti Gothob.}{\b  11}: 20 (1936). • Ge No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. bracteatum} Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot.}{\b  19}({\b 18}): 11 (1925). • Be Br Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. caloschistum} Dahlst., {\i op. cit.}{\b  10}({\b 6}): 15 (1911). • Da Fe Ge He No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. canoviride} H. Lindb. fil. ex Puolanne,{\i  Mem. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.} {\b 8}: 147 (1932-1933). • Be Br Da Fe He Ho No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. caudatulum} Dahlst.,{\i  Ark. Bot.} {\b 9}({\b 10}): 67 (1910). • Be Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. christiansenii} G. Hagl. in Hyl.,{\i  Fört. Skand. Växter} 157 (1941) ({\i T. marginellum} M.P. Christiansen, non H. Lindb. fil.). • Be Br Da No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. copidophyllum} Dahlst.,{\i  Ark. Bot.}{\b  9}({\b 10}): 25 (1910). • Be Da Fe Ge Ho No Po Su [Br].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. cordatum} Palmgren,{\i  Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  34}({\b 1}): 12 (1910) ({\i T. amblycentrum} Dahlst.). 2n = 24. • Be Br Da Fe Ge Hb Ho Hs No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. crispifolium} H. Lindb. fil., {\i op. cit.}{\b  29}({\b 9}): 27 (1907). • Be Br Da Fe Hb He Ho No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. croceiflorum} Dahlst.,{\i  Ark. Bot.} {\b 9}({\b 10}): 9 (1910). • Be Br Da Fe Ga He Ho No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. cyanolepis} Dahlst., {\i op. cit.}{\b  10}({\b 11}): 40 (1911) ({\i T. alienum} Dahlst.). 2n = 24. • Be Br Da Fe Ge Ho No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. dahlstedtii} H. Lindb. fil., {\i Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.} {\b 29}({\b 9}): 27 (1907) ({\i T. densiflorum} M.P. Christiansen, non Brenner). 2n = 24. • Be Br Da Fe Ga Ge Ho Is No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. dilaceratum} M.P. Christiansen,{\i  Dansk Bot. Ark.} {\b 9}({\b 2}): 9 (1936). • Da Ge Ho Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. dilatatum} H. Lindb. fil.,{\i  Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.} {\b 29}({\b 9}): 22(1907). • Be Br Da Fe Ga Ge No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. duplidens} H. Lindb. fil., {\i op. cit.} 38 (1907). 2n = 24, 26. Be Br Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Is No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. ekmanii} Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot.} {\b 10}({\b 6}): 19 (1911). 2n = 24. • Be Br Da Ga Ge Hb He Hs It Lu No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. expallidiforme} Dahlst., {\i op. cit.} {\b 9}({\b 10}): 18 (1910) ({\i T. oncolobum} Dahlst.). 
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. explicatum} G. Hagl., {\i Acta Horti. Gothob.} {\b 11}: 24 (1936) ({\i T. angustissimum} H. Lindb. fil.). • Fe No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. fasciatum} Dahlst. in Semander et al.,{\i  Bot. Stud.} ({\i Kjellman})172 (1906) ({\i T. sublatissimum} Dahlst.). 2n = 24. • Be Br Da Fe Ge Ho No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. florstroemii} Marklund, {\i Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.} {\b 55}({\b 5}): 22 (1926). • Fe Ge No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. geminatum} G. Hagl., {\i Bot. Not. }{\b 1937}: 450 (1937) ({\i T. trigonophorum} Marklund). • Fe No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. gibberum} Marklund, {\i Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  55}({\b 5}): 3 (1926). • Da Fe Ge Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. haematicum} G. Hagl., {\i Svensk Bot. Tidskr.} {\b 31}: 347 (1937) ({\i T. haematopus} sensu Dahlst., non H. Lindb. fil.). 2n = 24. • Be Br Da Fe Ge He Ho No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. haematopus} H. Lindb. fil., {\i Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.} {\b 29}({\b 9}): 25 (1907). 2n = 24. • Da Fe No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. hamatiforme} Dahlst. in Lindman, {\i Svensk Fanerogamfl.} 583 (1918) ({\i T. hamatifrons} Dahlst., {\i T. hamiferum} Dahlst.). 2n = 24. • Be Br Da Fe Ga Ge Hb Hs No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. hamatum} Raunk.,{\i  Dansk Ekskurs.-Fl.} ed. 2, 255 (1906). 2n = 24. • Be Br Da Fe Ga Ge No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. hastatum} Marklund, {\i Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.} {\b 55}({\b 5}): 8 (1926) ({\i T. undulatiflorum} M.P. Christiansen). • Be Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. huelphersianum} Dahlst., {\i Bot. Not.}{\b  1935}: 104 (1935) ({\i T. angermannicum} Dahlst.). • Da Fe No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. insigne} E. L. Ekman ex Wiinst. & K. Jessen in Raunk., {\i Dansk Ekskurs.-Fl.} ed. 5, 312 (1934). 2n = 25. • Be Br Da Ge Hb Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. involucratum} Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot.} {\b 9}({\b 10}): 29 (1910). 2n = 24. • Da Fe Ge No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. kjellmanii} Dahlst. in Semander et al.,{\i  Bot. Stud.} ({\i Kjellman})178 (1906) ({\i T. onychodontum} Dahlst. pro parte). • Be Da Fe Ge No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. laciniosifrons} Wiinst. in Raunk.,{\i  Dansk Ekskurs.-Fl.} ed. 5, 309 (1934). 2n = 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 48. • Be Da Fe Ge He Ho No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. laciniosum} Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot.}{\b  9}({\b 10}): 20 (1910) ({\i T. naeviferum} Dahlst.). • Br Da Fe Ho No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. laeticolor} Dahlst. in Semander et al.,{\i  Bot. Stud. }({\i Kjellman}) 168 (1906). 2n = 24. • Be Br Da Fe Ge No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. leptodon} Marklund,{\i  Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.} {\b 55}({\b 5}): 10 (1926). • Da Fe Ge No Su.
\par 

\par 
341}
\par