{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Schinz & R. Keller,{\i  W. apargioides} Less.). Perennial 20-50 cm. Stems, peduncles and involucre with dense, long, unequal, dark glandular hairs and sparse to numerous stellate hairs. Leaves glabrous or with sparse, dark, simple eglandular hairs; basal 20-170 × 15-30(-42) mm, oblanceolate to obovate, obtuse to cuspidate, denticulate to retrorse-dentate; cauline 0-2, more or less linear, entire. Capitula 1-5. Involucre 10-12 × 7-12 mm bracts dark, linear-lanceolate, more or less acute. Ligules yellow. Achenes 8-10 mm, 5-angled, tuberculate; beak slender, slightly longer than the body, with a crenulate collar at its base. 2n = 10.{\i  Wet, grassy places, mainly in the mountains. • S.C. Europe; Crna Gora and Albania; E. Pyrenees.} Al Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 176.            Heteracia}            Fischer & C.A. Meyer
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.D. Sell.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Stems several, branched. Leaves dentate to pinnatisect. Capitula few to numerous. Involucral bracts in 2 rows, the outer few, much smaller than the inner. Receptacle flat, without scales. Ligules yellow or whitish-yellow. Achenes of 2 kinds: outer with very short beak and without or with very short pappus; inner with long slender beak, usually with a pappus of rigid hairs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. szovitsii} Fischer & C.A. Meyer,{\i  Ind. Sem. Hort. Petrop. }{\b 1}: 30 (1835) ({\i H. epapposa} (Regel & Schmalh.) M. Popov). Glabrous annual. Stems 5-30 cm. Basal leaves 50-120 × 15-20 mm, oblong or oblong-ovate, more or less sinuate-dentate to pinnately lobed or pinnatipartite, the lobes triangular; cauline lanceolate or oblong-ovate, sessile, cordate-sagittate. Peduncles thickened. Involucre 5-9 × 6-9(-12) mm; bracts lanceolate, more or less obtuse, united towards the base. Outer achenes c. 8 mm obpyramidal, greyish-brown, somewhat compressed on back with 2 spongy, cylindrical ribs on the ventral side, more or less transversely rugose, laterally dilated upwards into wings; inner c. 10 mm, with 4-5 spongy ribs, 2 of which are cylindrical, the others narrowly winged, with filiform beak 2-2½ times as long as the body.{\i  Dry waste places. W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E). ({\i S.C. & S.W. Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 177.            Lapsana}              L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.D. Sell.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs. Stem usually solitary, branched. Leaves entire to lobed. Capitula numerous. Involucral bracts in 2 rows, the outer few, small and scale-like. Receptacle flat without scales. Ligules yellow. Achenes slightly compressed with c. 20 ribs; pappus absent.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. communis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 811 (1753). Plant 10-125 cm. Leaves 10-150 × 10-70 mm, ovate and dentate to lyrate-pinnatifid with a large terminal lobe and small lateral lobes, the upper sessile or shortly petiolate, sometimes lanceolate and entire, the lower long-petiolate. Capitula in a more or less corymbose panicle. Involucre 5-10 × 2-5 mm; inner bracts linear-oblong, more or less obtuse, keeled in fruit; outer 0·5-1 mm, few, ovate-lanceolate. Achenes 2·5-9 mm, the outer much longer than the inner.{\i  Throughout Europe.} All except Cr Fa Is Sb; recently introduced to Az.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  All subspecies can have the peduncles and involucre glabrous or with varying amounts of glandular hairs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant glaucous; stems 10-25 cm, numerous; involucre 
\par 
  less than 3 mm wide ............................................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b alpina}
\par 
1 Plant green; stem more than 25 cm, usually solitary;
\par 
  most involucres at least 3 mm wide
\par 
2 Ligules not more than 1½ times as long as involucre ... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b communis}
\par 
2 Ligules about twice as long as involucre
\par 
3 Peduncles usually not more than twice as long as involucre; 
\par 
  involucre 6-8 mm ........................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b adenophora}
\par 
3 Most peduncles more than twice as long as involucre; in-
\par 
  volucre 7-10 mm ........................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b intermedia}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b communis}: Annual; stem up to 125 cm, slender to robust, usually with eglandular hairs at the base. Leaves ovate to lyrate-pinnatifid, the lateral segments (if developed) not as wide as the terminal. Peduncles slender, usually more than twice as long as involucre. Involucre 5-7(-8) mm. Ligules up to 1½ times as long as involucre. 2n = 14, 16. {\i Throughout the range of the species except perhaps S.E. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b adenophora} (Boiss.) Rech. fil.,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 105}({\b 1}): 673 (1943) ({\i L. communis }forma{\i  adenoclados} (Borbás) Hayek): Annual, usually with short glandular hairs throughout; stem up to 80 cm, robust, rigid. Lower leaves lyrate-pinnatifid, the upper linear-lanceolate, entire. Peduncles rigid, often not more than twice as long as involucre. {\i Greece, Jugoslavia, Romania}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b intermedia} (Bieb.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 803 (1931) ({\i L. intermedia} Bieb.): Annual, biennial or perennial; stem 25-80(-100) cm, with eglandular hairs towards the base usually glabrous above. Leaves green, the basal and lower and middle cauline lyrate-pinnatifid, with the lateral segments often about as wide as the terminal one, the upper lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, dentate to entire. Peduncles slender, mostly more than twice as long as involucre. Involucre 7-10 × 3-5 mm. Ligules about twice as long as involucre. 2n = 14.{\i  S.E. Europe; rarely introduced elsewhere}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b alpina} (Boiss. & Balansa) P.D. Sell, {\i Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  33}: 432 (1975) ({\i L. alpina} Boiss. & Balansa,{\i  L. aipetriensis} Vassilcz.): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but stems numerous, 10-25 cm; leaves glaucous; involucre less than 3 mm wide.{\i  Mountains of Krym}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Subsp.{\b  pisidica} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Rech. fil.,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 105}({\b 1}): 674 (1943) ({\i L. pisidica} Boiss. & Heldr.), which differs from subsp. ({\b c}) in having the lower part of the stem with dense, crispate glandular hairs, has been erroneously recorded from Turkey-in-Europe and doubtfully recorded from Greece (Samothraki).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 178.              Crepis}               L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.D. Sell.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs. Stems 1 to many, usually branched. Leaves subentire to pinnatisect or lobed. Capitula 1-numerous. Involucral bracts in 2 rows, the outer up to 3/4 (rarely 5/6) as long as the inner. Receptacle flat or convex, usually pitted, the raised margins of the pits often ciliate, rarely also with 1 or 2 rigid hairs or narrow, membranous scales between the florets. Ligules usually yellow (sometimes with a red stripe on the outer face) sometimes orange, pink, white or parti-coloured. Achenes yellowish to black, uniform or of 2 or 3 kinds, with 4-35 ribs or striae, usually narrowed towards apex, sometimes beaked; pappus of 1-many rows of usually white and soft, sometimes greyish or yellow and brittle hairs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: E. B. Babcock,{\i  Univ. Calif. Publ. Bot.}{\b  21}: 1-197 (1947);{\b  22}: 198-1030 (1947);{\b  23}: 383-404 (1951).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  C. aspera} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1132 (1763), native of S.W. Asia and Egypt, has been recorded as an occasional casual in Europe.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant acaulescent; capitula in sessile clusters in the 
\par 
  centre of a flat rosette of leaves ..................................................... {\b 57. pusilla}
\par 
1 Plant with stems each bearing 1 or more capitula
\par 
2 Leaves pinnately divided to the midrib into narrowly 
\par 
  linear segments .................................................................. {\b 26. chondrilloides}
\par 

\par 
344}
\par