{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Corolla 3-4 mm in diameter. 2n = 22.{\i  Calcareous screes. • C. & S. Appennini.} It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 121. G. margaritaceum} A. Kerner, {\i Zeitschr. Ferdinand.} ({\i Innsbruck}) ser. 3, {\b 15}: 252 (1870). Stems 4-7·5 cm. Leaves in whorls of 6-8(-9); lower leaves ovate, coriaceous, densely papillose, especially on the upper surface; upper leaves 3·5-5(-6) × 0·8-1·3 mm, linear-lanceolate, smooth. Inflorescence narrowly pyramidal, somewhat acute; pedicels slender, erect. Corolla 3-3·5(-4) mm in diameter. 2n = 22. {\i Calcareous screes. S.E. Alps from} 12°{\i  to }12° 30' {\i E}. It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 122. G. baldense} Sprengel, {\i Pugillus }{\b 1}: 10 (1813). Stems 4·5-7 cm. Leaves 5-7(-10) × 0·5-0·8(-1·1) mm, in whorls of (6-)8-9(-10), linear-lanceolate, smooth. Inflorescence narrowly pyramidal, somewhat acute, many-flowered; pedicels slender, erect. Corolla 3-3·5 mm in diameter. Mean diameter of pollen grains 20·5-21·5 µm. 2n = 22. {\i Calcareous grassland. S.E. Alps from} 9° 45'{\i  to }12° {\i E}. It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 123. G. noricum} Ehrend., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  100}: 672 (1953). Like {\b 122} but stems 4-14 cm, ascending; leaves 5-9(-12) × (0·9-)1·1-1·5(-2) mm; corolla 3·5-5 mm in diameter; mean diameter of pollen grains 22-24 µm. 2n = 44. {\i Calcareous grassland. • E. Alps, extending to S. Slovenija.} Au Ge It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 124. G. demissum} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 3}): 40 (1843) ({\i G. pedunculatum} Stoj. & Stefanov). Caespitose. Stems 3-8 cm, glabrous and smooth. Leaves (3-)5-6(-8) × (1-)1·3-2·5 mm, in whorls of (4-)5-6, flat, broadly oblanceolate, with short cartilaginous apex, smooth, scarcely decreasing in the inflorescence. Inflorescence very few-flowered; bracts leaf-like. Corolla 2·5-3 mm in diameter, yellowish-brown or greenish; lobes acute. Fruit smooth, glabrous. 2n = 22. {\i Snow-patches on calcareous soil. S. Bulgaria, N.E. Greece.} Bu Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 125. G. stojanovii} Degen, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok }{\b 19}: 48 (1922). Like {\b 124} but stems (1·5-)2-4(-8) cm, more or less densely hairy; leaves (2·5-)3-5(-6) × 1-3 mm, softly hairy; pedicels (1·3-)1·5-5(-7) mm, glabrous; corolla greenish-brown, hairy externally; fruit more or less densely hairy. 2n = 22. {\i Exposed calcareous rocks. • S.W. Bulgaria} ({\i Pirin Pl}.). Bu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Doubtfully distinct from {\b 124}; intermediate individuals occur on the Pirin Planina.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 126. G. cespitosum} Lam., {\i Tabl. Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 1}: 262 (1792). Plant blackish-brown when dry, forming a flat cushion up to c. 25 cm in diameter, quite glabrous and smooth, with slender tap-root, filiform stock and stolons. Stems (2·5-)3-5(-8) cm, with short internodes. Leaves (3-)3·5-5(-7) × 0·4-0·6 mm, usually in whorls of 8-10, linear, rather thin, shining, smooth; margins flat, more or less thickened; midrib occupying c. ¼ of the width of leaf, indistinct; hyaline apex 0·5-1 mm. Inflorescence corymbose, leafy, very few-flowered; pedicels 1-3 mm. Corolla 2-4 mm in diameter, more or less flat, yellowish-white; lobes acute. Fruit c. 1·5 mm, faintly papillose, shining. 2n = 22. {\i Alpine schistose screes. • Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   In the zone of contact with {\b 85} ({\i G. pyrenaicum}), tetraploid hybrids are not rare. They differ from {\b 126} particularly in the coarser leaves which do not turn so dark on drying, and in the more shortly pedicellate flowers with more infundibuliform corolla.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. JUBOGALIUM Ehrend. Perennial herbs, often woody at the base, often caespitose, or annuals. Leaves 5-8(-10) in a whorl, 1-veined, not awned. Inflorescence bracteate throughout; upper branches and pedicels slender, almost capillary, usually reddish. Corolla rotate, purple to greenish-yellow. Ovary hairy except for the commissural groove which is sometimes glabrous and covered with yellowish glandular tissue. Fruit dry, smooth, hairy.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 127. G. graecum} L., {\i Mantissa} 38 (1767). Perennial. Stems more or less woody at the base, with short basal internodes, usually erect, 4-angled, hairy. Leaves in whorls of 5-6, usually hairy. Inflorescence oblong; bracts 1·5-2 mm; pedicels 1-2 mm. Corolla c. 1·5 mm in diameter, purple-brownish-greenish; lobes acute. Fruit hairy.{\i  Dry crevices in calcareous rocks. Kriti.} Cr. (E. Aegean region and S.W. Anatolia.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b graecum}: stems (4)8-15(-20) cm, with short hairs. Leaves (3·5-)4·5-6(-8) × 0·4-0·8 mm, narrowly linear, green, with more or less scattered short hairs. Inflorescence narrow, oblong. Fruit rather sparsely hairy; commissure glabrous. 2n = 22.{\i  Kriti}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pseudocanum} Ehrend.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  105}: 254 (1958): stems 6-8 cm, with long hairs. Leaves 4-6 × 1-1·7 mm, broadly linear, densely hairy. Inflorescence elongate-ovoid. Fruit densely hairy; commissure somewhat hairy. •{\i  Coastal areas of E. Kriti}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 128. G. canum} Req. ex DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  4}: 602 (1830). Perennial. Stems (5-)10-25(-35) cm, often more or less woody at the base, frequently pendent, densely hairy; lower internodes usually more than 9 mm. Leaves in whorls of 5-6, (4-)6-10(-13) × (1·5-)2-4(-7) mm, ovate, densely hairy, grey; margin usually recurved. Inflorescence pyramidal; bracts 1·5-3 mm; pedicels 1-4 mm. Corolla 1·8-2·5 mm in diameter, purple, rarely yellowish; lobes apiculate. Fruit densely hairy; commissure more or less hairy.{\i  Dry, calcareous cliffs. Karpathos.} Cr. ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  128} is represented in Europe by subsp. ovatum Ehrend., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 105}: 256 (1958).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 129. G. setaceum} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  2}: 584 (1788). Annual. Stems (2·5-)5-30(-35) cm, slender, more or less erect, finely retrorsely aculeolate or glabrous. Leaves 5-17(-20) × 0·4-0·9 mm, in whorls of (4-)6-8(-10), narrowly linear to filiform, glabrous or sparsely hairy; margin somewhat recurved, with papilliform teeth. Inflorescence lax, broadly ovoid, somewhat squarrose; bracts 3-5 mm, with hooked hairs on the upper surface; pedicels 1-3 mm. Corolla c. 0·5 mm in diameter, purple; lobes apiculate. Fruit with dense, hooked hairs, rarely glabrescent. 2n = 22.{\i  Dry, open habitats. Mediterranean region.} Bl Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si ?Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b setaceum}: Corolla-lobes shortly apiculate. {\i Chiefly in the N. and W. parts of the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b decaisnei} (Boiss.) Ehrend., {\i Biol. Meddel. Kong. Danske Vid. Selsk.}{\b  10}: 144 (1958): Corolla-lobes long-apiculate. Chiefly in the S. and E. parts of the range of the species.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. KOLGYDA Dumort. (Sect. {\i Aparine} Koch). Annuals. Stems 4-angled, retrorsely aculeolate, otherwise glabrous or hairy. Leaves in whorls of 4-11, 1-veined, acute or awned. Inflorescence pyramidal or oblong, usually strongly bracteate; cymes few-flowered or reduced to solitary axillary flowers. Flowers sometimes male (andromonoecious). Corolla usually rotate. Ovary without glandular commissure. Fruit dry, with patent, hooked setae, or more or less hispid or glabrous and papillose or smooth.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 130. G. monachinii} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 10}): 67 (1849). Stems (2-)4-10(-16) cm, ascending, weak, retrorsely aculeolate especially below, almost smooth above, weakly 4-angled. Leaves 4-7 × 1·5-2 mm, in whorls of 5-6,
\par 

\par 
34}
\par