{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy2\hr11\min5}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy2\hr11\min6}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages5}{\nofwords1080}{\nofchars6158}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 52 Involucre 8-13 \'d7 5-12 mm; florets 12-18 mm ............................ }{\b\fs28 22. biennis}{\fs28 
\par 51 Involucre canescent-tomentose and with dense, longer 
\par    glandular hairs, without long eglandular hairs
\par 53 Leaves coarsely dentate or shallowly pinnatifid;
\par    achenes with every fourth or fifth rib stronger .......................... }{\b\fs28 28. baldaccii}{\fs28 
\par 53 Leaves deeply pinnatifid, with narrow, dentate segments;
\par    achenes with ribs nearly equal ............................................... }{\b\fs28 30. pantocsekii}{\fs28 
\par 44 Involucral bracts glabrous on inner face
\par 54 Achenes 4- to 12-ribbed
\par 55 Cauline leaves mostly bract-like, not amplexicaul
\par 56 Ligules bluish-purple; receptacle with rigid hairs ................... }{\b\fs28 45. purpurea}{\fs28 
\par 56 Ligules yellow; receptacle glabrous ..................................... }{\b\fs28 52. multicaulis}{\fs28 
\par 55 At least some cauline leaves amplexicaul
\par 57 Achenes 1\'b74-3\'b78 mm
\par 58 Involucre 8-10 mm; achenes 2\'b75-3\'b78 mm .............................. }{\b\fs28 58. nicaeensis}{\fs28 
\par 58 Involucre 3-9 mm; achenes 1\'b74-2\'b75 mm
\par 59 Capitula erect before anthesis; outer involucral 
\par    bracts 7-9, 1/3-1/2 as long as inner ........................................... }{\b\fs28 60. capillaris}{\fs28 
\par 59 Capitula nodding before anthesis; outer involucral 
\par    bracts 4-6, smaller ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 62. neglecta}{\fs28 
\par 57 Achenes (3\'b75-)4-5\'b75 mm
\par 60 Some achenes more than 0\'b775 mm wide, 4- to 10-ribbed .... }{\b\fs28 54. dioscoridis}{\fs28 
\par 60 Achenes 0\'b75-0\'b775 mm wide, 10- to 15-ribbed
\par 61 Leaves glabrous; achenes 4\'b75-5\'b75 mm, 10-ribbed ..................... }{\b\fs28 4. paludosa}{\fs28 
\par 61 Leaves very hairy; achenes 3\'b75-5\'b75 mm, 10- to 15 ribbed ...... }{\b\fs28 12. smyrnaea}{\fs28 
\par 54 Achenes (13-)15- to 35-ribbed or -striate
\par 62 Receptacular pits ciliate
\par 63 Cauline leaves well-developed ......................................... }{\b\fs28 11. lampsanoides}{\fs28 
\par 63 Cauline leaves absent or bract-like
\par 64 Involucre 12-14 mm; achenes c. 7\'b75 mm, 18- to 20-ribbed .... }{\b\fs28 41. schachtii}{\fs28 
\par 64 Involucre 9-12 mm; achenes 5-6 mm, 15-striate .................... }{\b\fs28 42. bithynica}{\fs28 
\par 62 Receptacular pits glabrous
\par 65 Involucre 11-13 mm; achenes 5\'b75-8\'b75 mm, 25- to
\par    35-striate ...................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. viscidula}{\fs28 
\par 65 Involucre 8-11 mm; achenes 3-5 mm, up to 20-ribbed
\par 66 Basal and lowest cauline leaves entire to denticulate .................. }{\b\fs28 13. mollis}{\fs28 
\par 66 Basal and lowest cauline leaves lyrate-pinnatifid
\par 67 Cauline leaves well-developed, amplexicaul ......................... }{\b\fs28 12. smyrnaea}{\fs28 
\par 67 Cauline leaves few and, except the lowermost, bract-
\par    like, not amplexicaul ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 14. fraasii}{\fs28 
\par 43 Involucre without glandular hairs
\par 68 Involucral bracts pubescent on inner face
\par 69 Achenes 2-4 mm ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 44. tectorum}{\fs28 
\par 69 Achenes more than 4 mm
\par 70 Receptacular pits glabrous
\par 71 Achenes 4\'b75-6 mm; ligules entirely yellow .................................. }{\b\fs28 24. lacera}{\fs28 
\par 71 Achenes 7-9\'b75 mm; ligules yellow with red stripe on
\par    outer face ............................................................................... }{\b\fs28 34. oporinoides}{\fs28 
\par 70 Receptacular pits ciliate
\par 72 Achenes 9-18 mm
\par 73 Cauline leaves wide; all involucral bracts linear-lanceolate ..... }{\b\fs28 15. bocconi}{\fs28 
\par 73 Cauline leaves lanceolate or bract-like; outer involucral
\par    bracts lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, wider than inner ................. }{\b\fs28 19. albida}{\fs28 
\par 72 Achenes 4-7\'b75 mm
\par 74 Involucre 14-16 mm ............................................................. }{\b\fs28 10. chrysantha}{\fs28 
\par 74 Involucre less than 14 mm
\par 75 Outer involucral bracts not more than 1/3 as long as inner 
\par 76 Involucre 9-10 mm, densely canescent-tomentose ............. }{\b\fs28 35. sibthorpiana}{\fs28 
\par 76 Involucre 10-13 mm, glabrous or sparsely pubescent ............. }{\b\fs28 46. reuterana}{\fs28 
\par 75 Outer involucral bracts at least \'bd as long as inner
\par 77 Achenes 3- to 5-striate ........................................................ }{\b\fs28 27. auriculifolia}{\fs28 
\par 77 Achenes 10- to 20-ribbed or -striate 
\par 78 Plant not more than 10 cm 
\par 79 Involucre with long, yellowish eglandular hairs ............................................................. }{\b\fs28 8. rhaetica}{\fs28 
\par 79 Involucre canescent-tomentulose ........................................ }{\b\fs28 33. macedonica}{\fs28 
\par 78 Plant at least 15 cm
\par 80 Leaves (15-)30-75 mm wide ...................................................... }{\b\fs28 22. biennis}{\fs28 
\par 80 Leaves not more than 30 mm wide
\par 81 Achenes c. 7 mm ..................................................................... }{\b\fs28 38. guioliana}{\fs28 
\par 81 Achenes 4-5\'b75 mm
\par 82 Involucre canescent-tomentose to densely
\par    white-lanate; outer bracts 6-8 ........................................................ }{\b\fs28 29. turcica}{\fs28 
\par 82 Involucre canescent-tomentulose; outer bracts 10-12 ................... }{\b\fs28 40. athoa}{\fs28 
\par 68 Involucral bracts glabrous on inner face
\par 83 Receptacle naked; receptacular pits glabrous
\par 84 Cauline leaves \'b1 amplexicaul or auriculate-amplexicaul
\par 85 Involucre 4-9 mm; achenes 1\'b74-2\'b75 mm
\par 86 Involucre sometimes with glandular hairs, but not rigid
\par    eglandular hairs; outer bracts 7-9 .............................................. }{\b\fs28 60. capillaris}{\fs28 
\par 86 Involucre usually with rigid eglandular hairs; outer bracts 5  }{\b\fs28 61. micrantha}{\fs28 
\par 85 Involucre 8-13 mm; achenes 3\'b75-6\'b75 mm
\par 87 Involucre glabrous ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 47. pulchra}{\fs28 
\par 87 Involucre hairy
\par 88 Achenes c. 30-striate .............................................................. }{\b\fs28 2. geracioides}{\fs28 
\par 88 Achenes 4- to 10-ribbed ........................................................ }{\b\fs28 54. dioscoridis}{\fs28 
\par 84 Cauline leaves not amplexicaul, often bract-like,
\par    sometimes absent
\par 89 Leaves 2-4 mm wide .............................................................. }{\b\fs28 39. crocifolia}{\fs28 
\par 89 At least some leaves more than 4 mm wide
\par 90 Plant up to 20(-25) cm
\par 91 Plant 2-6 cm; capitulum solitary; achenes 1-1\'b725 mm wide . }{\b\fs28 6. terglouensis}{\fs28 
\par 91 Plant 5-20(-25) cm; capitula 1-6; achenes 0\'b775-1 mm wide ...... }{\b\fs28 7. jacquinii}{\fs28 
\par 90 Plant usually more than 25 cm
\par 92 Achenes c. 10-ribbed ............................................................. }{\b\fs28 48. stojanovii}{\fs28 
\par 92 Achenes 16- to 20-ribbed or -striate
\par 93 Leaves runcinate-pinnatifid to 2-pinnatifid; involucral
\par    bracts pubescent on inner face ....................................................... }{\b\fs28 24. lacera}{\fs28 
\par 93 Leaves entire to repand-dentate; involucral bracts 
\par    glabrous on inner face ............................................................. }{\b\fs28 43. praemorsa}{\fs28 
\par 83 Receptacle with scales or rigid hairs, or receptacular
\par    pits ciliate
\par 94 Achenes 4- to 10-ribbed
\par 95 Cauline leaves not amplexicaul, often bract-like
\par 96 Receptacle without scales or rigid hairs; ligules 
\par    yellow with reddish-purple stripe on outer face ........................ }{\b\fs28 37. taygetica}{\fs28 
\par 96 Receptacle with rigid hairs; ligules bluish-purple .................... }{\b\fs28 45. purpurea}{\fs28 
\par 95 Cauline leaves amplexicaul
\par 97 Ligules purplish-pink; achenes 5-6 mm ...................................... }{\b\fs28 36. incana}{\fs28 
\par 97 Ligules yellow, usually with reddish stripe on outer 
\par    face; achenes 2\'b75-5 mm
\par 98 Achenes 3\'b75-5 \'d7 0\'b75-2 mm, 4- to 10-ribbed ......................... }{\b\fs28 54. dioscoridis}{\fs28 
\par 98 Achenes 2\'b75-3\'b78 \'d7 c. 0\'b76 mm, 10-ribbed
\par 99 Involucre 8-10 mm; outer bracts 7-9 ..................................... }{\b\fs28 58. nicaeensis}{\fs28 
\par 99 Involucre 3-7 mm; outer bracts 4-6 .......................................... }{\b\fs28 62. neglecta}{\fs28 
\par 94 Achenes 14- to 25-ribbed or -striate
\par 100 Not more than 30 cm, with peduncles about as long as
\par     stem or stem simple; leaves not amplexicaul
\par 
\par 346}
\par }