{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 tifid; cauline like basal, distant. Capitula 1-6. Outer involucral bracts unequal, 1/2-2/3 as long as inner. Achenes 4-5 × 0·75-1 mm, light brown or yellowish, fusiform, slightly attenuate at both ends, 10- to 15(-20)-ribbed.{\i  Calcicole. • E. Alps, Carpathians and mountains of N.W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Cz Ge He It Ju Po Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b jacquinii}: Similar in appearance to {\i Leontodon montanus} subsp. {\i pseudotaraxaci.} Stems (6-)12-20(-25) cm.Leaves mostly oblanceolate to lanceolate, denticulate to runcinate-pinnatifid, with narrow, often remote lobes. Capitula (1-)2-6. Involucre 8-12 × 4-10 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, gradually acute, with more or less numerous stellate and simple eglandular hairs.{\i  N.E. Alps; Carpathians}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b kerneri} (Rech. fil.) Merxm.,{\i  Jahrb. Ver. Schutze Alpenpfl.}{\b  17}: 102 (1952) ({\i C. kerneri} Rech. fil.,{\i  C. jacquinii} sensu Hayek, non Tausch): Stem 5-15(-20) cm. Leaves mostly linear to linear-lanceolate, entire to runcinate-dentate with narrow, remote teeth. Capitula 1-2(-3). Involucre 10-14 × 6-12 mm; bracts linear-oblong, obtuse to abruptly acute, with numerous stellate and dark, long, simple eglandular hairs. 1500-1800{\i  m. E. Alps and mountains of N.W. part of Balkan peninsula.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. rhaetica} Hegetschw.,{\i  Fl. Schweiz }769 (1840) ({\i C. jubata} Koch). Stems 2-9 cm. Leaves more or less hairy; basal 2-5 × 0·5-1 cm, few, congested, oblanceolate, obtuse, entire or slightly dentate, narrowed to a short, winged petiole; cauline 1-2, linear-lanceolate, subacute, sessile. Capitulum solitary. Involucre 11-13 × 9-12 mm; bracts oblong or linear-lanceolate, the outer 1/2-2/3 as long as inner, with numerous, long, yellowish, simple eglandular hairs, pubescent on inner face. Achenes 6-8 × 0·7 mm, brown, cylindrical but gradually attenuate upwards, 18- to 20-ribbed. Pappus greyish or yellowish-white.{\i  Calcareous debris and rock crevices above }1950{\i  m. Alps, from} 7° {\i E. to} 11° 30'{\i  E.} Au Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Very similar in appearance to some alpine species of{\i  Hieracium}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. aurea} (L.) Cass.,{\i  Dict. Sci. Nat.}{\b  25}: 88 (1822). Stems 1-8, 2-30 cm, not or scarcely branched. Basal leaves 1-10 × 0·3-3 cm, obovate to oblanceolate, dentate to pinnatifid, glabrous or sparsely hairy; without cauline leaves. Involucral bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse, the outer 1/3-1/2 as long as inner. Ligules yellow or orange, with a reddish or reddish-purple outer face. Achenes 5-6 mm, pale brown, fusiform, rather strongly attenuate at apex, c. 16-ribbed.{\i  Meadows and pastures. • Alps, and mountains of Italy and S. & W. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Ga Ge Gr He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  A very variable species, the following two subspecies being connected by many intermediates.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b aurea}: Stems 10-30 cm. Involucre 10-13 mm. Florets c. 16 mm. 2n = 10.{\i  Alps, and mountains of Jugoslavia.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b glabrescens} (Caruel) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} 432 (1882) ({\i C. columnae} (Ten.) Froelich): Stems 2-16 cm. Involucre 7-9 mm. Florets c. 11 mm. 2n = 10.{\i  Alpi Apuane and Appennini; S. & W. parts of Balkan peninsula.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. chrysantha} (Ledeb.) Turcz.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou }{\b 11}: 96 (1838). Stems 1-3, 8-20 cm. Leaves more or less white-tomentulose; basal up to 9 × 2 cm, oblanceolate, obtuse to acute, sinuate-dentate or denticulate, gradually attenuate into the narrow petiole; cauline 1-3, like the basal or bract-like. Capitula 1-3. Involucre 14-16 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, the outer c. 2/3 as long as inner, with numerous, dark green, eglandular hairs, pubescent on inner face. Achenes 5-7(-9·5) mm, reddish-brown or dark purple, fusiform, usually more attenuate at apex than base, 15-ribbed. 2n = 8.{\i  Meadows and streamsides. Ural, southwards to} 54° 30'. Rs (N, C). ({\i N. & C. Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. HIERACIOIDES Froelich. Rhizomatous, pubescent perennials with robust to slender stems, with few branches mostly above the middle. Leaves petiolate, lyrate-pinnatifid or entire. Capitula with many florets. Ligules yellow. Receptacle with glabrous or ciliate pits.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. lampsanoides} (Gouan) Tausch,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 11} (Ergänz. 1): 80 (1828). Stems 30-90 cm, branched above. Leaves with yellow eglandular hairs; basal up to 12 × 3 cm, fugacious, oblanceolate, lyrate, with an ovate, denticulate to dentate terminal segment nearly 1/2 as long as whole leaf, and 2-4 small opposite pairs of lateral segments; lower cauline similar, middle and upper sublyrate or panduriform to ovate or lanceolate. Capitula 2-12. Involucre 9-11 × 6-10 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, long-acute, the outer 1/3-1/2 as long as inner, with numerous, unequal glandular hairs. Achenes 5-6 × 0·5-0·8 mm, brown, cylindrical, c. 20-ribbed. 2n = 12.{\i  Damp places. • Mountains of S.W. Europe, from N. Portugal to S.C. France.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. smyrnaea} DC. ex Froelich in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  7}: 170 (1838) ({\i C. murmanni} Boiss.). Like {\b 11} but stems 20-60 cm; leaves up to 25 × 6 cm, the terminal segment ¼-½ as long as whole leaf; outer involucral bracts 1/4-1/3 as long as th inner; achenes 3·8-4·5 × 0·5-0·7 mm, fusiform, 10- to 15-ribbed. {\i Woods and scrub. Turkey-in-Europe; one station in S. Greece.} Gr Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. C. mollis} (Jacq.) Ascherson,{\i  Fl. Brandenb.}{\b  1}: 385 (1864) ({\i C. succisifolia} (All.) Tausch). Stems 30-75(-90) cm. Leaves more or less pubescent with yellow eglandular hairs, or glabrous; basal 4-27 × 1·5-5 cm, elliptical to oblanceolate, obtuse to acute, entire or denticulate, more or less attenuate into a long or short winged petiole; lower cauline like the basal or sessile, remainder lanceolate, semiamplexicaul or bract-like. Capitula several, in corymbs. Involucre 8-10(-12) × 5-6 mm; bracts linear to linear-lanceolate, acute, the outer 1/3-1/2 as long as inner, with more or less numerous, unequal, black, yellow or brown glandular hairs. Achenes 3-4·5 × 0·5-0·7 mm, reddish-brown, fusiform, the marginal curved, the inner straight, all gradually attenuate at base and apex, c. 20-ribbed. 2n = 12.{\i  Damp or shady places. C. & S.E. Europe, extending locally westwards to Scotland and E. Pyrenees and north-eastwards to Estonia.} Al Au Br Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs †Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable in hairiness of stem, leaves and involucre, robustness of stem and leaves and the exact colour of the florets. In C. Europe the plants of higher altitudes are said to be more robust, have firmer stems and leaves, and blackish hairs, whereas those from lower altitudes are more slender and have thinner leaves and paler hairs, but if the whole range of the species is considered the variation does not fit into any significant pattern.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. C. fraasii} Schultz Bip.,{\i  Flora }({\i Regensb.}) {\b 25}: 173(1842). Stems 6-35 cm. Leaves with glandular or eglandular hairs; basal 3-22 × 0·8-5·2 cm, oblanceolate, lyrate-pinnatifid, the terminal segment broadly ovate and remotely denticulate, the lateral segments broad, obtuse, close or remote; lower cauline like the basal or lanceolate and dentate; upper cauline bract-like. Capitula few to many in a compound or irregular corymb. Involucre 9-10 × 4-5 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, the outer ¼-½ as long as inner, with numerous, short glandular and sometimes some longer eglandular hairs. Achenes 3-5 mm, dark brown, fusiform, more or less curved, 15- to 20-ribbed.{\i  Mountain rocks up to }2300{\i  m. Greece, Kriti, Karpathos.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 
348}
\par