{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. linguatum} Dahlst. ex M.P. Christiansen & Wiinst. in Raunk.,{\i  Dansk Ekskurs.-Fl.} ed. 5, 313 (1934). • Be Br Da Fe Ga Ge He No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. lingulatum} Marklund,{\i  Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.} {\b 55}({\b 5}): 20 (1925) ({\i T. aequatum} Dahlst., {\i T. subpallescens} Dahlst.). • Br Da Ga Ge He No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. longisquameum} H. Lindb. fil.,{\i  op. cit.} {\b 29}({\b 9}): 21 (1907) ({\i T. sagittatum} Dahlst.). 2n = 24. • Be Br Da Fe Ge Hb He Ho No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. lucidum} Dahlst.,{\i  Ark. Bot.} {\b 9}({\b 10}): 27 (1910) ({\i T. laeticolorans }A. Lindström ex Dahlst.). • Be Da Fe Ge Ho No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. lunare} M.P. Christiansen in Raunk.,{\i  Dansk Ekskurs.-Fl.} ed. 6, 321 (1942) ({\i T. nemorum} G. Hagl.). • Be Da He Ho Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. macranthum} Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot.} {\b 10}({\b 6}): 18 (1911) ({\i T. longisectum} G. Hagl.). • Da Fe Ge No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. maculatum} Jordan, {\i Pug. Pl. Nov.} 117 (1852) ({\i T. atripictum} Marklund). Br Fe No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. marklundii} Palmgren, {\i Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.} {\b 34}({\b 1}): 20 (1910) ({\i T. subhamatum} M.P. Christiansen). 2n = 24. • Be Br Da Fe Ga Hb Hs Lu Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. melanthoides} Dahlst.,{\i  Bot. Not. }{\b 1935}: 309 (1935). 2n = 24. • Be Br Da Fe No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. mimulum} Dahlst.,{\i  Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  29}({\b 9}): 29 (1907). 2n = 24. • Be Da Fe Ga Ge He No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. mucronatum} H. Lindb. fil., {\i op. cit.} 24 (1907) ({\i T. latispinum} Dahlst.). • Br Fe Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. multilobum} Dahlst. ex Puolanne,{\i  Mem. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.} {\b 8}: 161 (1932-1933). • Da Fe No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. obliquilobum} Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot.} {\b 9}({\b 10}): 46 (1910) ({\i T. tenuisquameum} Dahlst. ex G. Hagl., {\i T. tortisquameum} H. Lindb. fil., {\i T. unguiculosum} H. Lindb. fil. & Palmgren). • Be Br Da Fe Ga Ge He No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. oblongatum} Dahlst., {\i Rep. Bot. Exch. Club Brit. Is.}{\b  9}: 27 (1930) ({\i T. falciferum }Marklund ex Puolanne, {\i T. fusciceps} G. Hagl., {\i T. perhamatum} Dahlst.). 2n = 24. Br Fe Ho Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. occidentale} Dahlst.,{\i  Bergens Mus. Aarb. }{\b 1923-1924}({\b 6}): 35 (1925) ({\i T. valloense} M.P. Christiansen). • Da Fe No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. officinale} Weber in Wiggers,{\i  Prim. Fl. Holsat.} 56 (1780). Although this name has been used for this group of plants in the aggregate sense, it has never been typified and it is uncertain to which of the segregates the name applies.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. pachylobum} Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot.}{\b  9}({\b 10}): 54 (1910). • Da Fe Ge No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. pallescens} Dahlst., {\i op. cit.} 22 (1910). • Be Br Da Fe Ge He Ho No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. pallidulum} H. Lindb. fil.,{\i  Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  29}({\b 9}): 40 (1907). • Fe Ge No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. pannucium} Dahlst., {\i Bergens Mus. Aarb.}{\b  1923-1924}({\b 6}): 21 (1925) ({\i T. protractifrons} Dahlst. ex M.P. Christiansen & Wiinst.). • Be Br Da Fe Hb No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. pannulatiforme} Dahlst.,{\i  Rep. Bot. Exch. Club Brit. Is.}{\b  9}: 563 (1932) ({\i T. densilobum} Dahlst., {\i T. percrispum} M.P. Christiansen). • Be Da Fe No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. pannulatum} Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot.}{\b  9}({\b 10}): 13 (1910) ({\i T. amphilobum} M.P. Christiansen). • Da Fe Ga Ge No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. parvuliceps} H. Lindb. fil., {\i Meddel. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  36}: 5 (1910) ({\i T. laceratum} (Brenner) Brenner). 2n = 24. • Be Br Da Fe Ge No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. pectinatiforme} H. Lindb. fil., {\i Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn. }{\b 29}({\b 9}): 30 (1907). • Be Da Fe Ge He No Su [Br].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. piceatum} Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot.} {\b 9}({\b 10}): 11 (1910). • Be Br Da Fe Ga Ge Hs No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. polychroum} E. L. Ekman ex Th. Lange, {\i Bot. Not.}{\b  1911}: 286 (1911) ({\i T. acroschistum} G. Hagl., {\i T. purpureum} Raunk.). • Da Fe Ge No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. polyodon} Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot.}{\b  9}({\b 10}): 56 (1910) ({\i T. ardisodon} Dahlst.). 2n = 21, 22, 23, 24, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48. • Be Br Da Ga Ge No Rs ( ?) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. praecox} Dahlst. ex Puolanne,{\i  Mem. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  8}: 165 (1932-1933). • Fe No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. privum} Dahlst.,{\i  Ark. Bot. }{\b 10}({\b 6}): 7 (1911). • Be Br Da Fe Ge Ho No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. pycnolobum} Dahlst.,{\i  op. cit.} 9 (1911). • Be Da Fe Ge He Ho Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. raunkiaeri} Wiinst. in Raunk.,{\i  Dansk Ekskurs.-Fl.} ed. 5, 303 (1934) ({\i T. duplidentifrons} auct., non Dahlst.). 2n = 24. • Be Br Da Ge Ho No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. recurvum} Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot.}{\b  9}({\b 10}): 49 (1910) ({\i T. intricatum} H. Lindb. fil., {\i T. rubefactum} Dahlst.). • Da Fe No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. remotijugum} H. Lindb. fil.,{\i  Meddel. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  35}: 20 (1909). • Fe Ge No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. retroflexum} H. Lindb. fil.,{\i  op. cit.} 18 (1909). 2n = 24. • Be Da Fe Ge He No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. rhodopodum} Dahlst. ex M.P. Christiansen & Wiinst. in Raunk.,{\i  Dansk Ekskurs.-Fl.} ed. 5, 310 (1934). • Be Da Fe Ga Ge He No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. rubrisquameum} M.P. Christiansen,{\i  Dansk Bot. Ark.} {\b 9}({\b 2}): 4 (1936). • Da Ge No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. sagittipotens} Dahlst. & R. Ohlsen ex G. Hagl., {\i Bot. Not.}{\b  1934}: 29 (1934) ({\i T. valens} Marklund). • Da Fe Ge No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. scotiniforme} Dahlst. ex G. Hagl.,{\i  Acta Horti Gothob.}{\b  11}: 35 (1936) ({\i T. obscuratum} G. Hagl., non Dahlst.). • Da He No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. scotinum} Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot.}{\b  9}({\b 10}): 38 (1910). • Da Fe No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. sellandii} Dahlst.,{\i  Bergens Mus. Aarb. }{\b 1923-1924}({\b 6}): 19 (1925)({\i T. granvinense} Dahlst.). 2n = 24. • Be Br Da Fe Ga Hb No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. semiglobosum} H. Lindb. fil.,{\i  Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  29}({\b 9}): 33 (1907) ({\i T. acutulum} Marklund,{\i  T. adiantifrons} E.L. Ekman ex Dahlst.). • Da Fe Ge No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. septentrionale} Dahlst.,{\i  Ark. Bot.}{\b  12}({\b 2}): 115 (1912) (?{\i T. boreum} Dahlst., {\i T. guttulatum} H. Lindb. fil. ex Puolanne,{\i  T. myvatnense} M.P. Christiansen, {\i T. parvicorne} Dahlst.). • Br Fe Is No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. speciosum} Raunk.,{\i  Bot. Tidsskr.}{\b  25}: 139 (1903). 2n = 24. • Be Da Fe No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. spilophyllum} Dahlst.,{\i  Ark. Bot. }{\b 12}({\b 2}): 111 (1912). • Br Hb No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. stenoschistum} Dahlst.,{\i  op. cit.}{\b  9}({\b 10}): 58 (1910). 2n = 24. • Fe Ge No Su.
\par 

\par 
342}
\par