{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. T. fulvum} group. Leaves 5-18 cm, bright green, horizontal or erecto-patent, with deep narrow lobes; petiole unwinged, green or purple. Scapes 5-15 cm, ascending or erect, often purplish. Capitulum 20-40 mm in diameter. Involucre 7-12 × 5-9 mm; outer bracts up to 6 mm, green, often with paler margins, recurved to appressed, usually corniculate. Ligules short, wide, pale yellow. Achenes reddish- or pinkish-brown; body 2·5-3·5 mm, narrow, shortly spinulose; cone long-cylindrical; beak 5-8 mm, rather stout, often white. Apomictic.{\i  Dry places. • N., W. & C. Europe.} Au Be Br Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Is It No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 13 species have been described. The following have a relatively wide distribution:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. fulviforme} Dahlst.,{\i  Rep. Bot. Exch. Club Brit. Is.}{\b  6}: 775 (1923). 2n = 32. Be Br Co Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. fulvum} Raunk.,{\i  Dansk Ekskurs.-Fl.} ed. 2, 258 (1906) ({\i T. brachycranum} (Dahlst.) Dahlst.). 2n = 32. Be Br Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. glauciniforme} Dahlst.,{\i  Rep. Bot. Exch. Club Brit. Is.}{\b  8}: 620 (1929). Be Br Ga Hb Ho.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. oxoniense} Dahlst., {\i op. cit.}{\b  6}: 716 (1923) ({\i T. helvicarpum} Dahlst.). 2n = 32. Au Be Br Co Ga Hb He Ho It No.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. T. gasparrinii} group. Like {\b 26} but leaves with relatively wide and shallow lobes; involucre 7-11 mm wide; achenes pink or reddish, with body 2·5-3 mm and slender beak 7-9 mm.{\i  Dry places. • S. Europe.} Al Co Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 11 species have been described:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. asturiense} Van Soest,{\i  Acta Bot. Neerl.}{\b  20}: 145 (1971). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. dorchocarpum} Van Soest, {\i loc. cit.} (1971). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. epirense} Van Soest,{\i  Proc. Koninkl. Nederl. Akad. Wetensch.} ser. C, {\b 69}({\b 4}): 441 (1966). Ga Gr He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. gasparrinii} Tineo ex Lojac.,{\i  Fl. Sic.}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 201 (1902). Al Co Ga Hs It Ju Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. lambinonii} Van Soest, {\i Acta Bot. Neerl.}{\b  10}: 289 (1961). Ga He Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. nanum} Van Soest, {\i Proc. Koninkl. Nederl. Akad. Wetensch.} ser. C, {\b 69}({\b 4}): 445 (1966). Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. roseocarpum} Van Soest, {\i Acta Bot. Neerl.}{\b  6}: 411 (1957). Co Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. stenospermum} Sennen ex Van Soest, {\i Collect. Bot.} ({\i Barcelona}){\b  4}: 27 (1954). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. thracicum} Van Soest,{\i  Proc. Koninkl. Nederl. Akad. Wetensch.} ser. C, {\b 69}({\b 4}): 447 (1966). Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. vinosum} Van Soest,{\i  Collect. Bot.} ({\i Barcelona}) {\b 4}: 29 (1954). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. xanthiense} Van Soest, {\i Acta Bot. Neerl.} {\b 20}({\b 1}): 146 (1971).Gr.
\par 

\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   Sect. ERYTHROCARPA (Hand.-Mazz.) Dahlst.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. T. hoppeanum} group. Leaves 5-25 cm, variably lobed, dark olive-green, hairy, erect; lobes long, narrow, acute, patent acuminate-dentate towards the apex; petiole winged, dentate. Scapes 10-30 cm, stout, hairy, reddish in upper part, exceeding the leaves. Capitulum 35-45 mm in diameter, flat or convex. Involucre 8-18 × 7-15 mm; outer bracts ovate-lanceolate, dark green, with an often rather wide, pale margin, erect, corniculate or only slightly callosed. Ligules bright yellow, with a purple stripe. Achenes reddish-purple or brownish; body 3·5-4 mm, spinulose, rather narrow; cone 1-1·5 mm, cylindrical; beak 8-12 mm, slender, white. Sexual or apomictic.{\i  Dry places in the mountains. C. & S. Europe.} Au Cz Ga Gr He It Ju Lu Po Rm Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 8 species have been described for Europe:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. amborum} G. Hagl.,{\i  Ark. Bot.}{\b  26A}({\b 5}): 25 (1933). 2n = 24.Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. aquilonare} Hand.-Mazz. in Dalla Torre & Sarnth.,{\i  Fl. Tirol }{\b 6}({\b 3}): 687 (1912) ({\i T. laevigatum} subsp. {\i aquilonare} (Hand.-Mazz.) Hegi). 2n = 24. Au Ga He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. capricum} Van Soest,{\i  Proc. Koninkl. Nederl. Akad. Wetensch.} ser. C,{\b  69}({\b 4}): 434 (1966). 2n = 24. Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. caramanicae} Lojac., {\i Fl. Sic.} {\b 2}({\b 1}): 200 (1902). Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. duriense} Van Soest,{\i  Agron. Lusit.} {\b 13}: 67 (1951). Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. hoppeanum} Griseb.,{\i  Arch. Naturgesch.} ({\i Berlin}) {\b 18}: 349 (1852) ({\i T. calocephalum} Hand.-Maz.,{\i  T. laevigatum} subsp. {\i calocephalum} (Hand.-Maz.) Hayek). Cz Gr It Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. pieninicum} Pawl.,{\i  Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie} ser. B, {\b 1924}: 109 (1924) ({\i T. hoppeanum} subsp.{\i  pieninicum} (Pawl.) Domin).2n = 16. Cz Po.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. poliochlorum} Dahlst.,{\i  Acta Horti Berg.}{\b  9}: 26 (1929). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Sect. BOREIGENA (Dahlst.) G. Hagl.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. T. crassipes} group. Leaves 15-40 cm, lanceolate, variably lobed, large and coarse, never spotted, erect; terminal lobe long; petiole widely winged, pale. Scapes 15-40 cm, stout, erect, pale. Capitulum 50-70 mm in diameter, slightly convex. Involucre 20-25 × 20-25 mm; outer bracts up to 20 mm, narrow, erect to deflexed, whitish on inner face, ecorniculate or slightly callosed. Ligules pale yellow, long, narrow, not or scarcely striped. Achenes pale brown; body 3-3·5 mm, tuberculate; cone 0·2-0·7 mm, conical; beak 10-15 mm, slender. Apomictic.{\i  Meadows and clearings in coniferous woodland. • N. Fennoscandia.} Fe No Rs (N) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 21 species have been described. The following have a relatively wide distribution:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. cochleatum} Dahlst. & H. Lindb. fil., {\i Ark. Bot.}{\b  12}({\b 2}): 73 (1912) ({\i T. latipes} Dahlst., {\i T. praelongum} G. Hagl.). 2n = 24. Fe No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. crassipes} H. Lindb. fil., {\i Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  29}({\b 9}): 37 (1907). Fe Rs (N).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. galeatum} Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot.}{\b  12}({\b 2}): 59 (1912) ({\i T. molle} H. Lindb. fil.). Fe No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. kuusamoense} H. Lindb. fil. & Palmgren,{\i  Meddel. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  37}: 41 (1911). Fe No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. polyxanthum} Dahlst.,{\i  Acta Bot. Fenn.}{\b  21}: 161 (1938). Fe No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. rubrolineatum} H. Lindb. fil., {\i Acta Bot. Fenn. }{\b 17}: 21 (1935). Fe No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc    Sect. TARAXACUM (Sect. Vulgaria Dahlst.).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. T. officinale} group. Leaves 5-40 cm, entire to very laciniate, often large and coarse, never thin, never spotted; lobes usually more or less triangular; petiole often winged. Scapes
\par 

\par 
340}
\par