{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b fraasii} ({\i C. montana} D'Urv., non Bernh.): Capitula with c. 25 florets. Ligules yellow, with very unequal teeth. Achenes 3·75-5 mm, with smooth ribs. 2n = 12.{\i  Greece, Karpathos}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b mungieri} (Boiss. & Heldr.) P.D. Sell,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 250 (1976) ({\i C. mungieri} Boiss. & Heldr.): Capitula with 35-50 florets. Ligules yellow, red on the outer face, with subequal teeth. Achenes 3-3·75 mm, with acutely tuberculate ribs. 2n = 12. •{\i  Kriti,Karpathos}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. SOYERIA (Monnier) Bentham. More or less pubescent perennials, with long, woody tap-roots and stout, sometimes branched stems. Leaves entire to pinnatifid, petiolate, the upper gradually reduced in size. Capitula with many florets. Ligules yellow. Receptacle with ciliate pits.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. C. bocconi} P.D. Sell, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 250 (1976) ({\i C. montana} (L.) Tausch, non Bernh., {\i C. pontana} auct.). Stems 15-60 cm. Leaves glabrous except for short eglandular hairs on the margins and veins beneath; basal 4-12 × 1·5-3 cm, oblanceolate, obtuse to acute, sinuately or retrorsely denticulate, narrowed at base to a short, broadly winged petiole; lower cauline like the basal; upper cauline remote, lanceolate, acuminate, entire and amplexicaul, or bract-like. Capitula 1(-2). Involucre 18-20 × 18-25 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, the outer 2/3-3/4 as long as inner, with numerous, unequal, green or yellowish eglandular hairs, pubescent on inner face. Achenes 10-12 × 1·5-2 mm, yellowish-brown, cylindrical but strongly attenuate to the narrow apex, c. 17-ribbed, with 5 or 6 ribs more prominent than the remainder. 2n = 10.{\i  Alpine and subalpine meadows, stony slopes and woods. • Alps; mountains of C. & S.W. Jugoslavia.} Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. C. conyzifolia} (Gouan) A. Kerner,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  22}: 255 (1872) ({\i C. grandiflora }(All.) Tausch,{\i  C. balcanica }Velen., {\i C. trojanensis} Urum.). Stems 12-50 cm, usually branched above. Leaves with short, pale eglandular hairs, sometimes more or less glandular-hairy, rarely glabrescent; basal 5-30 × 1-4(-5) cm, oblanceolate, acute or obtuse, runcinately denticulate to pinnatifid, rarely pinnatisect, narrowed at base to broadly winged petioles; lower cauline oblanceolate to lanceolate, dentate or denticulate, broadly petiolate or sessile; upper cauline oblong or lanceolate, amplexicaul, sagittate-auriculate, or bract-like. Capitula 1-10. Involucre 10-20 × 8-20 mm; bracts lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, the outer unequal, c. ½ as long as inner, with greenish or yellowish eglandular hairs intermixed with shorter glandular hairs, sometimes more or less tomentose, rarely glabrescent, usually pubescent on inner face. Achenes 5-9 × 1-1·25 mm, yellowish-brown, fusiform, nearly equally attenuate at both ends, 15- to 20-ribbed. 2n = 8.{\i  Meadows and pastures, calcifuge. Mountains of Europe, from S.C. France and the Carpathians southwards to the Pyrenees and S.W. Bulgaria.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   A very variable species, especially in degree of dissection of leaves and nature of the indumentum. Many segregate taxa have been described, some at specific rank.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. C. pyrenaica} (L.) W. Greuter,{\i  Exsicc. Genav.}{\b  1}: 15 (1970) ({\i C. blattarioides} (L.) Vill.). Stems 4-70 cm, branched above. Leaves with pale eglandular hairs; basal 5-17 × 1-2·5 cm, few, fugacious, oblanceolate, acute, denticulate or dentate, narrowed into a winged petiole; lower cauline like the basal or oblong; upper cauline lanceolate to ovate, denticulate or dentate, sessile and amplexicaul. Capitula 1-6. Involucre 12-18 × 10-18 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute to obtuse, the outer nearly equalling inner, with a median line of long, green, black or yellowish, rigid eglandular hairs. Achenes 6-8 × c. 1 mm, yellowish-brown, fusiform, equally attenuate at both ends, c. 20-ribbed. 2n = 8.{\i  Mountains, }700-2200{\i  m; usually calcicole. • Alps and N. Appennini; Pyrenees; mountains of N. & E. Spain and S. & E. France}. Au Ga Ge He Hs It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. C. alpestris} (Jacq.) Tausch,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 11} (Ergänz. 1): 79 (1828). Stems 10-35 cm, usually simple. Leaves with short yellow glandular or eglandular hairs and sparsely tomentulose, or glabrescent; basal 3-12 × 0·7-2 cm, oblanceolate, obtuse to acute, denticulate to runcinate-pinnatifid or pinnately divided, with terminal segment narrowly lanceolate, narrowed into a winged petiole; cauline like the basal or lanceolate, sessile, more or less amplexicaul. Capitula 1(-6). Involucre (9-)12-15(-16) × 7-15 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, usually obtuse, the outer 1/3-2/3 as long as inner, greyish- or yellowish-tomentose and with short, black or green glandular hairs, pubescent on inner face. Achenes 7-10 mm, pale brown, fusiform, strongly attenuate above, rarely coarsely and shortly beaked, 10- to 12-ribbed. 2n = 8. 500-2650{\i  m; usually calcicole. From the Jura and Carpathians to the mountains of N. Italy and Albania.} Al Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Hybrids of {\b 18} with {\b 17} and with {\b 16} have been recorded from C. Europe.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. PALEYA (Cass.) Bentham. Pubescent perennials with long woody taproots. Basal leaves denticulate to pinnatifid, petiolate, the upper few, more or less reduced. Capitula with many florets. Ligules yellow. Receptacle with ciliate pits.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. C. albida} Vill., {\i Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 37 (1779). Stems 1-3, 3-55(-70) cm, simple or with 1-3 long branches. Basal leaves 5-28 × 1·5-8 cm, numerous, oblanceolate, lanceolate or narrowly elliptical, narrowed into a winged petiole; cauline few, lanceolate to linear, sessile. Capitula 1-4. Involucre 10-20 × 10-20 mm; bracts tomentose, or with short yellowish, glandular hairs, or glabrous, pubescent on the inner face towards apex with whitish or yellowish, silky, appressed hairs, the outer in 2 or 3 imbricate rows and 1/2-2/3(-3/4) as long as inner. Achenes 9-18 mm, pale yellowish to brown, fusiform, more or less attenuate to the slightly swollen apex, c. 15-ribbed.{\i  Rock-crevices and cliffs; usually calcicole. S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  The following subspecies are sometimes very distinct, but they are all connected by intermediates.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems (15-)35-55(-70) cm, branched
\par 
2 Involucre c. 10 mm wide at middle; inner bracts c. 15 mm 
\par 
  achenes reddish-brown ............................................ ({\b e}) subsp. {\b macrocephala}
\par 
2 Involucre 12-18 mm wide at middle; inner bracts 16-22 mm;
\par 
  achenes yellowish or yellowish-brown ........................ ({\b f}) subsp. {\b longicaulis}
\par 
1 Stems 3-30(-40) cm, usually simple
\par 
3 Leaves obscurely petiolate, elliptical, obovate or oblanceolate,
   without simple or glandular hairs, rarely glabrous  ({\b d}) subsp. {\b scorzoneroides}
\par 
3 Leaves obviously petiolate, oblanceolate to lanceolate
\par 
  ± glandular-hairy, often tomentulose, sometimes 
\par 
  stellate hairy, rarely glabrous
\par 
4 Outer involucral bracts lanceolate; inner bracts 
\par 
  acuminate or filamentous at apex .......................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b grosii}
\par 
4 Outer involucral bracts ovate, ovate-lanceolate or
\par 
  lanceolate; inner bracts obtuse, acute or acuminate
\par 
5 Anther-tube 4-5 mm; appendages 0·5 mm; plant not
\par 
  suffrutescent .......................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b albida}
\par 
5 Anther-tube (4-)5-6 mm; appendages 1 mm; plant 
\par 
  suffrutescent ....................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b asturica}
\par 

\par 
349}
\par