{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 2 Leaves not divided to the midrib, the segments, if 
\par 
  present, not narrowly linear
\par 
3 Achenes of 2 or 3 kinds
\par 
4 Ligules pink or white ....................................................................... {\b 50. rubra}
\par 
4 Ligules yellow, often with a red stripe on outer face
\par 
5 Receptacle with scales or rigid hairs subtending the florets
\par 
6 Outer involucral bracts 1/2-2/3 as long as inner;
\par 
  receptacle with linear scales subtending the florets ....................... {\b 51. foetida}
\par 
6 Outer involucral bracts 1/8-1/3 as long as inner;
\par 
  receptacle with rigid hairs subtending the florets ........................... {\b 53. sancta}
\par 
5 Receptacle glabrous or with ciliate pits, but never with
\par 
  scales or rigid hairs subtending the florets
\par 
7 Receptacle glabrous
\par 
8 Involucre 5-7 mm; achenes 2-2·5 mm ........................................ {\b 56. zacintha}
\par 
8 Involucre 8-13 mm; achenes 3-6·5 mm
\par 
9 Leaves with glandular hairs; involucre glabrous ......................... {\b 47. pulchra}
\par 
9 Leaves without glandular hairs; involucre hairy
\par 
10 Achenes 5·5-6·5 mm, c. 30-striate ......................................... {\b 2. geracioides}
\par 
10 Achenes 3-5 mm, 4- to 10-ribbed 
\par 
11 Involucre 8-12 × 5-10 mm; florets 11-18 mm ...................... {\b 54. dioscoridis} 
\par 
11 Involucre 8-9 × 4-6 mm; florets 7-8 mm ............................... {\b 55. multiflora}
\par 
7  Receptacle with ciliate pits
\par 
12 Achenes without or with short thick beak, the marginal
\par 
   mostly broadly winged ........................................................... {\b 54. dioscoridis}
\par 
12 Achenes not broadly winged, at least the inner with an
\par 
   obvious beak
\par 
13 Inner achenes 10-20 mm
\par 
14 Involucre 15-22 mm; outer bracts ovate ...................................... {\b 49. alpina}
\par 
14 Involucre 7-16 mm; outer bracts lanceolate to linear-
\par 
   lanceolate
\par 
15 Stem usually with several capitula; at least the inner
\par 
   achenes more than 12 mm ............................................................ {\b 51. foetida}
\par 
15 Stems numerous, each with a single capitulum; achenes 
\par 
   less than 12 mm ..................................................................... {\b 67. tybakiensis}
\par 
13 Inner achenes 2-7·5(-9) mm
\par 
16 Cauline leaves filiform, bract-like ....................................... {\b 67. tybakiensis}
\par 
16 Cauline leaves larger and amplexicaul
\par 
17 Involucre 8-14 mm; achenes 4-9 mm ...................................... {\b 66. vesicaria}
\par 
17 Involucre c. 7 mm; achenes 3-3·75 mm ....................................... {\b 68. setosa}
\par 
3  Achenes more or less uniform
\par 
18 At least some achenes contracted into a distinct beak
\par 
19 Cauline leaves more or less amplexicaul
\par 
20 Involucre 3-10 mm
\par 
21 Involucre with pale, rigid eglandular hairs thickened
\par 
   at their base ..................................................................................... {\b 68. setosa}
\par 
21 Involucre without pale, rigid eglandular hairs thickened at their
\par 
    base, sometimes with soft, slender eglandular hairs
\par 
22 Involucre 3-8 mm; achenes 1·75-4 mm
\par 
23 Outer involucral bracts 4-6, very small; achenes
\par 
   1·75-3·25 mm .............................................................................. {\b 62. neglecta}
\par 
23 Outer involucral bracts 10-12, ¼-½ as long as inner;
\par 
   achenes 3-4 mm ...................................................................... {\b 63. suffreniana}
\par 
22 Involucre 7-10 mm; achenes 3·5-9 mm
\par 
24 Outer involucral bracts linear-lanceolate to ovate ................... {\b 66. vesicaria}
\par 
24 Outer involucral bracts very narrowly linear ....................... {\b 69. bellidifolia}
\par 
20 Involucre 10-20 mm
\par 
25 Achenes (13-)15- to 20-ribbed
\par 
26 Achenes 10-12 mm ................................................................... {\b 15. bocconi}
\par 
26 Achenes 5-9 mm
\par 
27 Leaves hairy; involucre 10-20 × 8-20 mm, tomentose and
\par 
   with longer hairs .................................................................... {\b 16. conyzifolia}
\par 
27 Leaves glabrous; involucre 10-12 × 7-9 mm, tomentose 
\par 
   but without longer hairs ............................................................. {\b 25. bertiscea}
\par 
25 Achenes 10- to 12-ribbed
\par 
28 Outer involucral bracts more or less ovate, imbricate,
\par 
   becoming scarious ................................................................... {\b 65. bourgeaui}
\par 
28 Outer involucral bracts linear to lanceolate, neither
\par 
   imbricate nor scarious
\par 
29 Leaves conspicuously retrorsely dentate ................................. {\b 20. tingitana}
\par 
29 Leaves variously divided but not conspicuously retrorsely dentate
\par 
30 Beak of achene stout ................................................................. {\b 18. alpestris}
\par 
30 Beak of achene slender ............................................................ {\b 66. vesicaria}
\par 
19 Cauline leaves, if present, not amplexicaul
\par 
31 Achenes 9-18 mm ......................................................................... {\b 19. albida}
\par 
31 Achenes 5·5-8·5 mm
\par 
32 Receptacular pits glabrous
\par 
33 Achenes c. 10-ribbed .................................................... {\b 21. leontodontoides}
\par 
33 Achenes 15- to 20-ribbed
\par 
34 Leaves lyrate-pinnatifid with broad, obtuse lateral segments 
\par 
   and a broadly obovate terminal segment;  involucre 
\par 
   with dense, short, glandular and sometimes eglandular hairs ....... {\b 14. fraasii}
\par 
34 Leaves deeply runcinate-pinnatifid or pinnately divided
\par 
   with narrow, acute lateral and terminal segments; involucre
\par 
    canescent-tomentulose (sometimes also with eglandular hairs) ... {\b 24. lacera}
\par 
32 Receptacular pits ciliate
\par 
35 Achenes c. 10-ribbed
\par 
36 Involucre 8-11 × 3-5 mm; leaves lyrate-pinnatifid ....... {\b 70. bursifolia}
\par 
36 Involucre 10-13 × 5-9 mm; leaves denticulate to dentate,
\par 
   rarely shallowly lobed
\par 
37 Involucral bracts glabrous on inner face ................... {\b 31. triasii}
\par 
37 Involucral bracts pubescent on inner face
\par 
38 At least some cauline leaves like basal; capitula few 
\par 
   to numerous; achenes (2·5-)3-4(-4·5) mm ................... {\b 44. tectorum}
\par 
38 Cauline leaves small or bract-like; capitula 1-4;
\par 
   achenes c. 5·5 mm ....................................... {\b 64. spathulata}
\par 
35 Achenes 16- to 20-ribbed
\par 
39 Involucre without glandular hairs
\par 
40 Leaves glabrous or with eglandular hairs, all basal or
\par 
   the cauline bract-like ......................................................................... {\b 9. aurea}
\par 
40 Leaves sparsely canescent-tomentose and with minute 
\par 
   glandular hairs, the cauline well-developed .............................. {\b 38. guioliana}
\par 
39 Involucre with glandular hairs
\par 
41 Leaves with glandular hairs ..................................................... {\b 41. schachtii}
\par 
41 Leaves without glandular hairs
\par 
42 Branches of inflorescence more or less erect ...................... {\b 30. pantocsekii}
\par 
42 Branches of inflorescence divaricate ........................................ {\b 32. albanica}
\par 
18 Achenes not distinctly beaked, although often attenuate
\par 
   at apex
\par 
43 Involucre with glandular hairs
\par 
44 Involucral bracts hairy on inner face
\par 
45 Achenes 10- to 12-ribbed
\par 
46 Involucre tomentose and with longer eglandular and 
\par 
   glandular hairs ............................................................................ {\b 44. tectorum}
\par 
46 Involucre tomentose and with longer glandular hairs only
\par 
47 Involucre 9-16 mm ................................................................... {\b 18. alpestris}
\par 
47 Involucre 7-8 mm ........................................................................ {\b 59. foliosa}
\par 
45 Achenes 13- to 20-ribbed
\par 
48 Achenes 9-18 mm ........................................................................ {\b 19. albida}
\par 
48 Achenes 5-9 mm
\par 
49 Branches divaricate
\par 
50 Basal leaves 3-8 cm, denticulate to coarsely runcinate-
\par 
   dentate; achenes unequally ribbed ....................................... {\b 27. auriculifolia}
\par 
50 Basal leaves 10-15 cm, deeply and irregularly runcinate-
\par 
   pinnatifid or lyrate; achenes nearly equally ribbed .................... {\b 32. albanica}
\par 
49 Branches erect or arcuate-ascending
\par 
51 Involucre sometimes tomentose, sometimes with longer 
\par 
   eglandular and glandular hairs, but never with dense 
\par 
   glandular hairs and no eglandular hairs
\par 
52 Involucre 10-20 × 8-20 mm; florets 18-21 mm ................... {\b 16. conyzifolia}
\par 

\par 
345}
\par