{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. stereodes} E.L. Ekman,{\i  Acta Bot. Fenn.}{\b  21}: 164 (1938) ({\i T. onychodontum} Dahlst. pro parte). • Da Fe Ge No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. subcanescens} Marklund ex Puolanne,{\i  Mem. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  8}: 170 (1932-1933). • Cz Fe Ge He Hu Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. subcyanolepis} M.P. Christiansen,{\i  Dansk Bot. Ark.}{\b  9}({\b 2}): 23 (1936). 2n = 24. • Be Br Da Ga Hb Ho Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. subintegrum} Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot. }{\b 10}({\b 11}): 69 (1911). • No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. sublaciniosum} Dahlst. & H. Lindb. fil.,{\i  op. cit.}{\b  19}({\b 18}): 15 (1925) ({\i T. subexpallidum} Dahlst.,{\i  T. sublutescens} Dahlst.). • Br Fe No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. sublaeticolor} Dahlst., {\i op. cit. }{\b 19}({\b 18}): 17 (1925). 2n = 24. • Br Da Fe Ge Ho Is No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. subpraticola} G. Hagl.,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1934}: 33 (1934) ({\i T. lepidum} M.P. Christiansen). • Da Ga Ge Ho Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. subundulatum} Dahlst.,{\i  Rep. Bot. Exch. Club Brit. Is.}{\b  6}: 779 (1923) ({\i T. amphiodon }Dahlst. ex G. Hagl.). • Br Da Fe Ge No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. sundbergii} Dahlst.,{\i  Ark. Bot.}{\b  12}({\b 2}): 100 (1912). • Da Fe Lu No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. tenebricans} (Dahlst.) Dahlst.,{\i  op. cit.}{\b  9}({\b 10}): 5 (1910). 2n = 24. • Be Br Da Fe Ga Ge Ho Is No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. triangulare} H. Lindb. fil.,{\i  Meddel. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn. }{\b 35}: 19 (1909). • Fe Is No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. trilobatum} Palmgren,{\i  Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn. }{\b 34}({\b 5}): 7 (1910) ({\i T. chloroleucum} Dahlst., {\i T. planum} Raunk., {\i T. versifolium} Dahlst.). • Be Da Fa Fe Ga Ge He No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. undulatiforme} Dahlst.,{\i  Ark. Bot. }{\b 19}({\b 18}): 18 (1925) ({\i T. firmulifolium} Marklund, {\i T. orphnocephalum} Dahlst. & R. Ohlsen). • Be Da Ga No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. undulatum} H. Lindb. fil. & Marklund,{\i  Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  34}({\b 7}): 5 (1911). • Be Fe Ga No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. vastisectum} Marklund ex Puolanne,{\i  Mem. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  8}: 173 (1932-1933). • Be Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. xanthostigma} H. Lindb. fil.,{\i  Meddel. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn. }{\b 36}: 5 (1910). • Be Br Da Fe Ge He No Rs (B) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 174.         Chondrilla}           L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.D. Sell.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Biennial to perennial herbs. Stems 1-5, much-branched. Leaves entire to runcinate-dentate; cauline often narrow or bract-like. Capitula numerous, with fewer than 15 florets. Involucre 9-12 × 2·5-5 mm, cylindrical; bracts in 2 rows, the outer much shorter than the inner. Receptacle flat, without scales. Ligules yellow. Achenes with numerous ribs; beak very short to longer than the body, rarely absent, usually surrounded at its base by up to 6 short scales forming a collar; pappus of numerous rows of soft, simple hairs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves entire to remotely dentate; capitula all terminal
\par 
  on rather long peduncles ...................................................... {\b 4. chondrilloides} 
\par 
1 Leaves (at least the basal) deeply and irregularly runcinate-
\par 
  dentate; at least some capitula axillary or lateral on 
\par 
  short peduncles, or sessile
\par 
2 Beak of achene not more than 0·7 mm, sometimes absent ........ {\b 3. pauciflora}
\par 
2 Beak of achene more than 0·7 mm
\par 
3 Branches ascending; stems glabrous or with patent rigid
\par 
  hairs or sparse short appressed hairs ................................................ {\b 1. juncea}
\par 
3 Branches divaricate; stem with a short, whitish tomentum 
\par 
  and few to numerous rigid hairs .............................................. {\b 2. ramosissima}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. juncea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 796 (1753) (incl.{\i  C. acantholepis} Boiss.,{\i  C. brevirostris} Fischer & C.A. Meyer, {\i C. canescens} Kar. & Kir.,{\i  C. graminea} Bieb., {\i C. latifolia} Bieb.). Greyish-green biennial to perennial. Stems usually solitary, 50-100 cm, with numerous ascending branches, glabrous or with rigid hairs particularly below, sometimes with short appressed hairs. Leaves glabrous or with a few rigid hairs; basal 40-120 × 15-45 mm, soon withering, oblanceolate, more or less acute, deeply and irregularly runcinate-dentate, narrowed to a short, winged petiole; lower cauline usually like basal, the remainder usually long-linear, sometimes lanceolate, entire or denticulate. Capitula numerous, with 9-12 florets, terminal, lateral or axillary, solitary or in groups of 2-5 sessile or with rather short peduncles. Involucre 9-12 × 2·5-5 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse to subacute, glabrous or sparsely tomentose, sometimes with a row of rigid hairs on the median line, the inner 7-9. Achenes 8-10 mm; beak slender about half as long as to longer than the body. 2n = 14+1B, 30.{\i  Dry, open habitats. Europe northwards to N. France and S.C. Russia}. Al Au Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable in indumentum, size of cauline leaves and length of beak of achene.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. ramosissima} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  2}: 128 (1813). Like {\b 1} but branches divaricate; stems and sometimes branches with a short, whitish tomentum and few to numerous rigid hairs.{\i  Cultivated ground and waste places. • Greece and S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. pauciflora} Ledeb., {\i Icon. Pl. Fl. Ross.}{\b  2}: 28 (1830) ({\i C. ambigua} Fischer ex Kar. & Kir., {\i C. urumoffii }Degen). Like {\b 1} but capitula with 5-7 florets; involucre with 5-7 inner bracts; achenes 5-7 mm, with a very short beak up to 0·7 mm or rarely beakless the collar of scales sometimes partially or completely absent.{\i  Mountains of Bulgaria; S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan}. Bu Rs (E). ({\i W.C. Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. chondrilloides} (Ard.) Karsten,{\i  Deutsche Fl.} 1139 (1883) ({\i C. prenanthoides} (Scop.) Vill.). Glabrous or subglabrous perennial. Stems 1-5, 10-35 cm. Basal leaves 20-70 × 3-9 mm, glaucous, linear, narrowly oblanceolate or narrowly elliptical, obtuse to acute, entire to remotely patent-dentate, narrowed at base into a short, winged petiole; cauline 1-3, similar to basal or bract-like. Capitula usually numerous, all terminal on rather long peduncles. Involucre 8-11 × 3·5-5 mm; bracts linear to linear-lanceolate, more or less obtuse. Achenes 5-6 mm; beak slightly shorter than body.{\i  River gravels; calcicole. • E.Alps and adjacent lowlands; isolated and perhaps only temporary occurrences in S.W. Alps, N. Appennini and Corse.} Au Co Ga Ge He It
\par 
Ju ?Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 175.            Calycocorsus}             F.W. Schmidt
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Willemetia} Cass., non {\i Willemeta} Cothenius)
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.D. Sell.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Chondrilla} but involucre 10-12 × 7-12 mm, campanulate with dense glandular hairs; capitula 1-5, each with more than 15 florets.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. stipitatus} (Jacq.) Rauschert,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  73}: 225 (1966) ({\i Hieracium stipitatum} Jacq., {\i Willemetia stipitata }(Jacq.)
\par 

\par 
343}
\par