{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 but slightly attenuate at base and apex, c. 15-ribbed. •{\i  Border of Albania and S. Jugoslavia.} Al Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. C. oporinoides} Boiss. ex Froelich in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  7}: 165 (1838). Perennial; stems 1-8, 8-50 cm, simple or divaricately branched. Leaves glabrous or with short glandular or eglandular hairs; basal 5-23 × 1-3(-5) cm, oblanceolate, acute to caudate-acuminate, narrowed at base, pinnatifid with retrorse triangular to linear, mucronate lateral lobes; cauline like the basal or bractlike. Capitula few. Involucre 9-15 × 4-10 mm; bracts linear lanceolate, obtuse, the outer c. ½ as long as inner, canescent-tomentulose, pubescent on inner face. Ligules reddish-purple on outer face. Achenes 7-9·5 mm, yellowish, fusiform, attenuate at apex, 20- to 30-ribbed. 2n = 8.{\i  Screes and rock-crevices,} 1700-3000{\i  m. • S. & S.E. Spain. }Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. C. sibthorpiana} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 2}({\b 11}): 56 (1849) ({\i C. divaricata} subsp. {\i sibthorpiana} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Hayek). Perennial; stems 3-12 cm, with 3-4 short, divaricate branches. Leaves canescent-tomentose or glabrous; basal 2-6 × 0·5-1·3 cm, oblanceolate, acute to obtuse, narrowed at base, runcinate-dentate or pinnatifid, terminal segment irregular, lateral segments triangular-acute; cauline few, small, the lower like the basal or bract-like. Capitula few. Involucre 9-10 × 5-7 mm; bracts lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, obtuse, the outer c. 1/3 as long as inner, densely canescent-tomentose, pubescent on inner face. Ligules reddish-purple on outer face. Achenes 4·7-5 × 0·8 mm, brown, fusiform, slightly attenuate at apex, 10-ribbed.{\i  Mountain rocks,} 1800-2450{\i  m. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. C. incana} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  2}: 136 (1813). Perennial; stems 1-5, 3-15 cm, with 1-4 divaricate branches from near the base. Leaves glabrous or canescent-tomentose; basal 3-13 × 1-2 cm, oblanceolate, acute, narrowed to base, pinnatisect, with lanceolate, entire or triangular, dentate lateral segments, with acute lobes and teeth; cauline like the basal, sessile, amplexicaul, more or less reduced, the uppermost bract-like. Capitula few to numerous. Involucre 10-12 × 5-10 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse, the outer c. ½ as long as inner, densely canescent-tomentose, sometimes with a median row of short black hairs. Ligules purplish-pink. Achenes 5-6 × 0·8-1·4 mm, brown, fusiform, 10-ribbed. 2n = 16.{\i  Mountain rocks,} 1200-1850{\i  m. • S. & S.E. Greece. }Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. C. taygetica} Babcock,{\i  Univ. Calif. Publ. Bot.}{\b  19}: 404 (1941) ({\i C. divaricata} Boiss. & Heldr., non (Lowe) F. W. Schultz). Perennial; stems many, 7-15(-30) cm, with many divaricate branches. Leaves canescent-tomentose and with pale eglandular hairs; basal 5-10 × up to 1·7 cm, numerous, oblanceolate, acute, gradually narrowed at base, runcinate-dentate or pinnately lobed, with triangular or lanceolate, acute lateral segments; cauline like the basal or smaller, linear, entire. Capitula few to numerous. Involucre 10-12 × 4-8 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse, the outer c. 1/3 as long as inner, canescent-tomentulose. Ligules reddish-purple on outer face. Achenes 5·5 × 1 mm, chestnut-brown, fusiform, 10-ribbed. 2n = c. 40. •{\i  S. Greece} ({\i Taïyetos}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. C. guioliana} Babcock, {\i op. cit.}{\b  22}: 485 (1947). Perennial; stems 2, up to 45 cm, with up to 5 branches. Leaves sparsely canescent-tomentulose, and with minute, brown, glandular hairs; basal up to 15 × 2 cm, numerous, oblanceolate, acute or acuminate, narrowed at base, pinnately sinuate-dentate, the teeth acuminate and mucronate; lower cauline like the basal; upper cauline linear and entire. Capitula few. Involucre 10-13 × 7-12 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, obtuse to acute, the outer 10-12, 1/2-2/3 as long as inner, canescent-tomentose, pubescent on inner face. Achenes c. 7 mm, yellowish-brown, fusiform, attenuate and constricted at apex, 16- to 20-ribbed. •{\i  N.W. Greece} ({\i Smolikas}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. C. crocifolia} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 7}): 14 (1846-1847). Perennial; stems up to 25 cm, with a few slender branches. Leaves glabrous; basal 4-8 × 0·2-0·4 cm, numerous, linear or the lowest narrowly oblanceolate, acute or somewhat obtuse, gradually narrowed to the petiole, entire; lowest cauline like the basal, the remainder remote, gradually reduced or bract-like. Capitula 1-few. Involucre c. 10 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, the outer c. 1/3 as long as inner, sparsely canescent-tomentulose. Achenes 5-5·5 × 0·6-0·7 mm, yellowish, fusiform, sometimes slightly curved, strongly attenuate at apex, c. 20-striate.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S. Greece} ({\i Taïyetos}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. C. athoa} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 2}({\b 11}): 57 (1849). Perennial; stems 1 or more, 15-35 cm, remotely branched from near the base. Leaves glabrous or tomentulose; basal 5-15 × 0·5-3 cm, numerous, oblanceolate, acute, dentate to runcinate-pinnate, with triangular, acute teeth or lobes; cauline few, linear, acute or acuminate, entire. Capitula 1-4. Involucre 9-10 × 5-7 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, the outer c. ½ as long as inner, canescent-tomentulose, pubescent on inner face. Achenes 4·4-5 × 0·5 mm, yellowish-brown, fusiform-cylindrical, c. 16-striate.{\i  Mountain rocks. • N.E. Greece} ({\i Athos}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. MACROPODES Babcock. Pubescent perennials with long, woody taproots; stems simple or with few branches. Lower leaves petiolate, denticulate to lobed. Capitula with few to many florets. Ligules yellow. Receptacle with ciliate pits.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. C. schachtii} Babcock, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  33}: 5 (1934). Stems up to 10 cm, simple, scapose. Leaves up to 9 × 2 cm, all basal, oblanceolate, obtuse to acute, narrowed to base, unequally shallowly lobed or coarsely toothed, with fine, pale brown glandular hairs. Capitulum solitary. Involucre 12-14 × 6 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, the outer 2/3 as long as inner, with numerous, long, pale glandular hairs. Achenes 7·5 × 0·75 mm, greyish-brown, fusiform, long-attenuate at apex, 18- to 20-ribbed. 2n = 10.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • S. Bulgaria} ({\i Ali-Botus}). Bu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. C. bithynica} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 4}): 29 (1844). Stems 1-4, 5-12 cm, simple or with up to 4 branches. Leaves up to 10 × 1·3 cm, all basal, numerous, spathulate, rounded-obtuse or oblanceolate, acute, narrowed at base, shallowly lobed or dentate, with short, yellow, glandular or eglandular hairs. Capitula 1-4. Involucre 9-12 × 4 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, the outer c. ½ as long as the inner, with numerous, short glandular or eglandular hairs, sometimes tomentulose at base. Achenes 5-6 × 0·5 mm, pale greenish-yellow, fusiform, 15-striate. 2n = 10.{\i  Calcareous rocks and dry pastures. Mountains of the Balkan peninsula, from Bosna to E.C. Greece.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. INTYBELLIOIDES Froelich. More or less pubescent, rhizomatous perennials. Leaves petiolate, entire to repand-dentate, the margin narrowly revolute. Capitula with few to many florets, in a narrow, elongated or corymbose cyme. Ligules yellow, white or pink. Receptacle with glabrous pits.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. C. praemorsa} (L.) Tausch,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 11} (Ergänz. 1): 79 (1828). Stems 15-75 cm. Leaves 5-20 × 0·8-5·5 cm, all basal, obovate, oblanceolate, elliptical, oblong or lanceolate, obtuse,
\par 

\par 
352}
\par