{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 bract-like. Capitula few to many, in a corymb. Involucre c. 8 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute to obtuse, the outer very short, glabrous. Achenes 3-3·5 × 0·75-1 mm, brown, curved, fusiform, abruptly attenuate at apex, 10-ribbed; pappus caducous in one piece. 2n = 8.{\i  Stony places. S.E. Bulgaria.} Bu. ({\i W. Anatolia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. BARKHOUSIA (Moench) Gaudin. Annuals or rarely perennials, usually pubescent or hispid, with slender roots; stems simple, scapose, or more or less branched. Lower leaves usually petiolate, denticulate to 2-pinnatifid. Capitula with few to many florets, solitary or in a corymb. Ligules yellow, pink or white. Receptacle with ciliate pits and usually a linear scale subtending each floret.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. C. alpina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 806 (1753). Stems 10-120 cm, with long, erect branches from the base or middle. Leaves puberulent or rarely with short glandular hairs; basal up to 15 × 4 cm, obovate-oblong, obtuse, narrowed to the base, denticulate, sometimes with 3 or 4 irregular, usually shallow, lobes near apex; lower cauline like the basal; upper cauline oblong, ovate to lanceolate, acute or acuminate, amplexicaul, subauriculate, entire or denticulate. Capitula 1-20. Involucre 15-22 × 7-15 mm; outer bracts ovate, acute, scarious, c. 1/3 as long as inner, glabrous or tomentulose, becoming recurved at maturity; inner linear-lanceolate, obtuse, with scarious margins, tomentose, with short glandular hairs and longer rigid hairs. Ligules yellow, purplish on outer face. Achenes of 2 kinds: marginal 15-17 mm curved, gradually attenuate into a coarse beak, strongly attenuate at base, striate, densely white-puberulent; inner 15-20 mm, narrowly fusiform, gradually attenuate into a slender beak, finely 15-ribbed, spinulose. 2n = 10.{\i  Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. C. rubra} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 806 (1753). Stems 1 to many, 4-40 cm, simple or with 1 branch. Leaves with pale simple eglandular hairs; basal 2-15 × 0·5-3 cm, few to many, oblanceolate, acute, narrowed to base, denticulate, dentate or runcinate-pinnatifid, with triangular or lanceolate, acute segments; cauline few mostly bract-like, the lower sometimes like the basal. Capitula 1 or 2. Involucre 11-15 × 4-10 mm, outer bracts lanceolate acute, pale or scarious, c. ½ as long as the inner, glabrous or puberulent; inner linear-lanceolate, acute or obtuse, pale at margin, with numerous, long and short, pale glandular hairs. Ligules pink or white. Achenes dark brown, fusiform, of 2 kinds: marginal 8·5-9 mm, gradually attenuate into a usually short beak, c. 10-ribbed, coarsely and strongly spinulose; inner 12-21 mm, gradually attenuate into a long, rather slender beak, 15- to 20-ribbed, spinulose. 2n = 10.{\i  S. Italy; Balkan peninsula, Kriti. }Al Cr Gr It Ju [Ga].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. C. foetida} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }807 (1753). Stems 10-50 cm, branched from the base or middle. Leaves more or less hispid; basal up to 13 × 3 cm, oblanceolate, denticulate to 2-pinnate; cauline elliptical, ovate, lanceolate or linear, runcinate to deeply pinnatifid, sessile, auriculate. Capitula 1 to many. Involucre 7-16 × 4-13 mm. Ligules yellow, reddish-purple on the outer face. Achenes fusiform, of 2 kinds: marginal stout, shortly and coarsely beaked or beakless; inner longer, slender, with a slender beak.{\i  Most of Europe except the north.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Receptacle with scales; pappus 3-4 mm ...................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b commutata} 
\par 
1 Receptacle without scales; pappus (4-)5-6(-7) mm
\par 
2 Outer involucral bracts up to 0·75 mm wide, linear-lanceolate,
\par 
   c. ½ as long as inner, usually predominantly
\par 
  glandular-hairy .................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b foetida}
\par 
2 Outer involucral bracts 1-1·5 mm wide, lanceolate, c. 2/3
\par 
   as long as inner, mostly or entirely eglandular- hairy  ({\b b}) subsp. {\b rhoeadifolia}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b foetida} (subsp. {\i glandulosa} (C. Presl) Hayek, subsp.{\i  maritima} (Boiss.) Hayek, subsp.{\i  zacynthia} (Margot & Reuter ex DC.) Hayek): Outer involucral bracts up to 0·75 mm wide, linear-lanceolate, c. ½ as long as the inner, with usually predominantly glandular hairs. Receptacle without scales. Marginal achenes 7-9 mm, the inner 12-17 mm. 2n = 10.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b rhoeadifolia} (Bieb.) Celak., {\i Prodr. Fl. Böhm.} 190 (1871) ({\i C. rhoeadifolia} Bieb.,{\i  C. stribrnyi} Velen.): Outer involucral bracts 1-1·5 mm wide, lanceolate, c. 2/3 as long as inner, with mostly or entirely eglandular hairs. Receptacle without scales. Marginal achenes 5-7 mm, the inner 12-16 mm. 2n = 10.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b commutata} (Sprengel) Babcock,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 76}: 207 (1938) ({\i Rodigia commutata} Sprengel, {\i R. bulgarica} Velen.): Outer involucral bracts linear-lanceolate, c. ½ as long as inner, with glandular and eglandular hairs. Receptacle with 2 scales subtending each achene. Marginal achenes 5-9·5 mm, the inner 10-14 mm. 2n = 10. {\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula and Aegean region}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. MICROCEPHALUM Babcock. Pubescent perennial with horizontal rhizome. Lower leaves petiolate. Capitula with few florets, in a corymb. Ligules yellow. Receptacle with glabrous pits.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. C. multicaulis} Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Altaica}{\b  4}: 125 (1833). Stems 1-3, 10-40 cm. Leaves inconspicuously pubescent with simple eglandular hairs; basal up to 9 × 1·2 cm, oblanceolate to elliptical, obtuse to acute, dentate or obscurely lyrate; cauline mostly bract-like. Involucre 7-9 × 2·5-3 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, the outer short; all canescent-tomentose and with short glandular hairs. Achenes c. 4 mm, reddish-brown, narrowly fusiform, attenuate at apex, 10- to 12-ribbed. 2n = 10.{\i  Arctic and subarctic Russia; one station in arctic Norway}. No Rs (N). ({\i N. & C. Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. PTEROTHECA (Cass.) Babcock. Pubescent annuals with slender roots. Lower leaves petiolate. Capitula solitary or few, with few to many florets. Ligules yellow, sometimes red on outer face. Receptacle with a rigid hair subtending each floret, the pits indistinct, glabrous.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. C. sancta} (L.) Babcock, {\i Univ. Calif. Publ. Bot.}{\b  19}: 403 (1941) ({\i Lagoseris sancta} (L.) K. Malý, {\i L. bifida} (Vis.) Koch,{\i  L. macrantha} (Bunge) Iljin, {\i Pterotheca sancta} (L.) C. Koch). Stems 3-55 cm, many. Leaves with short, yellow, simple eglandular hairs, or subglabrous; basal 1-20 × 0·5-4 cm, obovate, oblanceolate or spathulate, obtuse to acute, denticulate, runcinate-pinnatifid or lyrate; cauline few, linear or bract-like. Involucre 6-11 × 4-9 mm; outer bracts lanceolate, with conspicuous pale margin, 1/8-1/3 as long as inner; inner linear-lanceolate, acute; all more or less tomentose and with dark or pale, simple eglandular hairs, with or without glandular hairs, or glabrous. Achenes of 3 kinds: outermost narrowly fusiform, sometimes somewhat compressed (sometimes absent); intermediate fusiform, spinulose; inner fusiform, smooth. 2n = 10.{\i  E. Mediterranean region and S.E. Europe, naturalized as a weed in W. Europe and Italy.} Al Bu Cr Gr Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E) Tu [Bl Co Ga He Hs It Sa].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. ZACINTHA (Miller) Babcock. More or less pubescent annuals or biennials; stems usually divaricately branched above. Lower leaves sessile or petiolate, denticulate to lyrate-pinnatifid. Capitula many, with few to many florets. Ligules yellow, usually reddish-purple on the outer face, rarely whitish. Receptacle with glabrous or ciliate pits, or flat.
\par 

\par 
354}
\par