{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. C. dioscoridis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1133 (1763). Annual or biennial; stems 10-60 cm, usually branched. Leaves glabrous or with sparse, eglandular hairs; basal 4-15 × 1-3 cm, lanceolate to oblanceolate, acute to obtuse, denticulate to pinnatifid, with 6-8 wide triangular lateral segments; cauline mostly sessile, lanceolate, acute or acuminate, denticulate, amplexicaul, with acute auricles. Involucre 8-12 × 5-9 mm; bracts linear to lanceolate acute, with glandular and sometimes eglandular hairs, the outer 1/3-2/3 as long as the inner. Florets 11-18 mm. Ligules yellow, reddish-purple on outer face. Achenes 3·5-5·5 mm, fusiform, curved, usually of 2 kinds: marginal greenish-yellow or whitish, with 2 lateral wings and usually ribbed; inner greenish-yellow or reddish-brown, with smooth or spinulose ribs; rarely all achenes unwinged. 2n = 8. •{\i  Greece, Albania and Aegean region; casual elsewhere in S. Europe and locally naturalized.} Al Cr Gr [Ga ?It ?Ju].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   A very polymorphic species; subspecies were described by Babcock, but on very limited material, and further information is required before their status can be confirmed.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. C. multiflora} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  2}: 138 (1813). Annual; stems 7-35 cm, branched from the base. Leaves glabrous; basal 1-5 × 0·5-1 cm, few, oblanceolate, obtuse, dentate or runcinate-pinnatifid, attenuate at base; lower cauline sessile, amplexicaul, with acute auricles; upper cauline lanceolate or linear, acute, entire. Capitula many. Involucre 8-9 × 4-6 mm bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, the outer glabrous, c. 1/3 as long as the inner, the inner with yellowish glandular hairs. Florets 7-8 mm. Ligules yellow. Achenes dark brown, of 2 kinds, or marginal absent: marginal 3·5-4 mm, more attenuate above than below, unequally ribbed; inner 3-3·5 mm, fusiform, strongly attenuate at apex, 10-ribbed, strigulose or finely spinulose near apex. 2n = 8.{\i  S.E. Greece and S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. C. zacintha} (L.) Babcock,{\i  Univ. Calif. Publ. Bot.}{\b  19}: 404 (1941) ({\i Zacintha verrucosa} Gaertner). Annual; stems 20-30 cm, branched from the base, with some capitula sessile at or near the bifurcations. Leaves with pale, eglandular hairs; basal up to 20 × 4 cm, withering early, oblanceolate, lyrate-pinnatifid, the terminal segment large, ovate, obtuse, the lateral segments remote, narrowly triangular and acute; lower cauline like the basal; upper cauline lanceolate, acuminate, sessile, with acute auricles, or bract-like. Ligules yellow, with reddish-purple stripe on outer face. Involucre 5-7 × 3-7 mm; bracts lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, obtuse, glabrous or tomentulose at base, the outer c. ½ as long as the inner. Achenes of 2 kinds: marginal 2-2·5 mm, strongly compressed laterally, triangular, acute at base, truncate or rounded at apex; inner c. 2·5 mm, yellowish, obconical, 10-ribbed, smooth. 2n = 6.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Bu Co Cr Ga Ge Gr Hs It Ju Rs (K) Sa Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. C. pusilla} (Sommier) Merxm., {\i Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}){\b  7}: 275 (1968) ({\i Melitella pusilla} Sommier). Acaulescent annual. Leaves 2-7 × 0·2-0·5 cm, in a flat basal rosette, linear-spathulate, entire to runcinate-pinnatifid, attenuate at base subglabrous. Capitula in sessile clusters of 2-8 in centre of basal rosette. Involucre c. 4 × 3-4 mm; outer bracts 2-4, linear, membranous, inner linear-lanceolate, obtuse, with a membranous apex. Achenes 1-1·5 mm, shortly beaked, of 2 kinds: inner and some outer whitish, oblong, compressed, striate; the remainder of the outer achenes brownish, thicker, angled, more finely striate and enclosed by the inner involucral bracts. 2n = 10.{\i  S. Greece, Kriti; Malta; S. Portugal.} Cr Gr Lu Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ALETHOCREPIS Bischoff. Pubescent annuals or biennials; stems many, branched from near the base or middle. Lower leaves petiolate, denticulate to pinnate. Capitula many, with few to many florets. Ligules yellow, usually reddish on outer face. Receptacle usually with ciliate pits.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. C. nicaeensis} Balbis in Pers., {\i Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 376 (1807). Annual or biennial; stem 25-100 cm, branched from the middle or above. Leaves with yellow eglandular hairs; basal up to 19 × 4 cm, oblanceolate, obtuse, runcinate-pinnatifid, dentate, or finely and remotely denticulate, attenuate at base; lowest cauline like the basal, the rest mostly lanceolate, sessile, usually with auricles. Capitula in several corymbs. Involucre 8-10 × 4-6 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse, canescent-tomentose and with glandular or eglandular hairs, the outer 1/3-1/2(-2/3) as long as inner. Achenes 2·5-3·8 × 0·6 mm, golden-brown, fusiform, 10-ribbed. 2n = 8.{\i  W. & C. Mediterranean region; a frequent casual elsewhere in meadows and forage-crops, and naturalized in some regions.} Al Ga Hs It Ju [Br *Bu Cz Da Ge Hu Rm Su].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. C. foliosa} Babcock,{\i  Univ. Calif. Publ. Bot.}{\b  23}: 389 (1951). Annual; glandular-pubescent throughout; stems up to 25 cm, remotely and regularly branched from the base. Basal leaves up to 9 × 2 cm, few, oblanceolate or spathulate, long-petiolate; lowest cauline oblanceolate, shortly petiolate, auriculate; upper cauline lanceolate, acuminate, dentate, sessile, amplexicaul, auriculate, the auricles about as long as the width of the lamina and narrow and acuminate. Involucre 7-8 × 4-5 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute or acuminate, tomentulose and with unequal, brown glandular hairs; outer bracts c. 1/3 as long as the inner. Achenes c. 2·75 × 0·5 mm, pale brown, fusiform, 10-ribbed. •{\i  C. Ural} ({\i Utka, near Krasnoufimsk}). Rs (C).
\par 

\par 
 A very distinctive species known only from the original collection of 1892.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. C. capillaris} (L.) Wallr.,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  14}: 657 (1841) ({\i C. virens} L. nom. illegit.). Annual or biennial; stems 1-many, (5-)20-100 cm, branched from the base or above. Leaves glabrous or with scattered short eglandular hairs; basal up to 30 × 4·5 cm, numerous, lanceolate to oblanceolate, obtuse to acute, denticulate, dentate, runcinate-pinnatifid, or lyrate, pinnatisect or 2-pinnatisect, narrowed at base; cauline like basal but smaller. Capitula many. Involucre 5-9 × 3-8 mm, glabrous, tomentose or sparsely glandular-hairy; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, outer 7-9, 1/3-1/2 as long as the inner. Achenes 1·4-2·5 mm, brown, 10-ribbed. 2n = 6. {\i W., C. & S. Europe; naturalized or casual in parts of the north and east.} Al Au Az Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm ?Tu [Da Rs (B, C, W, K) Su].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable. Plants without a central main stem and involucres 5-7 mm (var.{\i  capillaris}) are more frequent in W., C. & S. Europe, whilst plants with a central main stem and involucres 7-9 mm (var.{\i  agrestis} (Waldst. & Kit.) Dalla Torre & Sarnth.) seem to be more frequent in the northern part of the range. Both have 2n = 6.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. C. micrantha} Czerep. in Bobrov & Tzvelev,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  29}: 684 (1964) ({\i C. parviflora} Desf. ex Pers., non Moench). Like {\b 60} but leaves with numerous, pale, rather rigid, eglandular hairs; lower cauline lanceolate, acute to acuminate, entire or slightly dentate, sagittate-amplexicaul with acute to acuminate auricles; involucre 4-6 × 2-4 mm, usually with rigid, eglandular hairs, sometimes glabrous or tomentulose; outer bracts 5, c. 1/3 as long as the inner; achenes 1·4-2 mm, cylindrical. 2n = 8. {\i  E. Greece and Aegean region; Krym.} Cr Gr Rs (K) Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. C. neglecta} L.,{\i  Mantissa} 107 (1767). Annual; stems 10-50 cm. Leaves with short, eglandular hairs; basal oblanceolate,
\par 

\par 
355}
\par