{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b vesicaria}: Ultimate branches erect before anthesis. Involucre 8-14 × 4-10 mm, glabrous or sparsely pubescent near apex, sometimes with longer eglandular hairs; outer bracts broadly ovate, imbricate, usually with wide scarious margins, ¼-¾ as long as the linear-lanceolate inner. Ligules sometimes entirely red. Achenes (4-)5-7(-8) mm, usually of 2 kinds: marginal attenuate or shortly beaked (sometimes absent); inner with a stout beak equal to or shorter than the body, 10- to 12-ribbed. 2n = 8, 16.{\i  Mediterranean region}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b hyemalis} (Biv.) Babcock,{\i  Univ. Calif. Publ. Bot.}{\b  19}: 404 (1941): Ultimate branches deflexed before anthesis. Involucre 10-13 × 5-9 mm, tomentose, with a median row of black eglandular hairs; bracts linear-lanceolate, not imbricate, outer c. 1/3 as long as inner. Achenes 5-7 mm, uniform, pale brown, attenuate into a slender or rather stout beak nearly equalling the body, 10-ribbed. 2n = 8. •{\i  Sicilia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b haenseleri} (Boiss. ex DC.) P.D. Sell,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 254 (1976) ({\i Barkhousia haenseleri} Boiss. ex DC.,{\i  Crepis taraxacifolia} Thuill., {\i C. marschallii} (C.A. Meyer) Schultz Bip.,{\i  C. rutilans} Lacaita): Ultimate branches erect before anthesis. Involucre 8-12 × 3-8 mm, often pubescent, sometimes with long hairs; outer bracts more or less lanceolate, not imbricate. Receptacular pits with slender, white cilia. Achenes (5-)6-8(-9) mm, pale brown, uniform, gradually attenuate into a slender beak equalling or slightly longer than the body, smooth or muricate, 10-ribbed. 2n = 8,16.{\i  S.,W. & C. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b congenita} Babcock,{\i  Univ. Calif. Publ. Bot.}{\b  22}: 860 (1947): Ultimate branches erect before anthesis. Involucre 9-11 × 5-8 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, not imbricate, outer 1/4-1/3 as long as inner. Receptacular pits with coarse, yellow, shining cilia. Achenes 7-8 mm, brownish-yellow, with a coarse, ribbed beak spinulose to the apex, 10-ribbed. •{\i  S. & E. Spain.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. NEMAUCHENES (Cass.) Bentham. Pubescent annuals with long, slender to robust roots. Basal leaves petiolate, denticulate to pinnatifid. Capitula with many florets. Ligules yellow, usually reddish or purplish on outer face. Receptacle with ciliate pits.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 67. C. tybakiensis} Vierh.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 65}: 73 (1915) ({\i C. foetida }subsp.{\i  maritima} var.{\i  tybakiensis} (Vierh.) Hayek). Stems several, up to 15 cm, simple. Leaves up to 7 × 1 cm, all basal, numerous, oblong to obovate-lanceolate, subentire to pinnatisect, the lateral lobes triangular, acute, remotely denticulate, the terminal ovate-hastate, glabrous or with a few eglandular hairs. Capitulum solitary. Involucre 6-12 × 5-8 mm; outer bracts lanceolate, the inner linear-lanceolate, with eglandular and shorter glandular hairs or glabrescent, the outer c. 1/3 as long as the inner. Ligules yellow, reddish-purple on outer face. Achenes fusiform, of 2 kinds: marginal 6-8 mm, strongly curved, the body equalling the beak, with densely spinulose, obscure ribs; inner 10-12 mm, the beak 2½ times as long as the body and extremely slender, with 10 spinulose ribs. •{\i  C. & E. Kriti, Kasos.} Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 68. C. setosa} Haller fil., {\i Arch. Bot.} ({\i Roemer}) {\b 1}({\b 2}): 1 (1797). Stems 8-80 cm, remotely branched. Leaves with pale eglandular hairs; basal up to 30 × 8 cm, oblanceolate, obtuse to acute, denticulate to pinnatisect, narrowed below; cauline mostly lanceolate, auriculate-amplexicaul. Involucre 8-10 × 4-10 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, with pale, eglandular rigid hairs thickened at their base, the outer bracts up to ½ as long as inner. Style-branches dark green. Achenes 3·25-5 × 0·3-0·6 mm, uniform, fusiform, yellowish-brown, attenuate into a slender beak, 10-ribbed. 2n = 6, 8.{\i  S. & S.C. Europe.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (K) Sa Tu [Ge He Po].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    Plants from E. Greece with the involucre 7 × 4-5 mm, style-branches pale yellowish-green, achenes usually of 2 kinds (the marginal 3 × 0·5 mm, attenuate or with a small beak, the inner, or all when the achenes are uniform, 3-3·75 × 0·3-0·4 mm, attenuate into a very slender beak) have been described as subsp.{\b  topaliana} Babcock, {\i Univ. Calif. Publ. Bot. }{\b 19}: 403 (1941). Intermediates are frequent and the taxon is not obviously geographically or ecologically isolated, so it is best considered merely as a variety.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  C. atheniensis} Babcock,{\i  Univ. Calif. Publ. Bot.}{\b  22}: 876 (1947) is known only from the type specimen, collected in S.E. Greece (near Athinai) in 1848, and possibly introduced there. It differs from {\b 68} chiefly in having the involucre 10-14 mm, and the achenes 4·5-6·5 mm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. PSAMMOSERIS (Boiss. & Reuter) Babcock. More or less pubescent annuals or perennials. Basal leaves petiolate, dentate to pinnate. Capitula with few to many florets. Ligules yellow, reddish or dirty green on outer face. Receptacle with ciliate pits.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 69. C. bellidifolia} Loisel.,{\i  Fl. Gall.} 527 (1807). Annual; stems 35-50 cm, remotely branched from near the base. Leaves glabrous or pubescent on midrib beneath: basal up to 11 × 3 cm, oblanceolate, entire to pinnately lobed, narrowed at base; cauline like the basal or sessile, auriculate-amplexicaul. Ligules reddish on outer face. Involucre 7-10 × 4-5 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse, glabrous, tomentulose or glandular-pubescent, the outer 1/4-1/3 as long as inner. Achenes 3·5-6·5 mm, yellowish or brownish, fusiform, attenuate into a slender beak, 10-ribbed. 2n = 8. •{\i  W. Mediterranean region.} ?Bl Co Ga Hs It Sa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 70. C. bursifolia} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 805 (1753). Perennial; stems 5-35 cm, numerous, decumbent or arcuate, branched above. Leaves glabrous or puberulent; basal 2·5-25 × 0·6-5 cm, oblanceolate obtuse to acute, denticulate to dentate, lyrate-pinnatifid, the lateral segments lanceolate; cauline mostly smaller, the lower like the basal, the remainder often linear. Involucre 8-11 × 3-5 mm; bracts linear to linear-lanceolate, obtuse, canescent-tomentose and with pale yellow eglandular hairs, the outer c. 1/3 as long as the inner. Ligules greenish on outer face. Achenes 5·5-7 × 0·4 mm, pale brown, fusiform, abruptly attenuate into a pale, filiform, fragile beak up to nearly twice as long as the body, 10-ribbed. 2n = 8. •{\i  C. & S. Italy, Sicilia.} It Si [Ga ?Gr Hs].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 179.        Hispidella}           Barnades ex Lam.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.D. Sell.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Stems 1-several, usually simple. Leaves entire. Capitula usually solitary. Involucral bracts in 1 row, more or less equal. Receptacle densely hairy, without scales. Outer ligules yellow, reddish-brown on outer face; the inner brownish-purple. Achenes obpyramidal; pappus absent.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. hispanica} Barnades ex Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  3}: 134 (1789). Indumentum of both short, stellate hairs, and long, patent, simple hairs up to 12 mm. Stems 2-30 cm, one to several. Basal and cauline leaves similar, 10-60 × 2-10 mm, linear, linear-oblanceolate or spathulate, obtuse, entire. Peduncles thickened at apex after anthesis. Involucre 8-12 × 8-12 mm; bracts linear to linear-lanceolate, more or less acute, strongly incurved and thickened in fruit. Achenes c. 1·3 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Sandy fields and dry waste places. • C. Spain, N. Portugal, mainly in the mountains.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 
357}
\par