{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 bracts linear to linear-lanceolate, acute or obtuse, the outer 1/3-2/3 as long as inner, canescent-tomentose, sometimes with short, black, eglandular hairs, pubescent on inner face. Achenes 4·5-6 × 0·9-1·3 mm, dark reddish- or purplish-brown, fusiform, strongly attenuate at apex, sometimes with a short coarse beak, (16-)18 (-20)-ribbed. 2n = 18.{\i  Dry, rocky places; calcicole. • C.&S. Italy.} It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. C. bertiscea} Jáv.,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  21}: 21 (1922). Perennial; stems 50-60 cm, branched from about the middle. Leaves tomentulose on the midrib beneath, glabrous elsewhere; basal oblong, acute, lyrate-runcinate, sinuate-dentate, with narrowly oblong or linear teeth; lower cauline 15-19 × 3-6 cm, elliptical, acute, sublyrate-pinnatifid, the terminal part incompletely segmented and acuminately dentate, the lateral segments numerous, close together, linear-lanceolate, acuminate, denticulate or entire, steadily decreasing in length at apex and base of leaf; upper cauline linear, acuminate, entire, sessile, amplexicaul. Involucre 10-12 × 7-9 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, the outer c. 1/3 as long as inner, canescent-tomentulose. Achenes 5·5-7·5 × 0·8 mm, dark brown, oblong or fusiform, attenuate into a short beak, 13- to 18-ribbed.{\i  Calcareous screes. • N. Albania} ({\i N.W. of Tropoje}). Al.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. C. chondrilloides} Jacq,.{\i  Enum. Stirp. Vindob.} 312 (1762). Perennial; stems 15-55 cm, with a few branches from the middle or below. Leaves glabrous or with simple eglandular or glandular hairs; basal 6-16 × 1·5-5 cm, numerous and forming a dense rosette, oblanceolate, pinnatisect into very numerous, more or less narrowly linear, entire or 1-toothed segments; lower cauline like the basal; upper cauline reduced to the narrow rhachis or bractlike. Capitula few. Involucre 11-14 × 6-10 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, the outer 1/4-2/3 as long as inner, canescent-tomentose, the inner often with yellow or black, simple eglandular hairs, with or without glandular hairs. Achenes 5-7 × 0·7-0·9 mm, more or less brown, fusiform, strongly attenuate at apex and sometimes with a short, coarse beak, 14- to 18-ribbed. 2n = 8.{\i  Stony pastures; calcicole. • N.E. Italy; W. Jugoslavia.} It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. C. auriculifolia} Sieber ex Sprengel, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  3}: 634 (1826) ({\i C. raulinii} Boiss.). Perennial; stems 6-35 cm, simple or with 1-4 branches above. Leaves with pale eglandular hairs or glabrous; basal 3-21 × 1-4·5 cm, obovate, oblanceolate or elliptical, obtuse or acute, denticulate to coarsely runcinate-dentate, narrowed at base; cauline reduced to linear-lanceolate bracts. Capitula few. Involucre 10-14 × 4-12 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, the outer 1/3-2/3 as long as inner, more or less canescent-tomentose, occasionally with pale, simple, eglandular hairs and short glandular hairs, pubescent on inner face. Achenes 5-6·5 × 0·6-1·2 mm, yellowish, fusiform, with 4-5 strong ribs and 3-5 striae between the ribs. 2n = 10. {\i Rocks and cliffs. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. C. baldaccii} Halácsy, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  42}: 577 (1893). Perennial; stems 13-35 cm, branched often from near the base. Leaves with short, pale, glandular hairs; basal 10-23 × 2-4·5 cm, oblanceolate, acute to obtuse, retrorse- or runcinate-dentate, or pinnately lobed with wide, triangular, acute, dentate segments, or lyrate with large terminal segment and few small lateral ones; cauline 1-4, similar, or lanceolate, acuminate. Capitula few. Involucre 9-12 × 7-11 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, the outer 2/3-3/4 as long as inner, greyish- to dark brown-tomentose, densely glandular-hairy, pubescent on inner face. Achenes 5-6·5 × 0·6-0·8 mm, brown, fusiform, gradually attenuate at apex, c. 20-ribbed, every fourth or fifth rib stronger than the rest. 2n = 10.{\i  Rock-crevices. • Albania, N.W. Greece.} Al Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. C. turcica} Degen & Bald.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  46}: 417 (1896). Perennial; stems 20-50 cm, with a few branches from or below the middle. Leaves more or less canescent-tomentulose, sometimes with short glandular hairs beneath, or glabrescent; basal 8-16 × 2-3 cm, oblanceolate to obovate, acute to obtuse, narrowed to the petiole, acutely runcinate-dentate or pinnatifid, the lobes and teeth mucronate; lower cauline like the basal; upper cauline linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, acute to acuminate, auriculate, amplexicaul. Capitula 5-30, in a corymb. Involucre 11-12 × 7-11 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, the outer about ½ as long as inner, canescent-tomentose to densely white-lanate, pubescent on inner face. Achenes 4-5·5 × 0·6-0·8 mm, brown, somewhat angled, fusiform, equally attenuate at both ends, 10- to 20-ribbed.{\i  Rocky places. • S. Albania, N.W. Greece.} Al Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. C. pantocsekii} (Vis.) Latzel, {\i Verh. Ges. Deutsch. Naturf. Ärzte}{\b  85}: 658 (1913). Perennial; stems 1-3, 30-50 cm, with few branches. Leaves nearly glabrous or canescent-tomentulose and with white, mostly eglandular hairs; basal 10-18 × 2-4 cm, oblanceolate, acute or acuminate, pinnatisect almost to the midrib, with narrow terminal segment and numerous narrow, acuminate, dentate lateral segments, strongly attenuate at base; cauline few, small, pinnatifid, entire or bract-like. Capitula 1-3. Involucre 10-14 × 6-11 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, the outer 2/3-3/4 as long as inner, canescent-tomentose, with unequal, brown glandular hairs, pubescent on inner face. Achenes c. 6 mm, brown, fusiform, strongly attenuate at apex and almost beaked,16- to 18-ribbed.{\i  Mountain rocks,} 900-1500{\i  m. • Jugoslavia, N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. C. triasii} (Camb.) Nyman,{\i  Syll.} 49 (1854-1855). Perennial; stems 1-3, 10-45 cm, with few branches. Leaves with pale yellow, eglandular hairs; basal up to 13 × 3·5 cm, oblanceolate, obtuse or acute, denticulate to coarsely dentate, rarely with shallow lobes, attenuate at base; cauline few, the lower like the basal, or sessile, the upper bract-like. Capitula in a corymb. Involucre 10-12 × 5-9 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, the outer 1/3-1/2 as long as inner, canescent-tomentose. Achenes 5·5-8·5 × 0·75 mm, dark brown, fusiform, attenuate at apex with a definite beak, 10-ribbed. 2n = 8.{\i  Rock-crevices and mossy banks; calcicole. • Islas Baleares.} Bl.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. C. albanica} (Jáv.) Babcock,{\i  Univ. Calif. Publ. Bot.}{\b  22}: 468 (1947) ({\i C. baldaccii} subsp.{\i  albanica} Jáv.). Perennial; stems 3-4, up to 35 cm, with 1-10 branches. Leaves glabrous or sparsely puberulent; basal 10-15 × 2·5-3 cm, numerous, oblanceolate, acute, deeply and irregularly runcinate-pinnatifid to lyrate pinnate with a large, acutely dentate terminal lobe and acute, rapidly reduced, remote lateral lobes, narrowed at base; lower cauline like the basal; upper cauline linear-lanceolate, acuminate. Capitula few to numerous. Involucre 11-14 × 7-9 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, the outer 2/3 as long as inner, canescent-tomentose and with short glandular hairs, pubescent on inner face. Achenes 6·5-7·75 × 0·7-0·8 mm, reddish-brown, fusiform, attenuate at apex, c. 20-ribbed. {\i Calcareous rocks and screes. • N. Albania, S.E. Crna Gora.} Al Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. C. macedonica} Kitanov, {\i Bull. Inst. Bot.} ({\i Sofia}) {\b 1}: 372 (1950). Perennial; stems 1-3, 7-10 cm, usually branched. Leaves canescent-tomentulose; basal 4-11 × 0·8-2 cm, numerous, oblanceolate, irregularly runcinate-pinnatifid to lyrate-pinnate with large acutely dentate terminal lobe and acute, rapidly reduced lateral lobes; cauline usually 2, the lower like the basal, the upper bract-like. Capitula few. Involucre 10-12 × 5-8 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acuminate, canescent-tomentose, the outer 3/4-5/6 as long as inner. Achenes 5·5-6 × 0·7 mm, yellowish, cylindrical
\par 

\par 
351}
\par