{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 broadly oblanceolate to narrowly obovate, shortly awned, with sparse, short hairs above; margin and midrib softly antrorsely scabrid, the margin scarcely revolute. Inflorescence ovoid; partial inflorescences 1- to 3-flowered; pedicels rather stout, straight, more or less erect. Corolla 1·5-2 mm in diameter, pinkish, glabrous; lobes shortly apiculate. Fruit (excluding setae) 2·5-3·5 mm, orbicular-ovoid, with rather dense hooked setae. 2n = 22. {\i Stony places in the mountains. • S.E. Greece, Kriti, Karpathos.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 131. G. spurium} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 106 (1753) ({\i G. vaillantii} DC.). Stems 10-100(-160) cm, scrambling, weak to rather stout, retrorsely aculeolate, usually hairy at the nodes. Leaves (5-)30-35 × 2·5-4 mm, in whorls of 6-10, narrowly oblanceolate, gradually narrowed into the long-awned apex, more or less hairy and setose above, the somewhat revolute margin and midrib retrorsely aculeolate. Inflorescence narrowly ovoid to cylindrical (rarely reduced); partial inflorescences 1- to 7-flowered, longer than the leaves; peduncles and pedicels patent, straight but often sharply bent just under the fruit. Corolla 0·8-1·3 mm in diameter, greenish-yellow, glabrous; lobes acute. Fruit 2-3 mm, densely setose or glabrous. 2n = 20.{\i  Hedges, scrub, sand-dunes, cultivated and waste ground. Most of Europe, but rather rare in the west and only naturalized or casual in parts of the north.} Al Au Be Bu Co Cr Cz Da *Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (*N, B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si Su [Br].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Variants with glabrous and setose fruits often occur together, especially in cultivated ground; variants with setose fruits, apart from the flower-characters and the difference in chromosome number, are often not easy to distinguish from {\b 132}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 132. G. aparine} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 108 (1753). Like {\b 131} but stems (20-)80-180 cm, often stout and more hairy at the nodes; leaves 30-60 × 3-8 mm, in whorls of 6-9, narrowly to widely oblanceolate, abruptly contracted towards the apex; corolla 1·5-1·7 mm in diameter, whitish; fruit 3-5 mm, with dense, hooked setae. 2n = 42, 44, 48, 62, 66, 68. {\i Woods, scrub, hedges and cultivated ground. Europe, except N.E. Russia and parts of the Arctic}. All except Fa Is Sb, where it has been recorded as a casual.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   A very variable cosmopolitan weed.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 133. G. tricornutum} Dandy, {\i Watsonia}{\b  4}: 47 (1957) ({\i G. tricorne} Stokes pro parte). Stems 10-80(-100) cm, scrambling, stout, retrorsely aculeolate and very rough, without straight hairs below and above the nodes. Leaves 10-40 × 2·5-8 mm, in whorls of 6-8, narrowly oblanceolate, long-awned, glabrous above, the margin and midrib stiffly retrorsely scabrid; margin not revolute. Inflorescence long; partial inflorescences (1-)3- to 5(-7)-flowered, scarcely longer than the leaves; peduncles (5-)8-15(-20) mm; pedicels 1-8 mm, curved distinctly inwards and downwards after flowering. Flowers hermaphrodite, the lateral often male. Corolla 1-1·7 mm in diameter, glabrous, white; lobes long, acute. Fruit 3-5 mm, with numerous acute papillae. 2n = 44. {\i Cultivated  and waste ground and other dry, open habitats. S., W. & C. Europe, and S.W. part of U.S.S.R.; casual in the north and east.} Al Au Be Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (C, W, K) Sa Si Su Tu [Br].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 134. G. verrucosum} Hudson,{\i  Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. London}{\b  56}: 251 (1767) ({\i G. saccharatum} All.,{\i  G. valantia} Weber). Stems 5-50 cm, erect to ascending, retrorsely aculeolate and scabrid. Leaves 5-17 × 1·5-5 mm, in whorls of 5-6(-7), lanceolate, awned, glabrous above; margin and midrib antrorsely scabrid; margin not revolute. Inflorescence oblong; partial inflorescences mostly 3-flowered, shorter than the leaves; pedicels 1-3 mm, deflexed after flowering. Central flowers of the cyme hermaphrodite, the lateral male. Corolla (1-)2-2·5 mm in diameter, greenish-white to white, glabrous; lobes acute. Fruit 4-6 mm, prominently verrucose. 2n = 22.{\i  Cultivated fields and other open habitats. S. Europe; naturalized in C. Europe}. Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si [Au Cz Ge He Po].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 135. G. intricatum} Margot & Reuter, {\i Mém. Soc. Phys. Hist. Nat. Genève}{\b  8}: 304 (1839) ({\i G. zacynthium} Margot & Reuter). Stems 7-35 cm, ascending, usually much-branched from the base, rather slender, retrorsely aculeolate below, usually more or less hairy above. Leaves 4-12 × 1-2·5 mm, in whorls of 6-8, oblanceolate, shortly awned, green, brownish or blackish when dry, glabrous or hairy; margin and midrib antrorsely scabrid; margin scarcely revolute. Inflorescence ovoid; partial inflorescences lax, many-flowered, with 8-12 flowers at the 2 nodes below the central flower; peduncles (1-)2-5 mm; pedicels 1-4 mm, about twice as long as flowers, slender, slightly divaricate. Corolla 1-2 mm in diameter, yellowish-red, glabrous or with sparse hairs externally; lobes apiculate, the appendages 0·1-0·2 mm, less than ½ as long as the lobes. Fruit 0·6-0·8 mm, with hooked patent hairs or glabrous and papillose. {\i Dry, open habitats. ½ Greece and S. Albania.} Al Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Records from Greece for the closely related {\i G. floribundum} Sibth. & Sm., native of W. Anatolia, are obviously erroneous.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 136. G. capitatum} Bory & Chaub. in Bory,{\i  Expéd. Sci. Morée }{\b 3}({\b 2}): 54 (1832). Stems 9-35 cm, ascending, bifurcating from the base, retrorsely aculeolate below, hairy to glabrescent above. Leaves 5-13 × 0·6-3 mm, in whorls of 6-9, the lower oblanceolate, the upper narrowly lanceolate to linear, acute or with a short awn, blackish when dry, glabrous, or hairy (especially above); margin and midrib antrorsely scabrid, the margin somewhat revolute. Inflorescence broadly ovoid; partial inflorescences 5-8 mm in diameter, capitate, dense, many-flowered, with 10-15 flowers at the 2 nodes below the central flower; pedicels 0·5-1·5 mm, slender, more or less erect. Corolla 0·8-1·6 mm in diameter, reddish, glabrous (rarely hairy); lobes not or shortly apiculate (appendages less than 0·1 mm). Fruit 0·8-1·5 mm, glabrous, papillose, rarely with straight or curved hairs.{\i  Cultivated and waste ground. • S. & C. Greece}. Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 137. G. incrassatum} Halácsy,{\i  Consp. Fl. Graec.}{\b  1}: 724 (1901). Like {\b 136} but leaves in whorls of (5-)6(-7); partial inflorescences somewhat laxer; pedicels rather rigid, somewhat thickened after anthesis; fruit usually with patent, more or less curved hairs.{\i  Dry places. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Perhaps not specifically distinct from {\b 136}; connecting populations occur in S. Greece.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 138. G. viscosum} Vahl,{\i  Symb. Bot.}{\b  2}: 29 (1791) ({\i G. campestre} Schousboe ex Willd.). Like {\b 136} but main stems distinct, scarcely bifurcating; leaves 5-18 × 1-3·5 mm, in whorls of 6-10, narrowly to widely oblanceolate, greenish-brown when dry; inflorescence ovoid to pyramidal; partial inflorescences with 14-21(-27) flowers at the 2 nodes below the central flower; corolla yellowish-white, glabrous, the lobes not or shortly apiculate; fruit glabrous, finely papillose, shining.{\i  Dry places. S. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in growth-form and floral characters.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 139. G. parisiense} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }108 (1753). Stems 5-40 cm, procumbent to ascending, somewhat scrambling, retrorsely aculeolate, rough. Leaves 3-12 × 0·8-3 mm, in whorls of 5-7, lanceolate, shortly awned, pubescent or glabrous, the margin and midrib
\par 

\par 
35}
\par