{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b albida}: Stems 3-30(-40) cm, simple or with one branch; plant more or less tomentose, glandular-hispidulous or glabrous. Basal leaves oblanceolate or lanceolate, denticulate to pinnatisect. Outer involucral bracts ovate, ovate-lanceolate or lanceolate, the inner lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, obtuse, acute or rarely acuminate. Anther-tube 4-5 mm; appendages 0·5 mm. 2n = 10.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b asturica} (Lacaita & Pau) Babcock,{\i  Univ. Calif. Publ. Bot. }{\b 19}: 399 (1941): Stems 15-30 cm, simple or with up to 3 branches, suffrutescent; plant glabrous or sparsely tomentose. Basal leaves narrowly oblanceolate, denticulate to sinuate-lobed or pinnatisect. Outer involucral bracts ovate to lanceolate, the inner linear-lanceolate, obtuse. Anther-tube (4-)5-6 mm; appendages 1 mm. 2n = 10. •{\i  N.W. Spain} ({\i Cordillera Cantábrica}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b grosii} (Pau) Babcock,{\i  op. cit.}{\b  22}: 311 (1947): Stems (7-)15-30(-40) cm, simple or with 1-2 branches; plant with dense simple eglandular hairs, sometimes also or only with fine glandular hairs, or tomentose, or glabrous. Basal leaves oblanceolate to lanceolate, pinnatisect to lobed. Outer involucral bracts lanceolate, the inner linear-lanceolate, acuminate or filamentous at apex. Anther-tube (4-)5 mm; appendages 0·5-0·75 mm. •{\i  S. & S.E. Spain}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b scorzoneroides} (Rouy) Babcock, {\i op. cit.} 315 (1947): Stems 12-30(-45) cm, simple or with 1-6 branches, usually tomentose throughout, rarely nearly glabrous. Basal leaves elliptical, obovate or oblanceolate, irregularly denticulate to coarsely dentate or runcinately lobed. Outer involucral bracts broadly ovate to ovate-lanceolate, the inner linear-lanceolate, acute. Anther-tube (4-)6 mm; appendages 0·6 mm. •{\i  S. & E. Spain}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b macrocephala} (Willk.) Babcock,{\i  op. cit.}{\b  19}: 399 (1941) ({\i C. albida} var. {\i major} Willk.): Stems (15-)25-70 cm, simple or with 1-6 branches; plant more or less tomentulose, sometimes also or only with simple hairs, with or without glandular hairs, rarely glabrous. Basal leaves oblanceolate, denticulate, sinuately or runcinately dentate, or 1- to 2-pinnatifid. Outer involucral bracts ovate, the inner linear-lanceolate, acute to acuminate. Anther-tube (4·5-)6 mm; appendages 0·65-0·85 mm. 2n = 10. •{\i  N.E. Spain}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b longicaulis} Babcock,{\i  op. cit.}{\b 22}: 317 (1947): Stems 25-57 cm, with 1-4 branches, with glandular or simple eglandular hairs and sparsely tomentulose. Basal leaves oblanceolate to lanceolate, denticulate, irregularly runcinate-dentate or lobed. Outer involucral bracts ovate to ovate-lanceolate, the inner linear-lanceolate, acuminate or acute. Anther-tube (5-)6 mm; appendages c. 0·75 mm. •{\i  C. & S.E. Spain}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. GEPHYROIDES Babcock. Glabrous or pubescent perennials or biennials with taproots; stems with few branches. Lower leaves petiolate, denticulate to dentate or subpinnatifid. Capitula with many florets. Ligules yellow, sometimes reddish-purple on outer face. Receptacle with glabrous or ciliate pits.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. C. tingitana} Ball,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London }({\i Bot.}) {\b 16}: 537 (1878). Perennial; stems 15-45 cm, simple or branched above. Leaves glabrous or rarely with eglandular hairs above; basal up to 9 × 4 cm, spathulate, elliptical, obovate to oblanceolate, obtuse, conspicuously retrorsely dentate, abruptly contracted into a long, slender petiole; cauline oblanceolate to lanceolate, acute, more or less dentate, mostly sessile, auriculate, amplexicaul. Capitula 1-10. Involucre 11-13 × 5-6 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse, the outer 1/3-1/2 as long as inner, canescent-tomentulose and with simple eglandular hairs. Achenes 5-8 × 0·5-0·8 mm, very dark reddish-brown, fusiform, strongly attenuate above or coarsely beaked, 10-ribbed. 2n = 10.{\i  S. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. C. leontodontoides} All., {\i Auct. Fl. Pedem. }13 (1789). Perennial or biennial. Stems 1-8, 10-40 cm, remotely branched. Leaves glabrous, or slightly canescent-tomentose, or with eglandular hairs especially along the veins; basal 3-25 × 0·5-5·5 cm, oblanceolate, acute to obtuse, runcinately dentate or runcinate-pinnatifid, narrowed into a petiole; cauline all much reduced or bract-like, or the lower like the basal. Involucre 7-8 × 2·5-6 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse, the outer 1/5-1/4 as long as inner, slightly tomentose or glabrous, sometimes glandular-hairy (var.{\i  preslii} Nicotra). Ligules sometimes reddish-purple on outer face. Achenes 3·5-5 × 0·4-0·6 mm, brown, fusiform,sometimes beaked, 10-ribbed. 2n = 10. {\i Dry places. • C. Mediterranean region.} Al Co Ga It *Ju Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. CREPIS. Pubescent or glabrescent perennials or biennials with woody taproots; stems with few to many branches. Lower leaves petiolate, denticulate to pinnatifid. Capitula with few to many florets. Ligules yellow, sometimes reddish-purple on outer face, rarely purplish-pink. Receptacle usually with more or less densely ciliate, rarely glabrous, pits.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. C. biennis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 807 (1753). Biennial; stems 20-120 cm. Leaves scabridulous with short, eglandular hairs; basal 5-25 × 1·5-7·5 cm, oblanceolate, acute, denticulate, dentate, runcinate-pinnatifid, or pinnatisect, with triangular terminal and remote lateral lobes, narrowed into a narrowly winged petiole; lower cauline like the basal; upper cauline lanceolate to linear, sessile, pinnatifid to entire. Capitula in a simple or compound corymb. Involucre 8-13 × 5-12 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, the outer 1/2-2/3 as long as inner, more or less canescent-tomentose, sometimes silky-pubescent and often with yellow or black, simple glandular or eglandular hairs on the inner bracts, pubescent on inner face. Achenes 4-7·5 × 0·6-1 mm, yellowish to cinnamon-brown, fusiform, (10-)13- to 20-ribbed. 2n = 31, 36, 38, 39, 40. •{\i  Most of Europe except the N., S. & E. margins, but often introduced with grass-seed and doubtfully native in some regions.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Sa Su [Fe Hb No Rs (N)].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. C. pannonica} (Jacq.) C. Koch,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  23}: 689 (1851). Perennial; stems 13-130 cm, branched above the middle. Leaves with sparse to numerous eglandular hairs and more or less numerous glandular hairs; basal 15-30 × 4-6 cm, oblanceolate to elliptical, acute, dentate, narrowed into a long, winged petiole; lower cauline like the basal; middle and upper cauline obovate, elliptical, ovate or lanceolate, acute to acuminate, dentate, sessile, amplexicaul, with rounded or acute auricles, gradually reduced in size. Capitula more or less numerous, in a simple or compound corymb. Involucre 10-15 × 6-12 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, obtuse to acute, the outer up to ½ as long as inner, more or less tomentulose or canescent-tomentose. Achenes 5-6 × 0·9-1·1 mm, brown, fusiform, attenuate to the narrow apex, 15- to 20-ribbed. 2n = 8.{\i  Dry places. E. & E.C. Europe, northwards to C. Czechoslovakia and to} c. 54°{\i  N. in C. Russia.} Au Bu Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. C. lacera} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap. }{\b 1},{\i  Prodr}.: 71 (1811) ({\i C. latialis} Sebastiani). Perennial; stems 20-60 cm, branched at or above the middle. Leaves slightly tomentulose or with a few eglandular hairs; basal up to 20 × 8 cm, obovate to elliptical, acute, runcinate-pinnatifid to pinnatisect or 2-pinnatifid, rarely subentire, the terminal lobe rhombic or triangular to linear-acuminate, the lateral lobes lanceolate to linear, entire to pinnately lobed, gradually reduced towards the apex and base; lower cauline like the basal; upper cauline sessile, pinnatifid and caudate-acuminate or linear and entire. Capitula many. Involucre 8-11 × 5-10 mm;
\par 

\par 
350}
\par