{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 obtuse to acute, narrowed at base; lower cauline like the basal, or sessile and amplexicaul; upper cauline often bract-like. Involucre 3-7 × 1-4 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, usually acute, the outer 4-6, very small, the inner 7-9 (rarely more). Achenes 1·75-3·25 mm, pale brown, mostly fusiform, attenuate at apex or distinctly beaked, 10-ribbed.{\i  C. & E. Mediterranean region, Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem 10-50 cm, solitary, rarely several and then with 
\par 
  achenes not distinctly beaked
\par 
2 Stem hispidulous below, nearly glabrous above; achenes
\par 
  gradually attenuate to the apex but scarcely beaked, the 
\par 
  marginal not enfolded in and retained by the inner bracts  ({\b a}) subsp. {\b neglecta}
\par 
2 Stem hispid throughout with yellowish setae; at least 
\par 
  the inner achenes with a distinct beak which is not 
\par 
  more than 1 mm, the marginal enfolded in and often 
\par 
  retained by the inner bracts ........................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b corymbosa}
\par 
1 Stems up to 30 cm, several; achenes distinctly beaked
\par 
3 Basal leaves denticulate to pinnatisect with 4-6 pairs
\par 
  of lateral segments; achenes with stout beak ................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b fuliginosa}
\par 
3 Basal leaves dentate to pinnatisect with 6-10 pairs of 
\par 
  lateral segments; achenes with slender beak ....................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b cretica}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b neglecta} ({\i C. neglecta} subsp.{\i  stricta} (Scop.) Vierh.): Plant 10-50 cm. Stems solitary and erect or several and decumbent, more or less hispidulous below, glabrescent above. Basal leaves up to 14 × 3 cm, denticulate to pinnatisect. Involucre glabrous, tomentulose or glandular-pubescent, rarely with greenish, eglandular hairs near the apex of the inner bracts. Achenes gradually attenuate to the apex but not beaked, the marginal not enfolded in or retained by the inner bracts. 2n = 8.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b corymbosa} (Ten.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 460 (1879): Plant up to 40 cm. Stems branched from the base, with slender, yellow rigid hairs. Basal leaves up to 17 × 2 cm, denticulate to pinnatisect. Involucre usually with numerous yellow or greenish eglandular hairs, sometimes glabrous or nearly so. Achenes with a beak less than 1 mm, the marginal enfolded in and often retained by the inner bracts. 2n = 8. •{\i  Italy, Sicilia, Greece}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b fuliginosa} (Sibth. & Sm.) Vierh., {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  69}: 269 (1919) ({\i C. fuliginosa} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  C. neglecta }var.{\i  graeca} (Vierh.) Hayek): Plant dwarf, with several sparingly branched stems. Basal leaves 2-6(-8) × 1-2 cm, denticulate to pinnatisect with 4-6 pairs of lateral segments. Involucre glabrescent or tomentulose, with short glandular and eglandular hairs or with very slender, green, eglandular hairs. Achenes with a stout beak. 2n = 6.{\i  Greece and Aegean region}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b cretica} (Boiss.) Vierh.,{\i  op. cit.} 268 (1919): Plant dwarf, with numerous, sparingly branched stems. Basal leaves up to 7 × 0·5-1·5 cm, dentate to pinnatisect with 6-10 pairs of lateral segments. Involucre glabrous, tomentulose, or minutely glandular-hairy, sometimes with longer eglandular hairs. Achenes with a short, slender beak. 2n = 8. •{\i  Kriti and Karpathos}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 63. C. suffreniana} (DC.) Lloyd,{\i  Fl. Loire-Inf. }155 (1844). Annual; stems 3-35 cm, usually many, branched from the base. Leaves with eglandular hairs, or glabrous; basal 0·7-9 × 0·3-1·8 cm, spathulate to oblanceolate, obtuse to acute, denticulate to runcinate-pinnatifid, narrowed at base; cauline lanceolate, acute to acuminate, sessile, semiamplexicaul, auriculate. Involucre with 10-12 linear outer bracts ¼-½ as long as the 10-16 linear-lanceolate inner ones. Achenes 3-4 × 0·3-0·4 mm, narrowed to a slender beak, 10-ribbed. •{\i  S. & W. France, S. & W. Italy.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b suffreniana}: Involucre 4-6·5 × 2-3 mm, with dark eglandular and glandular hairs. Corolla c. 5 mm; anther-tube c.1 mm. Achenes deep purplish-brown. 2n = 8.{\i  S.& W. France, N.W. Italy}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b apula} (Fiori) P.D. Sell,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 254 (1976) ({\i C.suffreniana }var.{\i  apula} Fiori): Involucre 6-8 × 3-4 mm, with dark glandular hairs. Corolla 8-9 mm; anther-tube c. 2·5 mm. Achenes dark brown or nearly black. 2n = 8.{\i  S. Italy}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. LEPIDOSERIS (Reichenb.) Bentham. Pubescent perennials, biennials or annuals, usually with long woody root. Basal leaves petiolate, denticulate to pinnatifid. Capitula with many florets Ligules yellow, usually reddish or purplish on outer face. Receptacle with ciliate pits.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. C. spathulata} Guss., {\i Cat. Pl. Boccad.} 73 (1821). Perennial; stems 2-3, 15-30 cm. Leaves glabrous or puberulent; basal 5-15 × 0·5-2·5 cm, oblanceolate to spathulate, obtuse to subacute, sinuate-dentate or denticulate, attenuate at base; cauline small, linear, acuminate and sessile, or bract-like. Capitula 1-4. Involucre 12-13 × 5-7 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, canescent-tomentose, with short glandular hairs and a few longer eglandular hairs, pubescent on inner face, outer c. 1/3 as long as inner. Achenes 5·5 × 0·75 mm, brown, fusiform, gradually attenuate into a beak, 10-ribbed. •{\i  S. Italy, Sicilia.} It Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. C. bourgeaui} Babcock ex Maire, {\i Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Afr. Nord}{\b  29}: 428 (1938). Perennial; stems 20-50 cm, with 1-3 branches from near the base. Leaves with short eglandular hairs or glabrescent; basal up to 21 × 7 cm, oblanceolate, acute, pinnatisect, with unequal, oblanceolate, acute, dentate segments, gradually narrowed at base; lower cauline like the basal or sessile; upper cauline linear, entire to laciniate, narrowly amplexicaul, or bract-like. Capitula 1-9. Involucre 10-12 × 5-7 mm; outer bracts more or less ovate, acute, imbricate, becoming scarious, glabrous or sparsely tomentulose, 1/3-1/2 as long as the linear-lanceolate inner. Achenes 4·5-6 × 0·5-0·7 mm, brown fusiform, slightly curved, attenuate into a beak, 10 ribbed. 2n = 8.{\i  S.W. Spain }({\i near Cádiz}). Hs. ({\i Morocco.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 66. C. vesicaria} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 805 (1753). Perennial, biennial or annual; stems 3-150 cm, usually much-branched. Leaves pubescent or glabrous; basal 10-35 × 2-8 cm, oblanceolate or sometimes almost spathulate or ovate, obtuse to acute, sinuately or retrorsely denticulate, dentate or runcinate-pinnatifid, pinnatisect or 2-pinnatisect, often lyrate, sometimes pectinate, narrowed at base; lower cauline like the basal or sessile; upper cauline lanceolate to bract-like, auriculate-amplexicaul. Capitula many, often in a lax corymb. Involucre 5-14 mm, more or less tomentose, often with glandular or eglandular hairs; outer bracts (1/6-)1/4-1/3(-3/4) as long as inner. Achenes brown or yellowish fusiform, uniform or of 2 kinds, the inner always beaked, c. 10 ribbed.{\i  S., C. & W. Europe, northwards to the Netherlands and W. Austria; widely naturalized in Britain and Ireland.} Al Au Be Bl Cr Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Br Hb].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Outer involucral bracts broadly ovate, imbricate ............ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b vesicaria}
\par 
1 Outer involucral bracts linear-lanceolate, not imbricate
\par 
2 Ultimate branches strongly deflexed before anthesis;
\par 
  flowering in winter .......................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b hyemalis}
\par 
2 Ultimate branches erect before anthesis; flowering in summer
\par 
3 Achenes pale brown, finely beaked and ribbed, the beak 
\par 
  smooth or finely muricate; receptacular pits with 
\par 
  slender, white cilia ......................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b haenseleri}
\par 
3 Achenes brownish-yellow, coarsely beaked and ribbed,
\par 
  the beak definitely ribbed and spinulose to the apex;
\par 
  receptacular pits with coarse, yellow, shining cilia ........ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b congenita}
\par 

\par 
356}
\par