{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 acute or apiculate, abruptly or gradually contracted at base entire or obscurely denticulate to repand-dentate, with dense very short, pale hairs or glabrescent. Involucre 7-12 × 3-7 mm, bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, the outer 1/3-2/3 as long as the inner. Achenes 3-5·5 mm, pale brown, fusiform, c. 20-ribbed.{\i  Most of Europe eastwards from S.E. Norway and S.E. France, but absent from the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ligules pink or white ........................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b dinarica}
\par 
1 Ligules yellow
\par 
2 Capitula in a narrow, elongated cyme; achenes 3-4 mm ({\b a}) subsp. {\b praemorsa}
\par 
2 Capitula in a lax, often subcorymbose cyme;
\par 
  achenes 4-5·5 mm .......................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b corymbosa}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b praemorsa}: Leaves mostly oblanceolate or narrowly elliptical. Capitula in a narrow, elongated cyme; involucre with numerous, very short, pale hairs or glabrescent. Ligules yellow. Achenes 3-4 mm, equally attenuate at both ends. 2n = 8. {\i Throughout the range of the species except parts of the S. Alps and W. Jugoslavia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b corymbosa} (Gaudin) P.D. Sell,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 253 (1976) ({\i C. froelichiana} DC. ex Froelich,{\i  Hieracium praemorsum} subsp. {\i corymbosum} Gaudin): Leaves mostly obovate. Capitula in a lax, often subcorymbose cyme; involucre glabrous or tomentose. Ligules yellow. Achenes 4-5·5 mm, more attenuate at apex than base.{\i  Meadows and wood-margins, mainly in the mountains; calcicole. • S. Alps, from} c. 8° 30'{\i  to} c. 11° 45'{\i  E.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b dinarica} (G. Beck) P.D. Sell, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 253 (1976) ({\i C. incarnata} var.{\i  dinarica} G. Beck, {\i C. incarnata} (Jacq.) Tausch, non Vis.): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but with pink or white ligules. • {\i S.E. Alps and mountains of W. Jugoslavia.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. MESOPHYLION Babcock. Subglabrous to pubescent annuals with slender, tapering roots; stems branched from base or middle. Lower leaves petiolate, denticulate to 2-pinnatisect. Capitula many, with few to many florets. Ligules yellow. Receptacle with ciliate pits.
\par 

\par 
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 44. C. tectorum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 807 (1753). Stems 6-100 cm. Leaves glabrous to tomentulose, sometimes glandular; basal up to 15 × 4 cm, rosulate, lanceolate to oblanceolate, acute, narrowed at base, denticulate, dentate or runcinate-pinnatifid or lyrate, pinnatisect or 2-pinnatisect, with remote, unequal, lanceolate to linear, acute lobes; lower cauline like the basal, the rest lanceolate or linear, sessile. Capitula sometimes in corymbs. Involucro up to 13 × 8 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, more or less acute, the outer 1/3 as long as inner, appressed-hairy on inner face. Achenes (2·5-)3-4(-4·5) mm, dark purplish-brown, fusiform, strongly attenuate at apex, 10-ribbed. 2n = 8.{\i  Europe, except the islands, southwards to N.E. Spain, N. Italy, C. Jugoslavia and Krym.} Au Be ?Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems (7-)12-100 cm; capitula usually numerous ........... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b tectorum}
\par 
1 Stems up to 30 cm; capitula 1-7
\par 
2 Basal leaves few; involucre 9-12 mm .......................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b nigrescens}
\par 
2 Basal leaves numerous; involucre 7-9 mm ........................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b pumila}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tectorum} ({\i C. astrachanica} Steven ex Czerep., {\i C. ramosissima} D'Urv.): Stems (7-)12-100 cm. Basal leaves few; cauline numerous. Capitula usually many; involucral bracts 7-10 mm, more or less tomentose and with few to numerous short hairs. Ligules 12-15 mm.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b nigrescens} (Pohle) P.D. Sell,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 253 (1976) ({\i C. nigrescens} Pohle): Stems 7-30 cm. Basal leaves few; cauline 3-6. Capitula 1-7; involucral bracts 9-12 mm, with long, usually greyish eglandular hairs. Ligules 13-18 mm. {\i Rocky and sandy ground by rivers and the sea. Arctic Russia and Finland}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b pumila} (Liljeblad) Sterner, {\i Acta Phytogeogr. Suec.}{\b  9}: 166 (1938): Stems up to 7 cm. Basal leaves numerous; cauline 2-4. Capitula 2-7; involucral bracts 7-9 mm, with slender, unequal glandular hairs. Ligules 10-13 mm.{\i  Shallow soil over limestone rock. • Sweden }({\i Öland, Gotland}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. LAGOSERIS (Bieb.) Babcock. Tomentose perennials with vertical taproots. Lower leaves petiolate, runcinate-pinnatifid. Capitula 2-8, with many florets. Ligules pinkish-purple. Receptacle flat, with long rigid hairs between the florets.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. C. purpurea} (Willd.) Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 255 (1808) ({\i Lagoseris purpurea} (Willd.) Boiss., {\i L. callicephala} Juz. ex Czerep.,{\i  L. robusta} Czerep.). Stems 10-40 cm. Leaves canescent-tomentulose; basal 3-9 × 1·5-3 cm, numerous, oblanceolate acute, narrowed at base, deeply runcinate-pinnatifid with the segments all acutely dentate, to 2-pinnatisect; cauline mostly reduced to small bracts, occasionally like the basal. Involucre 10-12 × 5-6 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, the outer 1/3-1/2 as long as the inner, canescent-tomentose, rarely with unequal, yellow glandular hairs. Achenes 4·5-5 × 0·5-0·6 mm, dark brown, cylindrical but slightly attenuate above, 10-ribbed.{\i  Chalky hillsides. Krym. }Rs (K). ({\i Anatolia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. PHAECASIUM (Cass.) Dumort. Pubescent annuals (rarely perennials). Lower leaves petiolate, denticulate to pinnatifid. Capitula usually many, in a corymb, with few to many florets. Ligules yellow. Receptacle with ciliate or glabrous pits.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. C. reuterana} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 2}({\b 11}): 55 (1849). Perennial; stems 30-75 cm, branching from near the base. Leaves pubescent or hispidulous; basal 4-18 × 1-3 cm, oblanceolate, lyrate-runcinate-pinnatifid or coarsely dentate, acute to obtuse; lower cauline like the basal or all bract-like. Involucre 10-13 × 4-7 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, mostly with a white margin, glabrous or sparsely pubescent, pubescent on inner face, the outer 1/4-1/3 as long as the inner. Achenes 4-5 × c. 0·5 mm, fusiform, attenuate at apex, slightly constricted above base, c. 15-ribbed.{\i  Turkey-in-Europe.} Tu. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. C. pulchra} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }806 (1753). Annual; stems (5-)30-70(-100) cm, branched from the base. Leaves with short glandular and longer eglandular hairs; basal (1-)3-15(-24) × (0·5-)1-3(-5) cm, rosulate, oblanceolate, acute to obtuse narrowed at base, denticulate to runcinate-dentate or pinnatifid with triangular, acute lobes; lower cauline like the basal but lanceolate and less divided; upper cauline linear or bract-like. Capitula in a compound corymb. Involucre 8-11(-12) × 3-6 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, the outer very short, glabrous. Achenes uniform (all like the inner), or of 2 kinds: marginal 5-6 mm, somewhat compressed, more or less attenuate at apex, spinulose, usually without pappus; inner 4-4·5(-5) mm, cylindrical, more or less attenuate at apex, usually striate, with a pappus. 2n = 8.{\i  Dry, open habitats. S. Europe, extending northwards to N. France and S.E. Czechoslovakia; casual further north. }Al Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. C. stojanovii} Georgiev,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Bulg.}{\b  1}: 67 (1926). Annual; stems 35-40 cm. Leaves with short glandular or eglandular hairs; basal up to 15 × 3 cm, numerous, obovate, acute, narrowed at base, coarsely dentate; cauline small and
\par 

\par 
353}
\par