{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 180.           Andryala}              L 
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.D. Sell.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs. Stems usually solitary, rarely numerous. Leaves entire to pinnatisect; cauline few to numerous, often more or less amplexicaul. Capitula usually few to numerous, rarely solitary. Involucral bracts in 2 to several rows. Receptacle pitted, the margins of the pits laciniate-dentate and with cilia which are often longer than the subtending achenes, sometimes with scales enfolding some or all the florets. Ligules yellow, the outer sometimes with a reddish stripe on outer face. Achenes oblong or obconical, truncate (rarely with a disc) at apex, with 8-10 prominent ribs; pappus of greyish hairs, falling entire.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Capitulum 1(-2)
\par 
2 Involucre with at least some glandular hairs, receptacular 
\par 
  scales absent ................................................................................... {\b 4. agardhii}
\par 
2 Involucre without glandular hairs; receptacle with 
\par 
  laciniate scales enfolding the florets ..................................... {\b 5. levitomentosa}
\par 
1 Capitula more than 3
\par 
3 Involucre without glandular hairs ................................................. {\b 3. ragusina}
\par 
3 Involucre with numerous glandular hairs
\par 
4 Involucre 7-11 × 5-10 mm ....................................................... {\b 1. integrifolia}
\par 
4 Involucre 10-13 × 12-15 mm ........................................................ {\b 2. laxiflora}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. integrifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 808 (1753) ({\i A. arenaria} (DC.) Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  A. dentata} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  A. sinuata} L.). Annual to perennial. Stems 12-80 cm, sparingly to much-branched, with sparse to dense stellate and short simple eglandular hairs, and sometimes with glandular hairs above. Leaves 20-80 × 3-30 mm, with dense stellate and short eglandular hairs, linear, oblanceolate, lanceolate or ovate, obtuse to acute, entire to deeply pinnatisect, the lower usually narrowed at base, the upper usually broader and sometimes semiamplexicaul; basal leaves usually few, the cauline numerous, sometimes aggregated towards the base. Capitula few to numerous. Involucre 7-11 × 5-10 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, with dense stellate and short simple eglandular hairs and longer glandular hairs. Achenes c. 1·5 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Mediterranean region and S.W. Europe, northwards to} c. 47° N.{\i  in W. France.} Az Co Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable in all its parts. It appears to be divisible into many closely allied taxa, but, as none of the published classifications seem to cover more than part of this variation, it is thought better to treat it as one extremely variable species until detailed experimental work can be carried out.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. laxiflora} DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  7}: 246 (1838). Annual. Stems 10-45 cm, tomentose with stellate and simple eglandular hairs, and also with glandular hairs above. Leaves numerous, 40-60 × 10-25 mm, mostly cauline, oblanceolate, lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, subentire to dentate, the lower narrowed at base, the upper cordate-amplexicaul, tomentose with dense stellate and simple eglandular hairs. Capitula numerous. Involucre 10-12 × 12-15 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, with dense stellate and simple eglandular hairs and numerous longer glandular hairs. Achenes 1·5-2·5 mm, the outer enfolded by the inner involucral bracts and with scales between them. 2n = 18.{\i  S. & E. Spain, S. & E. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. ragusina} L., {\i Sp.Pl.} ed. 2, 1136 (1763). Perennial. Stems 10-50 cm, tomentose with stellate and simple eglandular hairs. Leaves 20-80 mm, linear-oblong, elliptical, obovate or oblanceolate, more or less acute, tomentose with dense stellate and simple eglandular hairs, all or at least the lower narrowed at base, the upper sometimes abruptly contracted and semiamplexicaul. Capitula few to numerous. Involucral bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, with dense stellate and simple eglandular hairs, without glandular hairs. Achenes 2-2·5 mm. •{\i  S.W. Europe.} Bl Co Ga Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    Two distinct variants occur: var.{\i  ragusina} has the stems branched only above the middle, leaves 10-30 mm wide, and involucre 11-16 × 12-16 mm, while var.{\i  ramosissima} Boiss. ex DC. has the stems often branched from the base, leaves not more than 10 mm wide, and involucre 8-10 × 6-10 mm. They may deserve the rank of subspecies, but they both appear to occur throughout the range of the species and their ecology is not clearly understood.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. agardhii} Haenseler ex DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  7}: 244 (1838). Perennial with woody, sometimes branched stock covered with the persistent bases of petioles. Stems 7-15 cm, with a tomentum of stellate and simple eglandular hairs throughout and longer glandular hairs above. Leaves with a dense tomentum of short and simple eglandular hairs; basal numerous, 15-35 × 5-15 mm, spathulate to oblanceolate, obtuse to subacute, entire, narrowed below into a long, winged petiole; cauline few, more or less linear. Capitulum solitary. Involucre 10-12 × 10-14 mm; bracts lanceolate, obtuse to acute, with a dense tomentum of stellate and simple eglandular hairs and few to numerous longer glandular hairs. Achenes 2·5-3·5 mm.{\i  Mountain rocks and screes. • S. Spain. }Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. lentomentosa} (E. I. Nyárády) P.D. Sell,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 256 (1976) ({\i Pietrosia levitomentosa} E. I. Nyárády). Perennial with a woody, often branched stock, covered with the persistent bases of petioles. Stems 6-20 cm, with a tomentum of mainly stellate hairs and longer simple eglandular hairs, and sometimes with a few glandular hairs above. Leaves with a dense tomentum of stellate and simple eglandular hairs; basal numerous, 10-100 × 10-25 mm, suborbicular to broadly elliptical, obtuse to subacute, entire or with 1-4 small teeth, attenuate at base into a winged petiole; cauline 1-4, linear. Capitulum 1(-2). Involucre 10-15 × 15-20 mm; bracts lanceolate, acute, with dense stellate hairs and dense, longer, simple eglandular hairs. Achenes c. 1·5 mm, obconical, with a 2-rimmed disc at the apex. Receptacle with laciniate scales enfolding the florets. {\i Mountain cliffs, }1600-1700{\i  m. • E. Carpathians} ({\i Pietrosul Brostenilor}). Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 181.      Hiaracium}    L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc (incl. {\i Pilosella }Hill)
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.D. Sell & C. West.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Stems 1-numerous. Leaves entire to deeply dentate, rarely lobed, the basal usually rosulate. Involucral bracts in several irregularly imbricate rows, linear-lanceolate. Receptacle without scales, flat, pitted; margins of the pits shortly dentate to fimbriate-dentate. Ligules usually yellow (sometimes with a red stripe on outer face), rarely reddish, green or white. Achenes 10 to 13-ribbed, narrowly obconical, never beaked. Pappus of 1 or 2 rows of unequal, brittle, white to pale yellowish-brown hairs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   In the opinion of the authors, {\i Hieracium} and{\i  Pilosella} are best considered as separate genera (see P. D. Sell & C. West,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  33}: 241-248 (1974)). The Editorial Committee, however, having reviewed the opinions of the Regional Advisers, decided that for the purposes of this Flora they would be best united in order to maintain nomenclatural continuity with the work of Zahn and the majority of European Floras.
\par 

\par 
358}
\par