{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  The amount and nature of the indumentum, particularly on the involucre, are very constant within species. There are two main types of hairs, branched and simple: branched hairs are either more or less {\i stellate}, or {\i plumose} or {\i subplumose} (i.e. pinnately branched with the side-projections longer than the diameter of the hair);{\i  simple} hairs can be glandular or eglandular; simple eglandular hairs include those hairs with minute side-projections not longer than the diameter of the hair. The abundance of the hairs is indicated by the following terms:{\i  few} or{\i  sparse}, when the hairs in question form only a small proportion of the total indumentum or are scattered;{\i  numerous}, when the hairs are abundant but separated widely enough to be individually distinct;{\i  dense} when they form a continuous indumentum. Stigmas which are {\i discoloured} have developed a dirty greyish or greenish tinge which may turn even darker when dry; yellow stigmas with no discoloration usually remain yellow when dry. Measurement of width of capitulum is made on herbarium material.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  More taxa have been described in {\i Hieracium} than in any other genus in the European flora. Zahn's monograph (1921-1923) is used as a basis for this account.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  In Subgenus{\i  Pilosella}, some attempt has been made to indicate the introduced status of some taxa; this has not been possible in Subgenus{\i  Hieracium}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants of Subgenus{\i  Pilosella} are sexual or partially apomictic. The species in this subgenus described here correspond to the species of Zahn, and the subspecies to those of both Zahn and Naegeli & Peter (1885). Only the small number of these subspecies which are morphologically distinct and have a wide geographical range are accepted here. The remaining subspecies of these authors are based on very insignificant characters and are usually of restricted distribution. Plants intermediate in character between most species and subspecies occur; many are obvious hybrids and occur with their parents, some being intermediate in character and others being closer to one parent than to the other. Other plants with intermediate characters are not so certainly of hybrid origin, or at least not of recent hybrid origin, and form uniform populations sometimes at a great distance from one or both of the species between which they are intermediate; such plants may be morphologically identical with part of a variable population of obvious hybrids. Triple and quadruple hybrids occur and have been described and given binomials, and some have been reproduced artificially. Vegetative spread occurs in the majority of the taxa in Subgenus{\i  Pilosella} and further complicates the situation. In this account the intermediates have been given hybrid binomials, followed by an indication of their probable origin in the form:{\b  H. × hypeuryum} Peter ({\i H. hoppeanum / pilosella}). In Subgenus {\i Pilosella} the taxa given hybrid binomials are included in the text in alphabetical order under their suggested parents; those which occur in 5 or more territories are numbered and described in the text but are, for practical reasons, not included in the key; the remainder are given distributions, but not descriptions, and are not numbered.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants of Subgenus {\i Hieracium} are usually agamospermic, forming only univalents at meiosis, usually having little or no pollen, and setting good seed; only a few species are known to be sexual. The majority of both Zahn's 'species principales collectivae' and his 'species intermediae collectivae' (which are morphologically intermediate between 'species principales collectivae', and may have originated as a result of hybridization) are treated in this account as groups of species, and Zahn's subspecies are treated as species. The groups of species (and a few species) are numbered and given descriptions, and each group description must be understood to cover all the species known in that group. After each name of a group which Zahn considered to be a 'species intermedia collectiva' a formula is given:{\b  H. rupestre} group ({\i H. pictum / humile}); these names in brackets correspond to the groups ('species principales collectivae') which in Zahn's opinion contributed to the origin of the group in question. Within each group a selection of species is listed, some because they are widespread or otherwise illustrate the extent of the distribution, and others because they indicate the range of morphological variation within the group. No infrageneric taxa are recognized below the rank of subgenus, but informal subdivisions have been made. At the end of these subdivisions a number of groups or species may be listed which are too local to be worth describing. Certain names in the index to Subgenus{\i  Hieracium} printed in roman type, may on further information prove to be synonyms.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: C. Naegeli & A. Peter,{\i  Die Hieracien Mittel-Europas.} München. {\b 1},{\i  Piloselloiden.} 1885;{\b  2},{\i  Archieracien}. 1886-1889. (General.) K. H. Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  75} ({\b IV.280}): 1-288 (1921); {\b 76} ({\b IV.280}): 289-576 (1921);{\b  77} ({\b IV.280}): 577-864 (1921);{\b  79} ({\b IV.280}): 865-1146 (1922);{\b  82} ({\b IV.280}): 1147-1705 (1923). (General.) F.Markgraf in A.von Hayek,{\i  Prodromus Florae Peninsulae Balcanicae}{\b  2}: 864-1049 (1931-1932). (Balkan peninsula.) K. H. Zahn in P. F. A. Ascherson & K. O. P. P. Graebner,{\i  Synopsis der Mitteleuropäischen Flora.} Leipzig. {\b 12}({\b 1}): 1-492 (1930); {\b 12}({\b 2}): 1-790 (1935). (C. Europe.) K. H. Zahn, {\i Les} Hieracium{\i  des Alpes Maritimes.} Genève, Bâle & Lyon. 1916. (Maritime Alps.) H. W. Pugsley,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot}.) {\b 54}: 1-356 (1948). (British Isles.) P. D. Sell & C. West in F. H. Perring,{\i  Critical Supplement to the Atlas of the British Flora} 75-134. London. 1968. (British Isles.) A.Zlatnik,{\i  Studia Bot. Cech.}{\b  1}: 37-51, 105-242 (1938). (Czechoslovakia.) K. Wiinstedt in C. Raunkiær,{\i  Dansk Ekskursions-Flora} ed. 7, 335-350. København. 1950. (Denmark.) J. P. Norrlin in Cajander, {\i Suomen Kasvio} 594-746. Helsingissä. 1906. (Finland.) B. de Retz,{\i  Le Genre} Hieracium{\i  dans la Flore de France}. Le Chesnay. 1970. (France.) K. H. Zahn,{\i  Neue Denkschr. Schweiz. Ges. Naturw.}{\b  40}: 165-728 (1906). (Switzerland.) J. L. Van Soest,{\i  Nederl. Kruidk. Arch.}{\b  1925}: 138-204 (1926);{\b  1926}: 163-215 (1927);{\b  1927}: 171-222 (1928); {\b 1929}: 103-138 (1929). (Netherlands.) S. O. F. Omang,{\i  Skr. Vid.-Akad. Oslo} {\b 1938}({\b 3}): 1-67 (1938). (Iceland.) I.  Óskarsson,{\i  Visind. Íslend}.{\b  37}: 1-142 (1966). (Iceland.) S. O. F. Omang,{\i  Nyt Mag. Naturvid.} ({\i Christiania}){\b  38}: 189-254 (1901); {\b 41}: 259-368 (1903); {\b 43}: 177-313 (1905); {\b 75}: 33-127 (1934). (Norway.) S. O. F. Omang, {\i Die Hieracien Norwegens.} Oslo. 1935. (Norway.) S. O. F. Omang in R. Nordhagen, {\i Norsk Flora} 712-744. Oslo. 1940. (Norway.) E. I. Nyárády in T. Savulescu,{\i  Flora Republicii Populare Romîne}{\b  10}: 214-713. Bucuresti. 1965. (Romania.) A. Y. Juxip in B. K. Schischkin & E. G. Bobrov,{\i  Flora URSS }{\b 30}: 1-732. Mosqua & Leningrad. 1960. (U.S.S.R.) H. Dahlstedt,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.Akad. Handl.}{\b  23}({\b 15}): 1-135 (1890); {\b 25}({\b 3}): 1-201 (1893); {\b 26}({\b 3}): 1-266 (1894). (Sweden.) K. Johansson, {\i Ark. Bot.}{\b  21}({\b 15}): 1-98 (1927); {\b 22}({\b 12}): 1-41 (1929). (Sweden.) G. Samuelsson,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} ser. 4, {\b 5}({\b 3}) (1954). (Scandinavia.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stolons often present; achenes up to 2·5 mm, each rib 
\par 
  shortly projecting above to form a crenulate apex;
\par 
  pappus hairs in 1 row with a few shorter than the rest
\par 
  (Subgen.{\i  Pilosella})
\par 
2 Main rosette non-flowering; capitula borne at ends of 
\par 
  stolons ...................................................................................... {\b 1. castellanum}
\par 
2 Main rosette with a flowering stem; capitula rarely 
\par 
  borne at ends of stolons
\par 
3 Flowering stems usually scapose, each with 1 capitulum
\par 
4 Leaves with dense stellate hairs above
\par 
5 Stolons long, slender .................................................................. {\b 10. pilosella}
\par 
5 Stolons short, thick
\par 
6 Involucral bracts with numerous glandular hairs .................... {\b 2. hoppeanum}
\par 

\par 
359}
\par