{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 295 Petioles short (usually not more than 30 mm) ........................ {\b 164. atratum}
\par 
295 Petioles long (up to 120 mm)
\par 
296 Leaves serrate ................................................................... {\b 165. liptoviense}
\par 
296 Leaves entire to denticulate ................................................... {\b 166. krasanii} 
\par 
287 Involucre without or with few glandular hairs
\par 
297 Involucre with few to numerous stellate hairs
\par 
298 Involucral bracts acute
\par 
299 Involucre (11-)13-17 mm
\par 
300 Peduncles without or with few simple eglandular hairs
\par 
    ...................................................................................... {\b 115. chondrillifolium}
\par 
300 Peduncles with numerous simple eglandular hairs
\par 
301 Simple hairs of involucre 3-6 mm ........................... {\b 111. scorzonerifolium}
\par 
301 Simple hairs of involucre 1-2·5 mm ............................... {\b 119. chlorifolium}
\par 
299 Involucre 9-13(-14) mm
\par 
302 At least some leaves deeply laciniate-dentate ....................... {\b 203. osyodon}
\par 
302 Leaves entire to shallowly dentate
\par 
303 Margin of leaves with few to numerous simple eglandular
\par 
    hairs up to 3 mm ................................................................ {\b 199. sparsiramum}
\par 
303 Margin of leaves with dense simple eglandular hairs 
\par 
    up to 11 mm ........................................................................... {\b 214. macrodon} 
\par 
298 Involucral bracts obtuse
\par 
304 Involucre usually 12-17 mm
\par 
305 Leaves usually less than 10 mm wide ........................... {\b 197. bupleuroides}
\par 
305 Leaves usually more than 10 mm wide
\par 
306 Simple eglandular hairs of involucre dark based .................... {\b 74. caesium}
\par 
306 Simple eglandular hairs of involucre not dark-based
\par 
307 Peduncles without or with few simple eglandular-hairs
\par 
    ...................................................................................... {\b 115. chondrillifolium}
\par 
307 Peduncles with numerous simple eglandular hairs ........ {\b 119. chlorifolium}
\par 
304 Involucre usually 9-12 mm
\par 
308 Involucral bracts in regular imbricate rows, the outer
\par 
    not obviously wider than the inner
\par 
309 Peduncles without or with few glandular hairs ..................... {\b 203. osyodon}
\par 
309 Peduncles with numerous glandular hairs ............................ {\b 207. dollineri}
\par 
308 Involucral bracts not in regular imbricate rows, the 
\par 
    outer wider and much shorter than the inner
\par 
310 Cauline leaves 2-4 ................................................................... {\b 74. caesium}
\par 
310 Cauline leaves more than 4
\par 
311 Leaves glaucous ..................................................................... {\b 76. ramosum}
\par 
311 Leaves green ..................................................................... {\b 258. laevigatum}
\par 
297 Involucre without or with few stellate hairs
\par 
312 Involucral bracts obtuse
\par 
313 Outer involucral bracts squarrose ...................................... {\b 211. silesiacum}
\par 
313 Outer involucral bracts appressed
\par 
314 Cauline leaves (4-)8-25(-numerous) ................................. {\b 258. laevigatum}
\par 
314 Cauline leaves 2-5
\par 
315 Leaves with hairs at least below and on the margins ....... {\b 89. caledonicum}
\par 
315 Leaves glabrous or nearly so .............................................. {\b 201. glabratum} 
\par 
312 Involucral bracts acute
\par 
316 Upper surface of leaves glabrous or with a few hairs
\par 
317 Involucre 9-10 mm ......................................................... {\b 210. naegelianum}
\par 
317 Involucre 11-17 mm
\par 
318 Leaves with rigid hairs on margin .......................................... {\b 88. scoticum}
\par 
318 Leaves with soft hairs on margin
\par 
319 Leaves nearly glabrous beneath ......................................... {\b 201. glabratum}
\par 
319 Leaves with dense hairs beneath ................................... {\b 116. cryptadenum}
\par 
316 Upper surface of leaves with numerous to dense hairs
\par 
320 Margins of receptacular pits with cilia ............................. {\b 126. mixtiforme}
\par 
320 Margins of receptacular pits without cilia
\par 
321 Achenes not more than 3 mm
\par 
322 Outer involucral bracts squarrose; styles usually
\par 
    discoloured ......................................................................... {\b 121. dasytrichum}
\par 
322 Outer involucral bracts appressed; styles usually yellow .... {\b 122. aphyllum} 
\par 
321 Achenes more than 3 mm
\par 
323 Leaves entire or with a few teeth
\par 
324 Cauline leaves (2-)4-8(-15); outer involucral bracts
\par 
    squarrose .................................................................................. {\b 109. villosum}
\par 
324 Cauline leaves (2-)3-6, outer involucral bracts appressed ..... {\b 110. pilosum}
\par 
323 At least some leaves strongly dentate
\par 
325 At least some basal leaves obovate or more or less
\par 
    spathulate ................................................................................ {\b 114. dentatum}
\par 
325 Basal leaves more or less lanceolate .............................. {\b 116. cryptadenum}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28      Subgen.{\b  Pilosella} (Hill) S. F. Gray. Rhizome horizontal or oblique, with a persistent rosette of leaves, from the axils which are usually developed procumbent leafy, or underground scaly stolons, sometimes bearing capitula at their apices. Flowering stems 1 to numerous. Leaves entire or slightly denticulate, never distinctly petiolate, often all basal, the cauline, when present, usually small or bract-like. Ligules yellow (often with a red stripe on outer face) or reddish, glabrous. Pollen copious. Achenes up to 2·5 mm, each rib shortly projecting above to form a crenulate apex; pappus-hairs in 1 row with a few shorter than the rest. Receptacular pits shortly dentate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. castellanum} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Nov. Hisp.} 20 (1842). Main rosette non-flowering; stolons wiry, leafy, bearing at the apex 1-3 scapes, each with a single capitulum. Leaves narrowly elliptical or linear, more or less acute, long-attenuate at base, with dense stellate hairs on both surfaces, and sparse, long, subrigid simple eglandular hairs on both surfaces and the margin. Scapes with dense stellate hairs and more or less numerous, very small glandular hairs, sometimes with few to numerous, simple eglandular hairs. Involucral bracts (8-)9-10(-11) × 0·75-1·25 mm, linear-lanceolate, acute, with dense stellate and very short simple eglandular hairs, few to numerous, much longer simple eglandular hairs, and more or less numerous, short glandular hairs; longer simple hairs sometimes absent (var. glandulosum Scheele). Ligules yellow, with a red stripe on outer face. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain rocks and meadows. • Spain, N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. hoppeanum} Schultes, {\i Österreichs Fl.} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 428 (1814). Stolons few, very short, stout, with large crowded leaves. Rosette-leaves rather numerous, oblanceolate to oblong, with long, white simple eglandular hairs on both surfaces and the margin, and dense stellate hairs beneath and rarely also above. Scapes up to 40 cm, each with a single capitulum, with rather numerous simple eglandular and dense glandular hairs. Involucral bracts (6-)11-14 × 1-4 mm, the outer ovate, the inner sometimes lanceolate, abruptly narrowed to a subacute or obtuse apex, with 0 to numerous simple eglandular hairs, 0 to numerous glandular hairs, and dense stellate hairs. Ligules yellow, the outer usually with a dark red stripe on outer face. 2n = 18, 45.{\i  C. & S. Europe from Switzerland and Sicilia eastwards, mainly in the mountains.} Al Au Bu Cz Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (K) Si Tu.
\par 

\par 
366}
\par