{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 hairs up to 5 mm at apex of stem and on involucral bracts. 2n = 45. {\i Most of Europe; mainly in upland regions}.
\par 
 ({\b h}) Subsp. {\b velutinum} Fries, {\i Uppsala Univ. Arsskr. }{\b 1862} ({\i Math. Nat., Epicr. Hier}.): 12 (1862) ({\i H. poliophyton }(Zahn) Juxip): Scapes 8-20 cm, with stellate, glandular and pale simple eglandular hairs on upper part. Leaves with dense stellate hairs on both surfaces. Involucre 9-12 mm- bracts with dense stellate and glandular hairs and pale simple eglandular hairs in various proportions. 2n = 45, 54. •{\i  Mainly in the upland regions of C. Europe}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. tardans} Peter,{\i  Bot. Jahrb. }{\b 5}: 256 (1884) ({\i H. niveum} (Müller Arg.) Zahn), from the W. Alps, differs from subsp. ({\b e}) only in having weaker, shorter stolons and in flowering later.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. H. × florentoides} Arvet-Touvet, {\i Essai Pl. Dauph. }40 (1871) ({\i H. adriaticum} Naegeli,{\i  H. aridum} Freyn, {\i H. cinerosiforme} (Naegeli & Peter) Zahn,{\i  H. tephrodes} Naegeli & Peter; {\i H. pilosella} /{\i  piloselloides}). Variable, but usually without or with very short stolons. Differs from {\i H. pilosella} in having more than 1 capitulum per stem and from {\i H. piloselloides} in having large capitula usually on long peduncles.{\i  C. Europe and Balkan peninsula; Corse.} Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge He It Ju ?Po Rm [Ho].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. H. × brachiatum} Bertol. ex Lam. in Lam. & DC., {\i Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  5}: 442 (1815) ({\i H. leptophyton }Naegeli & Peter; {\i H. pilosella} / {\i praealtum}). Often with long slender stolons. Not distinguishable from {\i H. × florentoides} unless growing with parents ({\i H. piloselloides} and {\i H. praealtum} do not usually grow together). {\i C. Europe, extending locally eastwards to C. Russia, Krym and Bulgaria.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, W, C, K)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. H. pseudopilosella} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  1},{\i  Prodr}.: 71 (1811). Stolons long, slender, with remote leaves. Rosette-leaves 10-55 × 5-10 mm, oblanceolate or elliptical, obtuse to acute, with numerous long, pale simple eglandular hairs on both surfaces and the margin and dense stellate hairs beneath. Scapes 20-32 cm, each with a single capitulum, with numerous stellate and long, blackish simple eglandular hairs, sometimes with short glandular hairs. Involucral bracts 10-13 × 1·5-2 mm, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, acute, with dense, long, dark simple eglandular hairs completely concealing the bracts, without or with few small glandular hairs. Ligules yellow, often with a red stripe on outer face. {\i S. Europe}. Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Lu Rm Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pseudopilosella}: Whole plant without or with very occasional glandular hairs. 2n = 18. •{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b banaticola} E. I. Nyárády & Zahn, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  10}: 123 (1911): Stems with numerous small glandular hairs above; involucre with a few small glandular hairs. •{\i  Bulgaria, N. Greece}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pseudopilosella} subsp.{\b  albarracinum} Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich} {\b 82}({\b IV.280}): 1186 (1923), from E. Spain (near Albarracin), has the involucre with dense, minute glandular hairs and few or no simple eglandular hairs and appears to be either a distinct species or of hybrid origin.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. H. flagellare} Willd., {\i Enum. Pl. Horti Berol., Suppl.} 54 (1814). Stolons long, stout, leafy. Rosette-leaves 30-130 × 5-25 mm, oblanceolate or spathulate, obtuse to subacute, with long, pale, subrigid simple eglandular hairs on both surfaces and the margin and more or less numerous stellate hairs beneath. Flowering stems 12-40 cm, furcate, with numerous glandular and stellate hairs and few to numerous, long simple eglandular hairs, with 0-2 small leaves. Capitula (1-)2-6. Involucral bracts (8-)9-12 × 1-1·25 mm, linear-lanceolate, acute, with sparse stellate hairs, numerous glandular hairs and more or less numerous long simple eglandular hairs. Ligules yellow, usually with a red stripe on outer face. {\i N., W. & C. Europe.} Au Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hs Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su [Be Ho].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b flagellare}: Flowering stems up to 40 cm. Capitula 2-4(-7); peduncles with more or less numerous simple eglandular hairs 2-3 mm. Involucral bracts with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs up to 1·5 mm. 2n = 36, 45.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b bicapitatum} (P.D. Sell & C. West) P.D. Sell, {\i Bot. Jour.Linn.Soc.} {\b 71}: 259 (1976) ({\i Pilosella flagellaris} subsp.{\i bicapitata }P.D. Sell & C. West): Flowering stems up to 18 cm. Capitula (1-)2(-4); peduncles with numerous simple eglandular hairs up to 7·5 mm. Involucral bracts with dense simple eglandular hairs up to 2·5 mm. 2n = 54. •{\i  Zetland.} Br.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\i H. flagellare} has been regarded by many authors as a hybrid between {\i H. caespitosum} and {\i H. pilosella}, but its large capitula and wide distribution with little variation suggest that it is better treated as a distinct species.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. H}. × {\b flagellariforme} G. Schneider,{\i  Hier. Westsud.} 46 (1889) ({\i H. flagellare} /{\i  lactucella}). Like {\i H. flagellare} but leaves glaucous and with few simple eglandular hairs. Differs from {\i H. lactucella} in its leaves having numerous stellate hairs beneath and in its larger capitula. • {\i C. & E. Europe, from the Sudeten Mts. eastwards to N.C. Russia and W. Romania.} Cz ?Po Rm Rs (B, C).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H.} × {\b chaunadenium} Vetter & Zahn in Ascherson & Graebner,{\i  Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  12}({\b 1}): 422 (1930) ({\i H. flagellare} /{\i  pilosella} / {\i praealtum}). •{\i  Austria} ({\i W. Steiermark}). Au.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. H. lactucella} Wallr., {\i Sched. Crit. }{\b 1}: 408 (1822) ({\i H. auricula} auct., non L.). Stolons numerous, long, with numerous spathulate leaves. Rosette-leaves 20-70(-90) × 3-15 mm, spathulate or narrowly elliptical, usually obtuse, gradually narrowed below into a winged petiole, glaucous, glabrous or with scattered simple eglandular hairs up to 4 mm on the margin and midrib. Flowering stems with minute stellate hairs, numerous minute glandular hairs and sometimes occasional simple eglandular hairs, with 0-2(-3) leaves like the basal and semiamplexicaul. Inflorescence irregularly cymose; capitula 1-5. Involucral bracts linear-lanceolate, usually obtuse, usually with pale margins, with scattered stellate hairs and glandular and simple eglandular hairs usually present in various proportions. Ligules yellow, sometimes with a red stripe at apex. 2n = 18, 27, 36.{\i  Grassland; usually calcifuge. Most of Europe, except the extreme north and south.} Au Be Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant 3-8 cm; glandular hairs on involucral bracts very
\par 
  short ligules with a deep red stripe ...................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b nanum} 
\par 
1 Plant (6-)10-28(-45) cm; glandular hairs on involucral
\par 
  bracts longer and stouter; ligules without a red stripe,
\par 
  sometimes with red apex
\par 
2 Involucral bracts 5-7 × 0·5-1 mm ................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b lactucella}
\par 
2 Involucral bracts 7-9 × 1-1·25 mm ........................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b magnauricula}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nanum} (Scheele) P.D. Sell,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 259 (1976) ({\i H. nanum} Scheele,{\i  H. serpyllifolium} Fries): Plant 3-8 cm. Involucral bracts 6-8 mm, with numerous very short glandular and occasionally with some simple eglandular hairs. Ligules with a deep red stripe. •{\i  C. Appennini; Corse; Pyrenees}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lactucella}: Plant (6-)10-20(-45) cm. Involucral bracts 5-7 × 0·5-1 mm, with numerous long and short glandular
\par 

\par 
369}
\par