{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 (20-)40-110(-150) × 6-12(-18) mm, mostly narrowly elliptical, attenuate at base. Involucre 11-15 × 12-17 mm; bracts 1·5-2 mm wide at base, lanceolate, usually with dense, long simple eglandular hairs, with few glandular hairs and usually few stellate hairs. 2n = 18.{\i  Probably throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b sabulosorum} Dahlst.,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} nov. ser., {\b 23}({\b 15}): 9 (1890): Scapes 5-30 cm. Rosette-leaves 15-50 × 8-15 mm, mostly narrowly elliptical, attenuate at base. Involucre 10-13 × 11-15 mm; bracts 1·5-2 mm wide at base, lanceolate, with dense unequal glandular hairs and few to numerous stellate hairs, without or with few simple eglandular hairs. 2n = 18.{\i  Fennoscandia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b tenuiscapum} (Pugsley) P.D. Sell, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 259 (1976) ({\i H. peleteranum} var.{\i  tenuiscapum} Pugsley): Scapes (6-)12-30(-35) cm. Rosette-leaves (30-)40-70(-130) × 4-12(-16) mm, mostly oblanceolate, long-attenuate at base. Involucre 10-12(-13) × (9-)10-12(-14) mm; bracts c. 1·5 mm wide at base, linear-lanceolate, with more or less dense, long simple eglandular hairs, usually few glandular hairs and scattered stellate hairs.{\i  Probably throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b ligericum} Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  82}({\b IV.280}): 1158 (1923): Rosette-leaves 20-60 × 4-8(-12) mm, mostly oblanceolate, long-attenuate at base. Involucre 8-12 × 10-12 mm; bracts 1·5-2 mm wide at base, lanceolate, with numerous stellate hairs, rather numerous simple eglandular hairs and numerous, very small glandular hairs. {\i W.C. & S.W. Europe}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. H.} × {\b longisquamum} Peter, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  5}: 256 (1884) ({\i H. pachylodes }Naegeli & Peter, nom. illegit.;{\i  H. peleteranum} /{\i  pilosella}). Intermediate between the parents. Like{\i  H. peleteranum} but with longer stolons and smaller capitula. Differs from{\i  H. pilosella} in its thicker stolons and dense indumentum of long simple eglandular hairs. 2n = 27.{\i  N. & W.C. Europe}. • Br Fe Ga Ge He It No Rs (N) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. × {\b mayeri }Vollmann,{\i  Denkschr. Bayer. Bot. Ges. Regensb.}{\b  9}: 81 (1905) ({\i H. peleteranum} / {\i pilosella} /{\i  praealtum}). •{\i  S.E Germany} ({\i near Regensburg}). Ge.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. ×{\b  hybridiforme} Zahn in Schinz & R. Keller,{\i  Fl. Schweiz} ed. 2,{\b  2}: 265 (1905) ({\i H. adriaticiforme} (Zahn) Zahn, {\i H. leucense} F. O. Wolf; {\i H. peleteranum} /{\i  piloselloides}). • {\i W.C. Europe.} Ga Ge He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. ×{\b  promeces} Peter,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  5}: 491 (1884) ({\i H. longistolonosum }Vollmann;{\i  H. peleteranum} /{\i  praealtum}). •{\i  S.E. Germany} ({\i near Regensburg}). Ge.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. H. argyrocomum} (Fries) Zahn,{\i  Arch. Bot. Bull.} ({\i Caen}){\b  2}: 201 (1928) ({\i H. subuliferum} Naegeli & Peter). Stolons short, stout, leafy. Rosette-leaves 30-70 × 6-10 mm, oblanceolate or spathulate, more or less obtuse, with dense stellate hairs and numerous, long simple eglandular hairs on both surfaces. Scapes 17-30 cm, each with a single capitulum, with dense stellate hairs and more or less numerous, pale, long simple eglandular hairs. Involucral bracts 8-12·5 × 1-1·5 mm, linear-lanceolate, long-acute, with more or less numerous stellate hairs and dense, long, pale, flexuous, simple eglandular hairs 3-5 mm, without glandular hairs. Ligules yellow, the outer with a dark red stripe on outer face. 2n = 18. 1500-2400{\i  m. • S. & C. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. H. pilosella} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 800 (1753). Stolons usually numerous, long, slender, leafy, occasionally with a terminal capitulum. Rosette-leaves 10-120 × 5-20 mm, oblanceolate, spathulate or elliptical, obtuse or acute, with few to numerous, long, pale simple eglandular hairs on both surfaces and the margin, and dense stellate hairs beneath and sometimes also above. Scapes 5-30(-50) cm, each with a single capitulum, with dense stellate hairs and simple eglandular and glandular hairs in various proportions. Involucral bracts (6-)8-12(-15) × 0·5-1·5(-2) mm, linear-lanceolate, acute, with variable indumentum. Ligules yellow, usually with a red stripe on outer face. 2n = 18, 36, 45, 54, 63. {\i Grassy places. Most of Europe.} All except Az Cr Fa Is Sb Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucral bracts with numerous glandular and stellate
\par 
  hairs, without simple eglandular hairs
\par 
2 Glandular hairs of involucral bracts not more than 0·5 mm,
\par 
  ± equal in length ......................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b micradenium}
\par 
2 Glandular hairs of involucral bracts up to 1 mm, very 
\par 
  unequal in length ............................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b euronotum} 
\par 
1 Involucral bracts with stellate and simple eglandular 
\par 
  hairs and sometimes also glandular hairs
\par 
3 Leaves with dense stellate hairs on both surfaces ........... ({\b h}) subsp. {\b velutinum}
\par 
3 Leaves with dense stellate hairs only beneath
\par 
4 Involucral bracts with obvious simple eglandular and 
\par 
  glandular hairs
\par 
5 Hairs of involucral bracts pale .......................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b pilosella}
\par 
5 Hairs of involucral bracts dark ..................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b trichosoma}
\par 
4 Involucral bracts with dense simple eglandular hairs;
\par 
  glandular hairs absent or inconspicuous
\par 
6 Hairs of involucral bracts pale .................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b tricholepium}
\par 
6 Hairs of involucral bracts dark
\par 
7 Involucral bracts and upper part of scape with moderately
\par 
  dense dark hairs not more than 2 mm ............................... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b melanops}
\par 
7 Involucral bracts and upper part of scape with dense 
\par 
  dark hairs up to 5 mm ................................................. ({\b g}) subsp. {\b trichoscapum}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b micradenium} Naegeli & Peter,{\i  Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  1}: 164 (1885): Scapes usually 8-20 cm, with glandular, stellate and often a few, pale simple eglandular hairs in the upper part. Leaves with dense stellate hairs beneath only. Involucre 8-11 mm; bracts with numerous, short, pale or dark, more or less equal glandular hairs up to 0·5 mm and dense stellate hairs, without simple eglandular hairs. 2n = 18, 36, 45.{\i  Pastures and sandy ground. Most of Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b euronotum} Naegeli & Peter,{\i  op. cit.} 155 (1885): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but scapes up to 30 cm; involucre (8-)10-12(-15) mm; bracts with unequal glandular hairs up to 1 mm. 2n = 45.{\i  N. Europe, and on mountains further south}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b pilosella}: Scapes (5-)10-30(-40) cm, with stellate, pale simple eglandular and glandular hairs in various proportions. Leaves with dense stellate hairs beneath only. Involucre 7-10(-12) mm; bracts with numerous stellate and pale simple eglandular hairs, and with more or less numerous glandular hairs. 2n = 36.{\i  Mainly lowland. Most of Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b trichosoma} Peter, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  5}: 254 (1884): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but scapes not more than 25 cm; simple eglandular and glandular hairs on upper part of scape and involucral bracts darker and stouter. 2n = 36, 45, 54, 63.{\i  Mainly in N. & E. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b tricholepium} Naegeli & Peter,{\i  Hier. Mittel-Eur.} {\b 1}: 138 (1885): Scapes 8-25 cm, with stellate, pale simple eglandular and glandular hairs on upper part. Leaves with dense stellate hairs beneath only. Involucre 7-11 mm; bracts with dense stellate and dense, pale simple eglandular hairs, without or with inconspicuous glandular hairs. 2n = 36.{\i  Most of Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b melanops} Peter,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  5}: 254 (1884): Scapes 6-30 cm, with stellate hairs and dark simple eglandular and glandular hairs on upper part. Leaves with dense stellate hairs beneath only. Involucre 10-12(-15) mm; bracts with numerous stellate and moderately dense, dark simple eglandular hairs up to 2 mm, without or with inconspicuous glandular hairs. 2n = 36, 45. {\i Most of Europe; mainly in upland regions}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b g}) Subsp. {\b trichoscapum} Naegeli & Peter, {\i Hier. Mittel-Eur. }{\b 1}: 133 (1885): Like subsp. ({\b f}) but with dense, dark simple eglandular
\par 

\par 
368}
\par