{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 196 Ligules with short simple eglandular hairs at apex
\par 
197 Lower leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate, never panduri
\par 
    form, sessile or obscurely petiolate ............................................ {\b 250. rectum}
\par 
197 Lower leaves elliptical to ovate-elliptical or lanceolate,
\par 
    sometimes panduriform, obviously petiolate
\par 
198 Margin of receptacular pits dentate .............................. {\b 224. rapunculoides}
\par 
198 Margin of receptacular pits fimbriate-dentate ................... {\b 232. cantalicum}
\par 
196 Ligules glabrous
\par 
199 Involucre without or with very few stellate hairs
\par 
200 Leaves distinctly reticulate-veined; margins of receptacular
\par 
     pits ± dentate .......................................................................... {\b 243. inuloides}
\par 
200 Leaves not distinctly reticulate-veined; margins of 
\par 
    receptacular pits fimbriate-dentate ........................................ {\b 254. sabaudum}
\par 
199 Involucre with few to dense stellate hairs
\par 
201 Margins of receptacular pits dentate ............................ {\b 224. rapunculoides}
\par 
201 Margins of receptacular pits fimbriate-dentate
\par 
202 Leaves nearly glabrous above, with sparse simple 
\par 
    eglandular hairs beneath ................................................... {\b 255. flagelliferum}
\par 
202 Leaves with numerous simple eglandular hairs 
\par 
    throughout ........................................................................ {\b 256. lycopsifolium} 
\par 
152 Basal leaves present at anthesis
\par 
203 At least the upper cauline leaves ± amplexicaul
\par 
204 Apex of rhizome with dense long hairs
\par 
205 Stigmas yellow .................................................................. {\b 99. cordifolium}
\par 
205 Stigmas discoloured .......................................................... {\b 100. sonchoides}
\par 
204 Apex of rhizome without dense long hairs
\par 
206 Involucre with numerous to dense glandular hairs
\par 
207 Involucre with numerous simple eglandular hairs
\par 
208 Involucre 8-9·5 mm ................................................................ {\b 223. pinicola}
\par 
208 Involucre 9-18 mm
\par 
209 Involucral bracts obtuse
\par 
210 Involucre without stellate hairs .......................................... {\b 211. silesiacum}
\par 
210 Involucre with few to numerous stellate hairs .................. {\b 235. epimedium}
\par 
209 Involucral bracts acute
\par 
211 Margins of receptacular pits dentate (without cilia) ... {\b 231. doronicifolium}
\par 
211 Margins of receptacular pits ciliate-dentate
\par 
212 Involucre without stellate hairs; stigmas yellow ............. {\b 105. cerinthoides}
\par 
212 Involucre with few to numerous stellate hairs;
\par 
    stigmas discoloured .................................................................... {\b 106. alatum}
\par 
207 Involucre without or with few simple eglandular hairs
\par 
213 Involucre with numerous stellate hairs
\par 
214 Upper surface and margin of leaves with rigid hairs ................ {\b 222. viride}
\par 
214 Leaves with soft hairs
\par 
215 Lower cauline leaves with long petiole, the upper and
\par 
    median semiamplexicaul at base but not cordate ................. {\b 221. umbrosum}
\par 
215 Lower cauline leaves with very short petioles, the 
\par 
    upper and median cordate, amplexicaul .......................... {\b 224. rapunculoides}
\par 
213 Involucre without or with few stellate hairs
\par 
216 Outer involucral bracts squarrose ...................................... {\b 211. silesiacum}
\par 
216 Outer involucral bracts appressed
\par 
217 Involucral bracts acute .......................................................... {\b 200. falcatum}
\par 
217 Involucral bracts obtuse
\par 
218 Cauline leaves 2-5(-7); margins of receptacular pits
\par 
    dentate without cilia .......................................................... {\b 225. pedatifolium}
\par 
218 Cauline leaves 5-10; margins of receptacular pits 
\par 
    ciliate-dentate ..................................................................... {\b 233. turritifolium}
\par 
206 Involucre without or with few glandular hairs
\par 
219 Margins of receptacular pits ciliate-dentate
\par 
220 Cauline leaves 7-13(-20) ............................................... {\b 117. valdepilosum}
\par 
220 Cauline leaves 1-8
\par 
221 Stigmas yellow
\par 
222 Involucre without stellate hairs ....................................... {\b 105. cerinthoides}
\par 
222 Involucre with few to numerous stellate hairs ................. {\b 108. longifolium}
\par 
221 Stigmas discoloured
\par 
223 Involucre with obvious glandular hairs ................................... {\b 106. alatum}
\par 
223 Involucre without or with few inconspicuous glandular
\par 
    hairs ............................................................................... {\b 107. lamprophyllum}
\par 
219 Margins of receptacular pits dentate, without cilia
\par 
224 Outer involucral bracts squarrose
\par 
225 Involucre 14-17(-23) mm ..................................................... {\b 109. villosum}
\par 
225 Involucre (8-)9-12(-14) mm .............................................. {\b 211. silesiacum}
\par 
224 Outer involucral bracts appressed
\par 
226 Involucre with few simple eglandular hairs; 
\par 
    bracts  obtuse ..................................................................... {\b 205. neyraeanum}
\par 
226 Involucre with numerous simple eglandular hairs;
\par 
    bracts acute
\par 
227 Cauline leaves 7-13(-20)
\par 
228 At least some hairs on stem more than 5 mm ............... {\b 117. valdepilosum}
\par 
228 Hairs on stem not more than 5 mm
\par 
229 Involucre 10-12 mm ..................................................... {\b 118. wilczekianum}
\par 
229 Involucre 12-17 mm ....................................................... {\b 119. chlorifolium}
\par 
227 Cauline leaves 3-8
\par 
230 Whole plant with dense long hairs up to 8 mm, giving 
\par 
    the plant a shaggy appearance ................................................... {\b 110. pilosum}
\par 
230 Hairs not so dense and many of them shorter, the 
\par 
    plant not shaggy in appearance ...................................... {\b 231. doronicifolium}
\par 
203 Leaves not amplexicaul
\par 
231 Apex of rhizome with dense long hairs
\par 
232 Involucre with few or no stellate hairs
\par 
233 Involucre with few or no glandular hairs .............................. {\b 90. laniferum}
\par 
233 Involucre with numerous glandular hairs ......................... {\b 103. aragonense}
\par 
232 Involucre with numerous stellate hairs
\par 
234 Cauline leaves 2-3; margins of receptacular pits
\par 
    densely ciliate ................................................................... {\b 101. purpurascens}
\par 
234 Cauline leaves 0-1; margins of receptacular pits 
\par 
    sparsely ciliate ................................................................... {\b 104. loscosianum}
\par 
231 Apex of rhizome without dense long hairs
\par 
235 Cauline leaf 0-1, or cauline leaves 2 but the upper one bract-like
\par 
236 Involucre without or with few simple eglandular hairs
\par 
237 Leaves with numerous stellate hairs on upper surface ....... {\b 85. stelligerum}
\par 
237 Leaves without stellate hairs on upper surface
\par 
238 Margin of leaves with rigid hairs ............................. {\b 131. pseudoprasinops}
\par 
238 Margin of leaves with soft hairs
\par 
239 Involucre with few glandular hairs ................................. {\b 202. franconicum}
\par 
239 Involucre with numerous glandular hairs
\par 
240 Outer involucral bracts much broader and shorter than
\par 
    inner, not regularly imbricate .................................................... {\b 65. murorum}
\par 
240 Involucral bracts all narrow, regularly imbricate .............. {\b 206. austriacum}
\par 
236 Involucre with numerous simple eglandular hairs
\par 
241 Involucre without or with few glandular hairs 
\par 
242 Involucre without or with few stellate hairs 
\par 
243 Involucral bracts obtuse
\par 
244 Margin of leaves with soft hairs .............................................. {\b 74. caesium}
\par 
244 Margin of leaves with rigid hairs ..................................... {\b 89. caledonicum} 
\par 
243 Involucral bracts acute
\par 
245 Leaves truncate or rounded at base .......................................... {\b 70. incisum}
\par 

\par 
364}
\par