{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 49 Upper part of stem and peduncles with dense hairs .... {\b 148. guentheri-beckii}
\par 
48 Involucre 9-13 mm
\par 
50 Ligules glabrous ................................................................... {\b 147. dolopicum}
\par 
50 Ligules with short simple eglandular hairs at apex ........... {\b 152. calophyllum}
\par 
47 Involucre with numerous stellate hairs
\par 
51 Cauline leaves 0-3; basal leaves often present at anthesis
\par 
52 Involucre 10-15 mm; bracts acute .................................. {\b 155. sericophyllum}
\par 
52 Involucre 8-12 mm; bracts obtuse to acute ........................ {\b 157. sartorianum}
\par 
51 Cauline leaves more than 6; basal leaves absent
\par 
53 Upper part of stem and peduncles without or with few 
\par 
   simple eglandular or ± plumose hairs
\par 
54 Ligules with short simple eglandular hairs at apex ........... {\b 152. calophyllum}
\par 
54 Ligules glabrous ................................................................... {\b 154. heldreichii}
\par 
53 Upper part of stem and peduncles with numerous simple
\par 
   eglandular or ± plumose hairs
\par 
55 Upper part of stem and most of peduncles without or 
\par 
   with few stellate hairs ................................................................. {\b 145. gaudryi}
\par 
55 Upper part of stem and peduncles with numerous to 
\par 
   dense stellate hairs
\par 
56 Stems 10-40(-50) cm; leaves entire to denticulate or 
\par 
   dentate; involucre 13-20 × 15-25 mm, with dense, long 
\par 
   plumose hairs ......................................................................... {\b 142. pannosum}
\par 
56 Stems 20-100 cm; leaves denticulate to deeply dentate;
\par 
   involucre 10-17 × 8-14 mm, with less dense subplumose 
\par 
   hairs .................................................................................... {\b 153. pilosissimum} 
\par 
41 Achenes dark when mature
\par 
57 Basal leaves absent at anthesis; cauline leaves more than 6
\par 
58 Involucre without or with few simple eglandular or ± 
\par 
   plumose hairs ................................................................ {\b 143. gymnocephalum}
\par 
58 Involucre with numerous to dense simple eglandular or
\par 
   ± plumose hairs
\par 
59 Ligules with short simple eglandular hairs at apex ....... {\b 140. verbascifolium}
\par 
59 Ligules glabrous
\par 
60 Involucre without or with few stellate hairs ............................. {\b 144. pichleri}
\par 
60 Involucre with numerous stellate hairs ..................................... {\b 145. gaudryi}
\par 
57 Basal leaves present at anthesis; cauline leaves not more than 6
\par 
61 Involucre 8·5-12 mm
\par 
62 Involucre without or with few stellate hairs
\par 
63 Ligules with glandular hairs at apex ......................................... {\b 125. mixtum}
\par 
63 Ligules glabrous or with few simple eglandular hairs at apex
\par 
64 Cauline leaves 3-6 ................................................................... {\b 138. pellitum}
\par 
64 Cauline leaves 1-2 ............................................................... {\b 151. lazistanum}
\par 
62 Involucre with numerous to dense stellate hairs
\par 
65 Peduncles without or with few minute glandular hairs
\par 
66 Hairs on upper surface of leaves soft ........................................ {\b 127. pictum}
\par 
66 Hairs on upper surface of leaves rigid ........................ {\b 128. farinulentiforme}
\par 
65 Peduncles with numerous glandular hairs
\par 
67 Involucre with numerous glandular hairs, without or
\par 
   with few simple eglandular or subplumose hairs ................... {\b 133. leiopogon}
\par 
67 Involucre with few glandular hairs and numerous simple
\par 
   eglandular or subplumose hairs ................................................. {\b 134. rupestre}
\par 
61 Involucre (11-)12-20 mm
\par 
68 Cauline leaves 0-1(-3)
\par 
69 Hairs on leaves distinctly plumose ..................................... {\b 129. pulchellum}
\par 
69 Hairs on leaves subplumose or dentate ................................ {\b 132. cephalotes}
\par 
68 Cauline leaves 2-10(-16)
\par 
70 Involucre with numerous glandular hairs ........................... {\b 141. chaboissaei}
\par 
70 Involucre without or with few glandular hairs
\par 
71 Upper surface of leaves without hairs or with few 
\par 
   simple eglandular or subplumose hairs
\par 
72 Cauline leaves 3-6 ................................................................... {\b 138. pellitum} 
\par 
72 Cauline leaves 1-2 ................................................................ {\b 151. lazistanum} 
\par 
71 Upper surface of leaves with dense ± plumose hairs
\par 
73 Leaves with small glandular hairs on margin ......................... {\b 139. lansicum}
\par 
73 Leaves without glandular hairs on margin
\par 
74 Cauline leaves 5-10(-16); stigmas discoloured ............. {\b 140. verbascifolium} 
\par 
74 Cauline leaves 2-6(-8); stigmas usually yellow
\par 
75 Cauline leaves ± amplexicaul; whole plant with plumose
\par 
   hairs 4-7 mm ......................................................................... {\b 136. erioleucum}
\par 
75 Cauline leaves not amplexicaul; plumose hairs less than 4 mm
\par 
76 Hairs plumose; leaves entire to sparsely dentate, the
\par 
   cauline ovate to lanceolate ......................................................... {\b 135. lanatum}
\par 
76 Hairs subplumose; leaves strongly dentate, the cauline
\par 
   narrower ...................................................................................... {\b 137. jordanii} 
\par 
25 Leaves without plumose or subplumose hairs
\par 
77 Leaves with glandular hairs which are sometimes sparse
\par 
   and confined to the margins
\par 
78 Glandular hairs on leaves numerous, conspicuous
\par 
79 Ligules glabrous or with few hairs at apex
\par 
80 Cauline leaves (at least the upper) ± amplexicaul
\par 
81 Leaves lanceolate, linear-lanceolate or oblong .................. {\b 193. intybaceum}
\par 
81 Leaves lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate .............................. {\b 194. pallidiflorum}
\par 
80 Cauline leaves not amplexicaul, often shortly petiolate
\par 
82 Involucre with an occasional simple eglandular hair .......... {\b 195. khekianum}
\par 
82 Involucre with ± numerous eglandular hairs
\par 
83 Peduncles without or with few stellate hairs .............................. {\b 174. humile}
\par 
83 Peduncles with numerous stellate hairs
\par 
84 Involucre without or with few stellate hairs .............................. {\b 175. cottetii}
\par 
84 Involucre with dense stellate hairs ............................................. {\b 176. kerneri}
\par 
79 Ligules with numerous simple eglandular or glandular
\par 
   hairs at apex
\par 
85 Leaves all cauline (occasionally a few basal withered
\par 
   at anthesis), 5-15(-numerous)
\par 
86 Receptacular pits dentate ........................................................ {\b 191. picroides}
\par 
86 Receptacular pits fimbriate-dentate
\par 
87 Involucre with numerous to dense stellate hairs ............ {\b 189. ramosissimum}
\par 
87 Involucre without or with few stellate hairs
\par 
88 Leaves 25-170 × 10-170 mm, often panduriform .................. {\b 188. viscosum}
\par 
88 Leaves 25-115 × 10-30 mm, never panduriform ................... {\b 192. neopicris}
\par 
85 Basal leaves present at anthesis
\par 
89 Involucre 12-18 mm
\par 
90 Stem, peduncles and involucre with few to numerous
\par 
   stellate hairs; involucral bracts long-acute ........................ {\b 178. amplexicaule}
\par 
90 Stem, peduncles and involucre without or with few
\par 
   stellate hairs; involucral bracts ± acute .............................. {\b 179. chamaepicris}
\par 
89 Involucre 8-12 mm
\par 
91 Involucre with sparse stellate hairs
\par 
92 Leaves entire to remotely denticulate ........................... {\b 180. pseudocerinthe}
\par 
92 Leaves deeply and irregularly dentate ..................................... {\b 181. rupicola}
\par 
91 Involucre with numerous stellate hairs
\par 
93 Involucre 8-9 mm; stigmas discoloured ............................. {\b 190. arpadianum}
\par 
93 Involucre 9-12 mm; stigmas yellow
\par 
94 Cauline leaves (2-)3-7(-12), well-developed; capitula 
\par 
   usually 3-8 ............................................................................... {\b 182. cordatum} 
\par 
94 Cauline leaves 1-3(-4), small; capitula 10-25 ............... {\b 183. glaucophyllum}
\par 
78 Glandular hairs on leaves inconspicuous, mainly on the
\par 
   margin
\par 

\par 
361}
\par