{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min21}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min22}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages5}{\nofwords1173}{\nofchars6689}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 6 Involucral bracts without glandular hairs ............................. }{\b\fs28 9. argyrocomum}{\fs28 
\par 4 Leaves with few or no stellate hairs above
\par 7 Stolons short, thick
\par 8 Involucral bracts \'b1 obtuse ........................................................ }{\b\fs28 2. hoppeanum}{\fs28 
\par 8 Involucral bracts acute ............................................................ }{\b\fs28 7. peleteranum}{\fs28 
\par 7 Stolons long, slender
\par 9 Leaves glaucous, without stellate hairs ..................................... }{\b\fs28 16. lactucella}{\fs28 
\par 9 Leaves green, with dense stellate hairs at least beneath
\par 10 Involucral bracts 0\'b75-1\'b75 mm wide, rarely with dense,
\par    long, dark, simple eglandular hairs ............................................. }{\b\fs28 10. pilosella}{\fs28 
\par 10 Involucral bracts 1\'b75-2 mm wide, with dense, long,
\par    dark, simple eglandular hairs completely concealing 
\par    the bracts .......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 13. pseudopilosella}{\fs28 
\par 3  Flowering stems scapose or leafy, at least one of the
\par    stems with more than one capitulum
\par 11 Ligules deep orange, turning purplish when dry ................ }{\b\fs28 48. aurantiacum}{\fs28 
\par    (Most}{\i\fs28  H. aurantiacum}{\fs28  hybrids key out here and can often
\par    be distinguished by their more lax or deeply furcate inflorescence.)
\par 11 Ligules yellow, sometimes with a reddish stripe on outer face
\par 12 Capitula few, on long peduncles; involucre (8-)9-12 mm
\par    (Many hybrids between species with a single capitulum per
\par    flowering stem and species with few to numerous capitula
\par    per flowering stem key out here)
\par 13 Stolons long and thick; leaves without glandular hairs ............ }{\b\fs28 14. flagellare}{\fs28 
\par 13 Stolons absent or short and thick; leaves with few to numerous minute glandular hairs .................................. }{\b\fs28 25. sphaerocephalum}{\fs28 
\par  12 Capitula often numerous; involucre 5-9 mm
\par 14 Flowering stems usually not more than 25 cm; cauline leaves
\par     usually solitary or absent; capitula usually not more than 7
\par 15 Stolons usually long and numerous; leaves without 
\par    glandular or stellate hairs ........................................................... }{\b\fs28 16. lactucella}{\fs28 
\par 15 Stolons absent or very short; leaves with stellate or 
\par    minute glandular hairs
\par 16 Involucral bracts without simple eglandular hairs ......................... }{\b\fs28 22. vahlii}{\fs28 
\par 16 Involucral bracts with simple eglandular hairs
\par 17 Involucral bracts with rather short, simple eglandular
\par    hairs and few to numerous, short glandular hairs ......................... }{\b\fs28 23. glaciale}{\fs28 
\par 17 Involucral bracts with long, dense simple eglandular 
\par    hairs and usually few short glandular hairs 
\par 18 Leaves with \'b1 numerous stellate hairs on both surfaces;
\par    involucral bracts 6-7 mm ...................................................... }{\b\fs28 26. breviscapum}{\fs28  
\par 18 Leaves with few stellate hairs above; involucral 
\par    bracts 7-12 mm ............................................................................. }{\b\fs28 27. alpicola}{\fs28 
\par 14 Flowering stems usually more than 25 cm; cauline 
\par    leaves 1-3(-11); capitula usually more than 7
\par 19 Stem and leaves glabrous or with scattered (sometimes
\par    long) simple eglandular hairs
\par 20 Peduncles without or with few stellate hairs ...................... }{\b\fs28 28. piloselloides}{\fs28 
\par 20 Peduncles with \'b1 dense stellate hairs ...................................... }{\b\fs28 29. praealtum}{\fs28 
\par 19 Stems and leaves with numerous simple eglandular or
\par    glandular hairs
\par 21 Upper half of stem with glandular and stellate hairs only . }{\b\fs28 64. verruculatum}{\fs28 
\par 21 Upper half of stem always with simple eglandular hairs
\par    and sometimes stellate and glandular hairs
\par 22 Whole plant covered with dense, rigid simple eglandular
\par    hairs, those of the stem ascending-appressed ............................ }{\b\fs28 57. echioides}{\fs28 
\par 22 Plant with scarcely rigid hairs, those of the stem \'b1 patent
\par 23 Stolons long ......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 38. caespitosum}{\fs28  
\par 23 Stolons very short or absent 
\par 24 Flowering stems with 1-4 leaves or bracts .............................. }{\b\fs28 30. cymosum}{\fs28  
\par 24 Flowering stems with (3-)5-20 leaves or bracts ...................... }{\b\fs28 57. echioides}{\fs28  
\par 1  Stolons absent; achenes (1\'b75-)2\'b75-5 mm, the ribs 
\par    apically confluent in an obscure ring; pappus-hairs in
\par    2 rows (Subgen.}{\i\fs28  Hieracium}{\fs28 )
\par 25 Leaves with \'b1 plumose hairs, particularly on the 
\par    margin and midrib beneath
\par 26 Apex of rhizome with dense, long hairs; margins of 
\par    receptacular pits usually densely ciliate
\par 27 Involucre without or with few glandular hairs
\par 28 Involucre 6-9 mm; achenes 1\'b75-2\'b75 mm
\par 29 Achenes 2\'b73-2\'b78 mm ............................................................. }{\b\fs28 91. elisaeanum}{\fs28 
\par 29 Achenes 1\'b75-2 mm .................................................................. }{\b\fs28 92. candidum}{\fs28 
\par 28 Involucre 9-12 mm; achenes 2\'b75-3 mm
\par 30 Involucre with few stellate hairs .......................................... }{\b\fs28 93. phlomoides}{\fs28 
\par 30 Involucre with numerous stellate hairs .............................. }{\b\fs28 94. rupicaprinum}{\fs28 
\par 27 Involucre with numerous glandular hairs
\par 31 Peduncles with simple eglandular hairs .............................. }{\b\fs28 98. subsericeum}{\fs28 
\par 31 Peduncles without simple eglandular hairs
\par 32 Involucre with numerous stellate hairs ................................. }{\b\fs28 97. briziflorum}{\fs28 
\par 32 Involucre with few or no stellate hairs
\par 33 Peduncles with a few small glandular hairs, or without
\par    glandular hairs ........................................................................ }{\b\fs28 93. phlomoides}{\fs28 
\par 33 Peduncles with numerous unequal or long glandular hairs
\par 34 Leaves with dense hairs 1-3 mm ............................................ }{\b\fs28 95. eriopogon}{\fs28 
\par 34 Leaves with few to numerous hairs 1-2 mm ............................. }{\b\fs28 96. lawsonii}{\fs28 
\par 26 Apex of rhizome without dense, long hairs; margins of
\par    receptacular pits glabrous or more or less ciliate
\par 35 Leaves with numerous obvious glandular hairs; margins
\par    of receptacular pits often ciliate
\par 36 Involucre with numerous stellate hairs ........................ }{\b\fs28 185. pedemontanum}{\fs28 
\par 36 Involucre without or with few stellate hairs
\par 37 Peduncles and involucre with subplumose hairs;
\par    involucre 12-15 mm
\par 38 Ligules glabrous; achenes pale when mature ..................... }{\b\fs28 186. scapigerum}{\fs28 
\par 38 Ligules with short eglandular hairs at apex; achenes 
\par    dark when mature .................................................................. }{\b\fs28 187. urticaceum}{\fs28 
\par 37 Peduncles and involucre without subplumose hairs;
\par    involucre 9-12 mm
\par 39 Peduncles with few stellate hairs; ligules with short
\par    glandular hairs at apex .......................................................... }{\b\fs28 184. pardoanum}{\fs28 
\par 39 Peduncles with \'b1 numerous stellate hairs; ligules with
\par    short simple eglandular hairs at apex
\par 40 Cauline leaves (2-)3-7(-12), at least 1 of them large;
\par    capitula usually 3-8 .................................................................. }{\b\fs28 182. cordatum}{\fs28 
\par 40 Cauline leaves 1-3(-4), very small; capitula 10-25 ....... }{\b\fs28 183. glaucophyllum}{\fs28 
\par 35 Leaves without glandular hairs or with occasional
\par    minute glandular hairs along the margin; receptacular
\par    pits without cilia
\par 41 Achenes pale when mature
\par 42 Involucre with few or no simple eglandular or \'b1 plumose hairs
\par 43 Basal rosette present at anthesis; cauline leaves 2-6 ..... }{\b\fs28 149. scheppigianum}{\fs28 
\par 43 Basal rosette absent or withered at anthesis; cauline
\par    leaves more than 6, often crowded towards base to form
\par    a false rosette
\par 44 Involucre with numerous stellate hairs ................................ }{\b\fs28 146. waldsteinii}{\fs28 
\par 44 Involucre with few or no stellate hairs 
\par 45 Involucre 12-15 mm ................................................... }{\b\fs28 143. gymnocephalum}{\fs28  
\par 45 Involucre 9-13 mm
\par 46 Involucre glabrous or with a few simple eglandular 
\par    hairs ................................................................................ }{\b\fs28 150. mirificissimum}{\fs28  
\par 46 Involucre with scattered stellate hairs, sparse to 
\par    dense minute glandular hairs and sometimes a few 
\par    simple eglandular hairs ................................................................ }{\b\fs28 156. jankae}{\fs28 
\par 42 Involucre with numerous or dense simple eglandular 
\par    or \'b1 plumose hairs
\par 47 Involucre without or with few stellate hairs
\par 48 Involucre 12-16 mm
\par 49 Upper part of stem and peduncles with few or no hairs ........... }{\b\fs28 144. pichleri}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 360}
\par }