{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 245 Leaves cuneate to attenuate at base
\par 
246 Margins of receptacular pits ciliate-dentate ...................... {\b 126. mixtiforme}
\par 
246 Margins of receptacular pits fimbriate-dentate, without cilia
\par 
247 Basal leaves lanceolate to oblong, entire ............................. {\b 120. piliferum}
\par 
247 Basal leaves elliptical to lanceolate, denticulate to
\par 
    dentate .................................................................................... {\b 122. aphyllum}
\par 
242 Involucre with numerous stellate hairs
\par 
248 Involucre 14-17 mm .......................................................... {\b 132. cephalotes}
\par 
248 Involucre 9-12 mm
\par 
249 Upper surface of leaves with numerous simple eglandular hairs
\par 
250 Leaves green .................................................................. {\b 69. fuscocinereum}
\par 
250 Leaves ± glaucous ................................................................... {\b 74. caesium}
\par 
249 Upper surface of leaves glabrous or with very few 
\par 
    simple eglandular hairs
\par 
251 Outer involucral bracts broader and much shorter than inner,
\par 
     not regularly imbricate; hairs of involucre often dark at base ... {\b 74. caesium}
\par 
251 Involucral bracts all narrow, regularly imbricate;
\par 
    hairs of involucre not dark at base
\par 
252 Peduncles with numerous glandular hairs ............................. {\b 207. dollineri}
\par 
252 Peduncles without or with few glandular hairs .................... {\b 203. oxyodon} 
\par 
241 Involucre with numerous glandular hairs
\par 
253 Involucre without or with few stellate hairs
\par 
254 Ligules with short simple eglandular hairs at apex
\par 
255 Leaves not spotted or blotched; stigmas dark ........................ {\b 164. atratum}
\par 
255 Leaves spotted or blotched; stigmas yellow
\par 
256 Base of leaves truncate ........................................................ {\b 66. glaucinum}
\par 
256 Base of leaves attenuate ................................................... {\b 82. sommerfeltii}
\par 
254 Ligules glabrous
\par 
257 Leaves with numerous hairs on upper surface
\par 
258 Margins of receptacular pits ciliate-dentate ........................... {\b 84. bourgaei}
\par 
258 Margins of receptacular pits dentate, without cilia ......... {\b 124. armerioides}
\par 
257 Leaves subglabrous on upper surface
\par 
259 Leaves spotted or blotched ............................................... {\b 82. sommerfeltii}
\par 
259 Leaves not spotted or blotched
\par 
260 Peduncles with dense glandular hairs; margins of
\par 
    receptacular pits sparsely ciliate ....................................... {\b 83. aymericianum}
\par 
260 Peduncles with few small glandular hairs; margins of
\par 
    receptacular pits without cilia ................................................ {\b 87. saxifragum}
\par 
253 Involucre with numerous stellate hairs
\par 
261 Stigmas discoloured
\par 
262 Ligules with short simple eglandular hairs at apex ........... {\b 167. rohacsense}
\par 
262 Ligules glabrous ....................................................................... {\b 67. bifidum}
\par 
261 Stigmas yellow
\par 
263 Leaves without spots or blotches
\par 
264 Simple eglandular hairs of involucre pale ............................. {\b 80. schmidtii}
\par 
264 Simple eglandular hairs of involucre dark .......................... {\b 163. senescens}
\par 
263 Leaves spotted or blotched
\par 
265 Leaves with numerous hairs on upper surface ................... {\b 130. caesioides}
\par 
265 Leaves subglabrous on upper surface
\par 
266 Basal leaves truncate or rounded at base ..................... {\b 81. hypochoeroides}
\par 
266 Basal leaves attenuate at base .......................................... {\b 82. sommerfeltii}
\par 
235 At least 2 cauline leaves large
\par 
267 Involucre without or with few simple eglandular hairs
\par 
268 Involucre without or with few stellate hairs
\par 
269 Outer involucral bracts ± squarrose ................................... {\b 211. silesiacum}
\par 
269 Outer involucral bracts appressed
\par 
270 Involucre without or with few glandular hairs
\par 
271 Involucral bracts acute ......................................................... {\b 200. falcatum}
\par 
271 Involucral bracts obtuse
\par 
272 Leaves glaucous ..................................................................... {\b 209. saxatile}
\par 
272 Leaves green ...................................................................... {\b 258. laevigatum}
\par 
270 Involucre with numerous glandular hairs
\par 
273 Peduncles with numerous glandular hairs
\par 
274 Involucral bracts 7-8 mm ................................................... {\b 78. rotundatum}
\par 
274 Involucral bracts 9-11 mm .................................................. {\b 79. diaphanum}
\par 
273 Peduncles without or with few glandular hairs
\par 
275 Leaves glaucous, the cauline 2-6(-15) ...................... {\b 215. macrodontoides}
\par 
275 Leaves green, the cauline (4-)8-25(-numerous) ................ {\b 258. laevigatum}
\par 
268 Involucre with more or less numerous stellate hairs
\par 
276 Involucre with numerous glandular hairs
\par 
277 Involucral bracts acute
\par 
278 Leaves green, ± dentate ..................................................... {\b 77. argillaceum}
\par 
278 Leaves glaucous, usually entire ..................................... {\b 213. heterogynum}
\par 
277 Involucral bracts obtuse
\par 
279 Cauline leaves 4 or more .................................................. {\b 258. laevigatum}
\par 
279 Cauline leaves not more than 3
\par 
280 Stigmas yellow ............................................................... {\b 202. franconicum}
\par 
280 Stigmas discoloured .......................................................... {\b 206. austriacum}
\par 
276 Involucre without or with few glandular hairs
\par 
281 Involucral bracts obtuse
\par 
282 Leaves 1-3(-4·5) mm wide ............................................... {\b 196. porrifolium}
\par 
282 Leaves more than 4·5 mm wide
\par 
283 Leaves green ..................................................................... {\b 258. laevigatum}
\par 
283 Leaves glaucous
\par 
284 Leaves without stellate hairs beneath ................................... {\b 198. glaucum}
\par 
284 Leaves with few to numerous stellate hairs beneath .............. {\b 209. saxatile}
\par 
281 Involucral bracts acute
\par 
285 Leaves with numerous hairs on upper surface ..................... {\b 113. ctenodon}
\par 
285 Leaves glabrous or nearly so on upper surface
\par 
286 Cauline leaves 2-6(-10); involucre 9-11(-13) mm ................ {\b 198. glaucum}
\par 
286 Cauline leaves 3-15; involucre 10-13 mm ........................ {\b 208. calcareum}
\par 
267 Involucre with ± numerous simple eglandular hairs
\par 
287 Involucre with few to numerous glandular hairs
\par 
288 Involucre with few to numerous stellate hairs
\par 
289 Involucre dark, with dark simple eglandular hairs ............. {\b 163. senescens}
\par 
289 Involucre greenish, with pale simple eglandular hairs
\par 
290 Leaves spotted ..................................................................... {\b 73. maculatum}
\par 
290 Leaves not spotted
\par 
291 Involucral bracts shortly acute ............................................... {\b 71. vulgatum}
\par 
291 Involucral bracts long-acute ................................................ {\b 72. benzianum}
\par 
288 Involucre without or with few stellate hairs
\par 
292 Involucral bracts obtuse ..................................................... {\b 211. silesiacum}
\par 
292 Involucral bracts acute
\par 
293 Involucral bracts with pale hairs; ligules glabrous
\par 
294 Upper surface of leaves with numerous simple hairs,
\par 
    the cauline 2-12 .................................................................... {\b 86. onosmoides}
\par 
294 Upper surface of leaves glabrous or nearly so, the 
\par 
    cauline 2-4(-6) ....................................................................... {\b 87. saxifragum}
\par 
293 Involucral bracts with dark or dark-based hairs;
\par 
    ligules usually with short simple eglandular hairs 
\par 
    at apex
\par 

\par 
365}
\par