{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves with dense stellate hairs above ............................ ({\b e}) subsp. {\b cilicicum}
\par 
1 Leaves without stellate hairs above 
\par 
2 Involucre with numerous simple eglandular hairs,
\par 
  without or with few glandular hairs
\par 
3 Involucral bracts (8-)11-14 × 2-4 mm, ± ovate, the 
\par 
  margins pale and without hairs ..................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b hoppeanum}
\par 
3 Involucral bracts 9-12 × 1·5-3 mm, lanceolate or 
\par 
  narrowly ovate, the margins not pale and with numerous
\par 
  hairs ............................................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b pilisquamum} 
\par 
2 Involucre with numerous glandular hairs, without or
\par 
  with few simple eglandular hairs
\par 
4 Involucral bracts 10-12 × 1·5-2·5 mm, with unequal 
\par 
  glandular hairs which are often dark throughout their 
\par 
  length ........................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b testimoniale}
\par 
4 Involucral bracts 6-10 × 1·3-2 mm, with short glandular
\par 
  hairs which are usually dark only at the base ..................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b troicum}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b hoppeanum}: Leaves without stellate hairs above. Involucral bracts (8-)11-14 × 2-4 mm, more or less ovate, in the central part with numerous long simple eglandular hairs which are dark at least in their basal half, without or with few glandular hairs; margins pale, without hairs. •{\i  Alps}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pilisquamum} Naegeli & Peter, {\i Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  1}: 124 (1885): Leaves without stellate hairs above. Involucral bracts 9-12 × 1·5-3 mm, lanceolate or narrowly ovate, with numerous simple eglandular hairs which are pale throughout or dark only at the very base, without or with few glandular hairs; margins not pale, covered with hairs. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b testimoniale} Naegeli ex Peter, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  5}: 251 (1884): Leaves without stellate hairs above. Involucral bracts 10-12 × 1·5-2·5 mm, lanceolate to narrowly ovate, with numerous unequal, dark, broad-based glandular hairs, without or with few simple eglandular hairs; margins not pale, covered with hairs.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b troicum} Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  82}({\b IV.280}): 1153 (1923): Leaves without stellate hairs above. Involucral bracts 6-10 × 1·3-2 mm, more or less lanceolate, with numerous short glandular hairs which are dark only,at the base, without or with few simple eglandular hairs; margins rarely pale, usually covered with stellate hairs.{\i  Balkan peninsula and E.C. Europe, extending to N. Italy}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b cilicicum} Naegeli & Peter,{\i  Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  1}: 121 (1885): Leaves with dense stellate hairs above. Involucral bracts 10-11 × 1·5-2 mm, with numerous short glandular hairs, without or with few simple eglandular hairs; margins not pale, with hairs. {\i Bulgaria }({\i E. Stara Planina}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Subsp. {\b lydia} Bornm. & Zahn in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich}{\b  82}({\b IV.280}): 1154 (1923), from Turkey-in-Europe and W. Anatolia, differs from subsp. ({\b b}) in its narrower, more acute, involucral bracts; in this respect it is very like{\i  H}. × {\i hypeuryum.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H.} × {\b viridifolium} Peter, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  5}: 258 (1884) ({\i H. latisquamum} Naegeli & Peter, nom. illegit.; {\i H. hoppeanum} /{\i  lactucella}). Intermediate between the parents, but variable. Like {\i H. hoppeanum} but leaves more glaucous; capitula 2-3(-5), on long peduncles; involucral bracts 6-9 mm, narrower. Differs from {\i H. lactucella} in its thicker stolons, larger leaves which have dense stellate hairs beneath, and larger capitula. 1700-2500{\i  m. • C. Europe, extending to C. Jugoslavia.} Au Ge He Hu It Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. H}. × {\b hypeuryum} Peter,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  5}: 255 (1884) ({\i H. hoppeanum }/ {\i pilosella}). Like {\i H. hoppeanum} but with more numerous, longer, more slender stolons. 1400-2600 {\i m. S. & S.C. Europe.} Al Au Bu Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Rs (K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Over a large part of its range this taxon grows with its parents and is clearly of hybrid origin, but in other places, particularly the Pyrenees, {\i H. hoppeanum} has not been recorded and {\i H. pilosella} is local.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. H}. × {\b ruprechtii} Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  3}: 861 (1875) ({\i H. arnoseroides} Naegeli & Peter, {\i H. biglanum} Bornm. & Zahn,{\i  H. raiblense }(Huter ex Naegeli & Peter) Zahn; {\i H. hoppeanum} / {\i piloselloides}). Intermediate between the parents. Differs from {\i H. hoppeanum} in its more or less glaucous leaves, capitula 2-7 on long peduncles, and involucre 6-9·5 mm, and from {\i H. piloselloides }in its fewer, larger capitula.{\i  C. Europe and Balkan peninsula. }Au Bu Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. H}. × {\b tephrocephalum} Vuk., {\i Hier. Croat.} 8 (1858) ({\i H. hoppeanum} / {\i praealtum}). Not morphologically distinguishable from{\i  H.} ×{\i  ruprechtii} and only recognizable when growing with both parents ({\i H. piloselloides} and {\i H. praealtum} do not usually grow together).{\i  C. & S.E. Europe.} Al Au Bu Ge Hu It Ju Rm Rs (K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Much of the distribution and synonymy of the last two hybrids is doubtful, because of the impossibility of recognizing them unless the parents are recorded.
\par 

\par 
  {\b H}. × {\b byzantinum} (Boiss.) Zahn in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich}{\b  82}({\b IV. 280}): 1194 (1923) ({\i H. hoppeanum} / {\i pseudopilosella}). {\i Turkey-in-Europe.} Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. H. peleteranum} Merat, {\i Nouv. Fl. Env. Paris} 305 (1812). Stolons few, short, stout, with large, crowded leaves. Rosette-leaves lanceolate, oblanceolate, oblong or elliptical, obtuse to acute, green, with more or less numerous subrigid simple eglandular hairs 4-6 mm on both surfaces and the margin, and dense stellate hairs and short simple eglandular hairs beneath. Scapes up to 30 cm, each with a single capitulum, with numerous, often dense stellate hairs and more or less numerous simple eglandular and glandular hairs Involucral bracts 8-15 × 1·5-3 mm, lanceolate, acute, densely covered with long simple eglandular hairs 3-4 mm, few to numerous stellate hairs and usually few or no (sometimes numerous) short glandular hairs. Ligules yellow, the outer usually with a dark red stripe on outer face. 2n = 18, 27, 36, 45.{\i  Dry, sandy or rocky places up to }2600 {\i m. N., W. & W.C. Europe. }Au Be Br Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs It Lu No Rs (N) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucral bracts with numerous glandular hairs, without
\par 
  or with few simple eglandular hairs ............................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b sabulosorum}
\par 
1 Involucral bracts without or with few glandular hairs,
\par 
  and with numerous to dense simple eglandular hairs
\par 
2 Involucral bracts with numerous but not dense simple 
\par 
  eglandular hairs, small but obvious glandular hairs and
\par 
  numerous stellate hairs ..................................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b ligericum}
\par 
2 Involucral bracts usually with dense simple eglandular 
\par 
  hairs and few stellate hairs, without or with few 
\par 
  glandular hairs
\par 
3 Scapes up to 12(-18) cm; rosette-leaves 9-20 mm wide,
\par 
  cuneate or shortly attenuate at base .............................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b peleteranum}
\par 
3 Scapes (6-)10-30 cm; rosette-leaves 4-12(-18) mm wide,
\par 
  distinctly attenuate at base
\par 
4 Involucre 11-15 × 12-17 mm; bracts lanceolate, 1·5-2 mm
\par 
  wide at base ............................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b subpeleteranum}
\par 
4 Involucre 10-12(-13) × (9-)10-12(-14) mm; bracts linear
\par 
  lanceolate, c. 1·5 mm wide at base ............................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b tenuiscapum}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b peleteranum}: Scapes up to 12(-18) cm. Rosette-leaves 21-87 × 9-20 mm, mostly oblanceolate or elliptical, cuneate or shortly attenuate at base. Involucre 11-15 × 12-20 mm; bracts 1·5-3 mm wide at base, lanceolate, with dense, long simple eglandular hairs, rarely with few minute glandular hairs, usually with few stellate hairs. 2n = 18.{\i  Mainly in coastal areas.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b subpeleteranum} Naegeli & Peter,{\i  Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  1}: 129 (1885): Scapes (6-)10-20(-30) cm. Rosette-leaves
\par 

\par 
367}
\par