{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 149 Leaves hairy throughout .................................................... {\b 167. rohacsense}
\par 
149 Leaves glabrous or nearly so above
\par 
150 Stigmas yellow ............................................................. {\b 68. subcaesiiforme}
\par 
150 Stigmas discoloured ............................................................ {\b 204. fulcratum}
\par 
77  Leaves without glandular hairs
\par 
151 Capitula with few florets, nodding in bud ............................. {\b 212. sparsum}
\par 
151 Capitula with numerous florets, erect in bud
\par 
152 Basal leaves absent or withered at anthesis
\par 
153 Leaves not amplexicaul
\par 
154 Cauline leaves 0-2 ............................................................ {\b 157. sartorianum}
\par 
154 Cauline leaves numerous
\par 
155 Achenes pale when mature
\par 
156 Leaves with rigid, patent, bulbous-based simple 
\par 
    eglandular hairs .................................................................... {\b 217. olympicum}
\par 
156 Leaves glabrous or with a few stellate and simple
\par 
    eglandular hairs beneath ................................................... {\b 218. leiocephalum}
\par 
155 Achenes dark when mature
\par 
157 Involucre with numerous stellate hairs
\par 
158 Involucre without or with few glandular hairs ...................... {\b 76. ramosum}
\par 
158 Involucre with numerous glandular hairs ......................... {\b 216. tommasinii}
\par 
157 Involucre without or with few stellate hairs
\par 
159 Margins of leaves revolute .............................................. {\b 257. umbellatum}
\par 
159 Margins of leaves not revolute
\par 
160 Leaves green ..................................................................... {\b 258. laevigatum}
\par 
160 Leaves glaucous
\par 
161 Involucre 11-13 mm, the outer bracts ± squarrose ............. {\b 219. virgicaule}
\par 
161 Involucre 12-15 mm, the bracts appressed ......... {\b 220. pseudobupleuroides}
\par 
153 At least the upper leaves ± amplexicaul
\par 
162 Cauline leaves not more than 6
\par 
163 Involucre with few simple eglandular hairs ................... {\b 225. pedatifolium}
\par 
163 Involucre with numerous simple eglandular hairs
\par 
164 Leaves elliptic-lanceolate or lanceolate, the upper
\par 
    sometimes panduriform; involucre 8-9·5 mm ........................ {\b 234. segureum}
\par 
164 Leaves elliptical; involucre 9-13 mm
\par 
165 Cauline leaves (1-)2-6(-7), subpetiolate or sessile;
\par 
    ligules often with simple eglandular hairs at apex ............... {\b 235. epimedium}
\par 
165 Cauline leaves (3-)4-8(-10), the lower with a 
\par 
    distinct winged petiole; ligules glabrous ................................. {\b 237. dovrense} 
\par 
162 Cauline leaves more than 6
\par 
166 Achenes pale when mature
\par 
167 Ligules with short simple eglandular hairs at apex
\par 
168 Involucre with numerous simple eglandular hairs
\par 
169 Involucral bracts acute .................................................. {\b 230. cydonifolium}
\par 
169 Involucral bracts obtuse
\par 
170 Involucre with numerous stellate and glandular hairs ..... {\b 228. juraniforme}
\par 
170 Involucre with few stellate and few glandular hairs ................. {\b 249. nobile}
\par 
168 Involucre without or with few simple eglandular hairs
\par 
171 Involucre with numerous stellate hairs ....................... {\b 251. symphytaceum}
\par 
171 Involucre without or with few stellate hairs
\par 
172 Stem and leaves with dense, soft simple eglandular hairs . {\b 229. pocuticum}
\par 
172 Stem and leaves with few (rarely numerous) simple
\par 
    eglandular hairs 
\par 
173 Leaves 10-30(-50); involucre 8-12 mm ....................... {\b 226. prenanthoides}
\par 
173 Leaves 5-15(-18); involucre 7-8·5 mm ................................. {\b 227. juranum}
\par 
167 Ligules glabrous
\par 
174 Plant lanate at least in the lower part with dense,
\par 
    long simple eglandular hairs
\par 
175 Upper part of plant with dense simple eglandular 
\par 
    hairs up to 4 mm .................................................................. {\b 259. eriophorum}
\par 
175 Upper part of plant with less dense simple eglandular
\par 
    hairs up to 2·5 mm ................................................................ {\b 260. prostratum}
\par 
174 Plant not lanate
\par 
176 Involucre 8-9 mm, glabrous or nearly so ....................... {\b 253. bracteolatum}
\par 
176 Involucre 9-15 mm, hairy
\par 
177 Involucre without or with few simple eglandular hairs
\par 
178 Leaves entire or remotely denticulate, glabrous or nearly so. {\b 245. lucidum}
\par 
178 Leaves subentire to dentate, with few to numerous 
\par 
    simple eglandular hairs
\par 
179 Leaves never panduriform; peduncles with few to  numerous
\par 
    simple eglandular hairs; involucre 10-14(-16) mm ............ {\b 246. racemosum}
\par 
179 Leaves sometimes panduriform; peduncles without or 
\par 
    with few simple eglandular hairs;
\par 
    involucre (7-)9-10(-12) mm ........................................... {\b 251. symphytaceum}
\par 
177 Involucre with numerous simple eglandular hairs
\par 
180 Plant with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs;
\par 
    leaves 10-numerous ............................................................ {\b 246. racemosum}
\par 
180 Plant with dense simple eglandular hairs; leaves 
\par 
    5-numerous
\par 
181 Lower leaves oblong-lanceolate or lingulate ................ {\b 247. pseuderiopus}
\par 
181 Lower leaves ± elliptical .......................................................... {\b 249. nobile} 
\par 
166 Achenes dark when mature 
\par 
182 Involucral bracts acute
\par 
183 Involucral bracts with dense simple eglandular hairs 
\par 
    up to 5 mm, and few small glandular hairs ...................... {\b 117. valdepilosum}
\par 
183 Involucral bracts with few to numerous shorter simple
\par 
    eglandular hairs and few to numerous glandular hairs .....{\b 230. cydonifolium} 
\par 
182 Involucral bracts obtuse
\par 
184 Involucre with numerous simple eglandular hairs
\par 
185 Ligules with short simple eglandular hairs at apex ......... {\b 236. carpathicum}
\par 
185 Ligules glabrous
\par 
186 Involucre without or with very few stellate hairs ............... {\b 254. sabaudum}
\par 
186 Involucre with few to dense stellate hairs
\par 
187 Margins of receptacular pits ± dentate
\par 
188 Leaves (4-)8-20(-30); capitula not more than 10 ............... {\b 239. truncatum}
\par 
188 Leaves 15-50; capitula usually more than 10 ...................... {\b 244. crocatum}
\par 
187 Margins of receptacular pits fimbriate-dentate
\par 
189 Leaves densely hairy throughout; peduncles with 
\par 
    numerous simple eglandular hairs ............................................... {\b 249. nobile}
\par 
189 Leaves with few hairs, the upper surface sometimes 
\par 
    nearly glabrous; peduncles without or with few simple
\par 
    eglandular hairs 
\par 
190 Peduncles with minute glandular hairs ................................ {\b 252. insuetum} 
\par 
190 Peduncles without glandular hairs ..................................... {\b 254. sabaudum}
\par 
184 Involucre without or with few simple eglandular hairs
\par 
191 Involucre without or with few glandular hairs
\par 
192 Involucre with numerous stellate hairs
\par 
193 Involucre 8·5-10 mm ........................................................... {\b 242. robustum}
\par 
193 Involucre 10-12 mm ..................................................... {\b 256. lycopsifolium}
\par 
192 Involucre without or with few stellate hairs
\par 
194 Involucre 8·5-10 mm ............................................................. {\b 241. virosum}
\par 
194 Involucre 10-13 mm
\par 
195 Leaves distinctly reticulate-veined, with short rigid
\par 
    hairs on the margin ................................................................. {\b 240. latifolium}
\par 
195 Leaves not distinctly reticulate-veined, with long 
\par 
    hairs on the margin ................................................................ {\b 254. sabaudum}
\par 
191 Involucre with numerous glandular hairs
\par 

\par 
363}
\par