{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 antrorsely scabrid; margin not or slightly revolute. Inflorescence oblong, narrowly ovoid to pyramidal; partial inflorescences with 7-11(-16) flowers at the 2 nodes below the central flower peduncles 2-7 mm, (½-)1-3(-4) times as long as the pedicels; pedicels 0·5-2·5 mm, widely divaricate after anthesis. Corolla 0·5-1 mm in diameter, greenish inside, reddish outside, more or less glabrous; lobes acute. Fruit 0·8-1 mm, glabrous or with curved hairs, finely papillose. 2n = 44, 66. {\i Cultivated fields, roadsides and other dry, open habitats. S., W. & C. Europe, northwards to E. England, and eastwards to S. Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria.} Al Au Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Polymorphic. In S.W. Europe variants are found with few flowered partial inflorescences and large fruits with hooked hairs ({\b G. decipiens} Jordan,{\i  Obs. Pl. Crit.}{\b  3}: 178 (1846)). In the same region populations transitional to {\b 140} occur.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 140. G. divaricatum} Pourret ex Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  2}: 580 (1788) ({\i G. parisiense} subsp.{\i  divaricatum} (Pourret ex Lam.) Rouy & Camus). Stems 5-30 cm, erect, more slender and less strongly retrorsely aculeolate than {\b 139}, nearly smooth above. Leaves 4-10 × 0·3-1·5(-2) mm, in whorls of 6-8, narrowly lanceolate to linear, the upper often slightly hispid above; the margin and midrib antrorsely scabrid; margin not or slightly revolute. Inflorescence broadly ovoid, lax; partial inflorescences with 5-13 flowers at the 2 nodes below the central flower; peduncles 5-20 mm, (2-)3-7(-10) times as long as the pedicels; pedicels 0·5-2·5 mm, filiform, somewhat deflexed after anthesis. Corolla 0·5-1 mm in diameter, yellowish-red, glabrous; lobes not or shortly apiculate. Fruit 0·5-0·7 mm, glabrous, finely papillose. 2n = 44.{\i  Dry, open habitats. S. Europe, extending locally northwards to N.W. France and S.E. Czechoslovakia.} Al ?.Az Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si Tu [Be He].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Not very variable, and usually quite distinct from {\b 139} and {\b 141}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 141. G. tenuissimum} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 104 (1808). Stems 10-45 cm, rather stout, retrorsely aculeolate, not glabrescent above. Leaves 10-15 × 0·8-2 mm, in whorls of (6-)8-10, linear-lanceolate, glabrous or with short, scattered hairs above; margin not or slightly revolute, antrorsely scabrid. Inflorescence diffuse, ovoid to pyramidal; partial inflorescences usually with 7-11(-14) flowers at the 2 nodes below the central flower; peduncles 5-15 mm, filiform; pedicels 3-15 mm, filiform, elongating and more or less divaricate after anthesis. Corolla 1-1·7 mm in diameter, greenish-yellow, glabrous or more or less hairy. Fruit c. 1 mm, hairy or glabrous, papillose. 2n = 22, 44. {\i Dry, stony ground. E. & C. parts of Balkan peninsula, extending to W. Hungary and Krym.} Bu Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (W, K) Tu [He]. ({\i W. & C. Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 142. G. minutulum} Jordan, {\i Obs. Pl. Crit.}{\b  3}: 182 (1846). Stems 2-10 cm, ascending, very delicate, more or less retrorsely aculeolate. Leaves 1·5-3 × 0·8-1 mm, in whorls of 4, obovate to elliptical, narrowing to the base, cuspidate, bright green, blackish when dry; margin antrorsely scabrid. Flowers solitary or in pairs, scarcely exceeding the leaf-whorls; pedicels short, straight, erect to patent. Corolla very small, whitish; lobes oblong-ovate, acute. Fruit less than 1 mm, ovoid, with hooked hairs. Shady rocks, mediterranean coasts and hills. {\i • S.W. Europe,from S. Portugal to Arcipelago Toscano.} Ga Hs It Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 143. G. recurvum} Req. ex DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 4}: 609 (1830). Stems 3-11 cm, slender, ascending to erect, much branched at the base, but without branches above, retrorsely aculeolate below, often with dense patent hairs above. Leaves 3-8 × 1-3·5 mm, in whorls of (4-)6-7, oblanceolate to ovate, acute, hairy to glabrescent; margin and midrib antrorsely scabrid, margin revolute. Inflorescence cylindrical; partial inflorescences short, scarcely exceeding the bracts, 2- to 3-flowered and distinctly pedunculate, or flowers solitary. Pedicels 1-3 mm, deflexed after anthesis. Corolla c. 1 mm in diameter, yellowish-red, usually hairy externally; lobes acute. Fruit 0·7-1 mm, ovoid; mericarps curved and separated from one another, densely covered with hooked setae (rarely glabrous).{\i  Dry, stony places. N. Sporadhes, Kikladhes.} Gr. ({\i W. Anatolia, Cyprus.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Related to{\b  144} and connected with it by intermediates.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 144. G. verticillatum} Danth. in Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  2}: 585 (1788). Like {\b 143} but stems 8-18 cm, erect, not very hairy to glabrescent; leaves 4-8 × 1-1·8 mm, lanceolate to oblong; flowers forming dense whorls in the leaf-axils; peduncles very short, hardly visible; pedicels usually less than 1 mm, straight and erect after anthesis; corolla 1-1·5 mm in diameter, pubescent or glabrous externally. 2n = 22, 44. {\i Dry places. Mediterranean region and S.E. Europe}. Al Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rm Rs (W, K) Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 145. G. murale} (L.) All., {\i Fl. Pedem.}{\b  1}: 8 (1785). Stems 5-20 cm, procumbent or ascending from a much-branched base, but usually without branches above, smooth or retrorsely aculeolate (also with patent hairs above). Leaves 4-10 × 0·8-2·5 mm, in whorls of 4-6, widely to narrowly oblanceolate, shortly awned, hairy to glabrescent. Inflorescence cylindrical, few-flowered, with 1-4 flowers in each whorl, in 2-flowered partial inflorescences or solitary; pedicels 0·5-1·5 mm, shorter than the bracts, deflexed after anthesis. Corolla c. 0·7 mm in diameter, yellowish, glabrous or somewhat hairy externally; lobes acute. Fruit 1·3-1·5 mm, cylindrical; mericarps curved and separated from one another, often unequal, and with hooked setae especially towards the apex (rarely glabrous). 2n = 44. {\i Roadsides, rocky ground and other dry, open habitats. Mediterranean region and S. W. Europe.} Al Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 6.        Callipeltis}        Steven
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By F. Ehrendorfer.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves in whorls of 4(-6). Inflorescences mono- or dichasial; cymes mostly 5- to 7-flowered, the central flower naked, the lateral subtended by a large, membranous, veined bracteole. Calyx absent. Corolla minute, yellowish-green, rotate, with 3 to 4 lobes. Stigmas capitate. Fruit dry, cylindrical; mericarp usually 1.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. cucullaris} (L.) Rothm.,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 50}: 72 (1941) ({\i C. cucullaria} DC.). Stems 5-20 cm, slightly scabrid or smooth. Leaves 3-12 × 1-4 mm, narrowly obovate to oblanceolate, obtuse, glabrous or sparsely puberulent, somewhat scabrid on the margin with points directed forward. Cymes sessile; bracteoles enlarging to 3-5 mm in fruit, obovate, narrowed towards base, usually plicate and folded lengthwise around fruit. Corolla c. 0·5 mm, cup-shaped. Fruit 1·2-1·8 mm, cylindrical, slightly curved, hispidulous mainly towards apex. {\i Dry places. C. & S. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N. Africa, S.W. & C. Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 7.          Cruciata}           Miller 
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By F. Ehrendorfer.
\par 
 
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs, sometimes woody. Leaves in whorls of 4, 1- to 3-veined. Inflorescence narrow, with whorls of short axillary cymes; central flowers hermaphrodite, the lateral male
\par 

\par 

\par 
36}
\par