{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 95 At least the upper cauline leaves ± amplexicaul
\par 
96 Ligules glabrous
\par 
97 Basal leaves present at anthesis; cauline usually not more than 12
\par 
98 Involucre without or with few glandular hairs,
\par 
   stellate hairs absent ................................................................ {\b 211. silesiacum}
\par 
98 Involucre with numerous glandular and stellate hairs ................. {\b 222. viride}
\par 
97 Basal leaves absent at anthesis; cauline usually more than 12
\par 
99 Involucre 11-15 mm, without simple eglandular hairs ............ {\b 245. lucidum}
\par 
99 Involucre 9-11 mm, with numerous simple eglandular hairs . {\b 252. insuetum}
\par 
96 Ligules with short hairs at apex
\par 
100 Involucral bracts mostly ± obtuse
\par 
101 Cauline leaves more than 10
\par 
102 Leaves entire to denticulate ............................................ {\b 248. compositum}
\par 
102 Leaves deeply dentate .............................................................. {\b 250. rectum}
\par 
101 Cauline leaves not more than 10
\par 
103 Involucre 12-16 mm .............................................................. {\b 171. nigritum}
\par 
103 Involucre 9-12 mm
\par 
104 Involucre with few glandular hairs
\par 
105 Involucre with few simple eglandular hairs and dense
\par 
    stellate hairs ........................................................................ {\b 205. neyraeanum}
\par 
105 Involucre with numerous simple eglandular hairs and 
\par 
    few stellate hairs .............................................................. {\b 238. semidovrense}
\par 
104 Involucre with numerous glandular hairs
\par 
106 Involucre with few stellate hairs ........................................ {\b 170. sudeticum}
\par 
106 Involucre with numerous stellate hairs
\par 
107 Involucre with few simple eglandular hairs .............................. {\b 222. viride}
\par 
107 Involucre with numerous simple eglandular hairs
\par 
108 Some basal leaves ± spathulate ................................................. {\b 161. fritzei}
\par 
108 Basal leaves not spathulate ................................................. {\b 173. gombense}
\par 
100 Involucral bracts mostly ± acute
\par 
109 Apex of rhizome with dense long hairs
\par 
110 Involucre with numerous to dense stellate hairs ............ {\b 101. purpurascens}
\par 
110 Involucre without or with few stellate hairs
\par 
111 Stigmas yellow ................................................................... {\b 99. cordifolium}
\par 
111 Stigmas discoloured .......................................................... {\b 100. soncheides}
\par 
109 Apex of rhizome without long hairs
\par 
112 Involucre 12-16 mm .............................................................. {\b 171. nigritum}
\par 
112 Involucre 7-12 mm
\par 
113 Involucre with numerous simple eglandular hairs .... {\b 172. chlorocephalum}
\par 
113 Involucre without or with few simple eglandular hairs
\par 
114 Involucre with numerous stellate hairs ..................................... {\b 222. viride}
\par 
114 Involucre without or with few stellate hairs
\par 
115 Ligules with glandular hairs at apex ................................. {\b 184. pardoanum}
\par 
115 Ligules with simple eglandular hairs at apex
\par 
116 Leaves entire to remotely denticulate ......................... {\b 180. pseudocerinthe}
\par 
116 Leaves deeply and irregularly dentate ................................... {\b 181. rupicola}
\par 
95  Leaves not amplexicaul 
\par 
117 Basal leaves absent or withered at anthesis
\par 
118 Cauline leaves 0-2 ............................................................ {\b 157. sartorianum}
\par 
118 Cauline leaves numerous
\par 
119 Involucre with dense stellate-hairs ..................................... {\b 217. olympicum}
\par 
119 Involucre without or with few stellate hairs .................. {\b 253. bracteolatum} 
\par 
117 Basal leaves present at anthesis
\par 
120 Involucre with numerous glandular hairs
\par 
121 Involucre with numerous to dense stellate hairs
\par 
122 Achenes pale when mature ............................................ {\b 213. heterogynum}
\par 
122 Achenes dark when mature
\par 
123 Involucre greenish, with pale simple eglandular hairs
\par 
124 Involucre without or with few simple eglandular hairs
\par 
    ...................................................................................... {\b 131. pseudoprasinops}
\par 
124 Involucre with numerous simple eglandular hairs
\par 
125 Peduncles with dense glandular hairs .................................... {\b 80. schmidtii}
\par 
125 Peduncles with few glandular hairs .................................... {\b 130. caesioides}
\par 
123 Involucre blackish, with dark or dark-based simple
\par 
    eglandular hairs
\par 
126 Stigmas yellow .................................................................... {\b 163. senescens}
\par 
126 Stigmas discoloured
\par 
127 Involucral bracts mostly obtuse ........................................... {\b 168. bocconei}
\par 
127 Involucral bracts mostly acute
\par 
128 Cauline leaves 3-5 ..................................................................... {\b 161. fritzei}
\par 
128 Cauline leaves 1-3
\par 
129 Leaves green, almost glabrous above ............................. {\b 160. pietroszense}
\par 
129 Leaves glaucous, with numerous simple
\par 
    eglandular hairs above .................................................................. {\b 162. arolae}
\par 
121 Involucre without or with few stellate hairs
\par 
130 Ligules glabrous
\par 
131 Cauline leaves 0-1(-2) ............................................................ {\b 80. schmidtii}
\par 
131 Cauline leaves 2-12 ............................................................ {\b 86. onosmoides}
\par 
130 Ligules with simple eglandular hairs at apex and
\par 
   sometimes on outer face
\par 
132 Involucral bracts mostly obtuse
\par 
133 Leaves attenuate at base ....................................................... {\b 168. bocconei}
\par 
133 Leaves truncate at base ...................................................... {\b 169. vollmannii}
\par 
132 Involucral bracts mostly acute
\par 
134 Petioles 50-120 mm
\par 
135 Leaves serrate .................................................................... {\b 165. liptoviense}
\par 
135 Leaves entire to denticulate .................................................... {\b 166. krasanii}
\par 
134 Petioles less than 50 mm
\par 
136 Capitula usually 2-10 .............................................................. {\b 164. atratum}
\par 
136 Capitula 1-2
\par 
137 Leaves 5-15(-20) mm wide; capitulum usually 1;
\par 
    stigmas usually yellow ............................................................. {\b 158. alpinum}
\par 
137 Leaves 10-40 mm wide; capitula often 2; stigmas 
\par 
    usually discoloured ............................................................... {\b 159. nigrescens} 
\par 
120 Involucre without or with few glandular hairs 
\par 
138 Involucre without or with few stellate hairs
\par 
139 Ligules glabrous
\par 
140 Involucre with dense simple eglandular hairs ...................... {\b 177. valoddae}
\par 
140 Involucre without or with few simple eglandular hairs ..... {\b 211. silesiacum}
\par 
139 Ligules with short simple eglandular hairs at the 
\par 
    apex and sometimes on the outer face
\par 
141 Leaves with dense flexuous hairs 4-8 mm ................... {\b 123. cochlearioides}
\par 
141 Leaves with fewer, straight, shorter hairs
\par 
142 Leaves 5-15(-20) mm wide; capitulum usually 1;
\par 
    stigmas usually yellow ............................................................. {\b 158. alpinum}
\par 
142 Leaves 10-40 mm wide; capitula often 2; stigmas 
\par 
    usually discoloured ............................................................... {\b 159. nigrescens} 
\par 
138 Involucre with numerous to dense stellate hairs
\par 
143 Apex of rhizome with numerous long hairs; margins of
\par 
    receptacular pits fimbriate-dentate ................................ {\b 102. guadarramense}
\par 
143 Apex of rhizome without long hairs; margins of 
\par 
    receptacular pits shortly dentate
\par 
144 Leaves with long rigid hairs on margins and sometimes
\par 
    on upper surface ........................................................................ {\b 80. schmidtii}
\par 
144 Hairs of leaves not rigid
\par 
145 Involucre with dense simple eglandular hairs up to 4 mm 
\par 
       ........................................................................................ {\b 112. leucophaeum}
\par 
145 Involucre with shorter hairs
\par 
146 Leaves green
\par 
147 Capitula 1-2(-3); involucre 10-15 mm, blackish ............. {\b 160. pietroszense}
\par 
147 Capitula up to 12; involucre 8-12 mm, greenish
\par 
148 Cauline leaves more than 3 ................................................. {\b 75. hypastrum}
\par 
148 Cauline leaves 0-2 ........................................................... {\b 157. sartorianum}
\par 
146 Leaves ± glaucous
\par 

\par 
362}
\par