{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 hairs and sometimes with numerous simple eglandular hairs. Ligules usually without a red stripe, rarely slightly red at apex.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b magnauricula} (Naegeli & Peter) P.D. Sell,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 259 (1976) ({\i H.auricula} subsp.{\i  magnauricula} Naegeli & Peter): Plant 20-28(-35) cm. Involucral bracts 7-9 × 1-1·25 mm, with more or less numerous long and short glandular hairs and more or less numerous simple eglandular hairs. Ligules without a red stripe.{\i  Probably throughout the range of the species, but more common in the east}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. H}. × {\b auriculiforme} Fries, {\i Nov. Fl. Suec.} ed. 2, 248 (1828) ({\i H. lactucella} / {\i peleteranum}). Intermediate between the parents. Like {\i H. lactucella} but stolons shorter and thicker; leaves with numerous stellate hairs beneath; involucral bracts acute. Differs from {\i H. peleteranum} in its glaucous leaves and glandular-hairy involucral bracts. 2n = 18, 36. •{\i  Fennoscandia; S.W. & W.C. Alps.} Fe Ge He It No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b paragogiforme} Besse & Zahn ex Kaeser,{\i  Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges.}{\b  13}: 139 (1903) ({\i H. lactucella} / {\i peleteranum} /{\i  piloselloides}). • {\i S.W. Switzerland }( {\i Valais}). He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. H}. ×{\b  schultesii} F. W. Schultz,{\i  Arch. Fl. Fr. Allem. }35 (1842) ({\i H. tardiusculum} Peter; {\i H. lactucella} / {\i pilosella}). Like {\i H. lactucella} but leaves with numerous stellate hairs beneath and involucral bracts more or less acute. Differs from {\i H. pilosella} in usually having more than 1 capitulum per scape and glaucous leaves. •{\i  From W.C. France and Sardegna eastwards to Finland, W.C. Russia and C. Romania}. Au Be Co Cz Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C) Sa Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   This widespread hybrid is difficult to distinguish from {\i H.} × {\i auriculiforme} in the few areas where their distributions overlap, but the latter usually has shorter, thicker stolons and broader involucral bracts.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. H}. ×{\b  paragogum} Naegeli & Peter,{\i  Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  1}: 653 (1885) ({\i H. lactucella} / {\i pilosella} / {\i praealtum}). Like{\i  H. lactucella} but with larger capitula. Differs from {\i H. pilosella} in having 3-6(-9) capitula per flowering stem, from{\i  H. praealtum} in its larger capitula, and from {\i H.} × {\i auriculiforme} and {\i H}. × {\i schultesii} in its shorter peduncles. •{\i  N.C. Europe, extending eastwards to C. Russia.} Cz Ge Ho ?Po Rs (C, W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. H}. ×{\b  sulphureum} Doll,{\i  Rhein. Fl. }521 (1843) ({\i H. lactucella} / {\i piloselloides}). Like {\i H. lactucella} but without or with very short stolons. Differs from{\i  H. pilaselloides} in its shorter stems and lax inflorescence. •{\i  C. Europe, extending to Latvia; C. Appennini.} Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. H}. ×{\b  koernickeanum} (Naegeli & Peter) Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  82}({\b IV.280}); 1469 (1923) ({\i H. Lactucella} / {\i praealtum}). Not distinguishable with certainty from {\i H}. × {\i sulphureum} unless growing with its parents, though it usually has long slender stolons. •{\i  E.C. Europe and W. part of U.S.S.R.} Au Cz Ge Hu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) [Ho].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. H. vahlii} Froelich in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  7}: 204 (1838). Stolons short and thick or absent. Rosette-leaves 15-30(-80) × 4-15(-20) mm, spathulate or oblanceolate, rounded-obtuse, mucronulate, entire, gradually narrowed at base, glaucous, with few to numerous, long, rigid simple eglandular hairs and numerous, unequal, yellowish glandular hairs. Flowering stems 5-14(-22) cm, with numerous stellate and dense, yellowish-stalked glandular hairs, often with 1-2 linear bracts. Inflorescence irregularly cymose; capitula 1-3(-4); peduncles usually short. Involucral bracts 7-9 × 0·75-1·25 mm, linear-lanceolate, obtuse, with numerous stellate and dense, unequal, yellow-stalked glandular hairs. Ligules yellow, usually slightly red at apex. 2n = 18.{\i  Screes and mountain pastures. • C. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   This taxon was considered by Zahn to be intermediate between {\i H. breviscapum} and {\i H. lactucella}, but it does not grow with, and has characters that do not occur in, either of them.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. H. glaciale} Reyn.,{\i  Nov. Acta Helv. Phys. Math.}{\b  1}: 305 (1787). Stolons absent or rarely very short. Rosette-leaves 15-60 × (2-)4-10 mm, linear, linear-lanceolate or oblanceolate, obtuse to acute, narrowed to a short, winged petiole, green or slightly glaucous, with stellate hairs at least on the margin and sometimes covering the whole leaf, scattered, long, subrigid simple eglandular hairs throughout, and usually some minute, yellowish glandular hairs on the margin. Flowering stems 10-20(-30) cm, with more or less numerous stellate and short glandular hairs and few to numerous, longer simple eglandular hairs, without or with a small, solitary leaf. Inflorescence cymose; capitula 2-6(-8). Involucral bracts 6-8 × 1-1·25 mm, linear-lanceolate, acute, concolorous, with more or less numerous stellate and simple eglandular hairs, and few to numerous, short glandular hairs. Ligules pale yellow. 2n = 18.{\i  Dry mountain pastures; somewhat calcifuge. • Alps.} Au Ga Ge He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b pachypilon} Peter, {\i Bot. Jahrb. }{\b 5}: 259 (1884) ({\i H. eurylepium} Naegeli & Peter, nom. illegit., {\i H. permutatum }Naegeli & Peter,{\i  H. glaciale} / {\i hoppeanum} (vel{\i  sphaerocephalum})). •{\i  Alps.} Au He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b lathraeum} Peter, {\i op. cit.} 260 (1884) ({\i H. auriculigenum} Arvet-Touvet & Belli,{\i  H. brachycomum} Naegeli & Peter,{\i  H. nigricarinum} Naegeli & Peter; {\i H. glaciale} / {\i hoppeanum }/ {\i lactucella}). •{\i  E. & E.C. Alps}. Au Ge He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b salernicola} Vetter & Zahn in Ascherson & Graebner,{\i  Syn. Mitteleur. Fl. }{\b 12}({\b 1}): 409 (1930) ({\i H. glaciale} / {\i hoppeanum} / {\i lactucella} / {\i piloselloides}). •{\i  Alpi Dolomitiche.} It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b basifurcum} Peter, {\i Bot. Jahrb.} {\b 5}: 260 (1884) ({\i H. glaciale} / {\i hoppeanum} /{\i  pilosella}). •{\i  E. & E.C. Europe}. Au Ge He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. H}. ×{\b  niphostribes} Peter,{\i  Bot. Jahrb. }{\b 5}: 261 (1884) ({\i H. niphobium} Naegeli & Peter, nom. illegit.;{\i  H. glaciale} /{\i  lactucella}). Like {\i H. glaciale} but with obvious stolons. Differs from {\i H. lactucella} in having stellate hairs on the lower surface of the leaves and more numerous simple eglandular hairs on the involucral bracts. •{\i  Alps.} Au Ga Ge He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b H}. × {\b aletschense} Zahn,{\i  Neue Denkschr. Schweiz. Ges. Naturw.}{\b  40}: 251 (1906) ({\i H.glaciale} / {\i lactucella} / {\i peleteranum}). •{\i  S.W.& W.C. Alps.} Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b stellipilum} Peter, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  5}: 458 (1884) ({\i H. triplex} Peter; {\i H. glaciale} / {\i lactucella} /{\i  pilosella}). •{\i  E. Alps.} Au He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b subrubens} (Arvet-Touvet) Zahn in Koch, {\i Syn. Deutsch. Fl.} ed. 3, {\b 2}: 1711 (1900) ({\i H. finalense} Naegeli & Peter,{\i  H. salayense} Zahn;{\i  H. glaciale} /{\i  peleteranum}). •{\i  S.W. & W.C. Alps.} Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b faurei} (Arvet-Touvet) Arvet-Touvet, {\i Hier. Alpes Fr.} 5 (1888) ({\i H. glaciellum }Naegeli & Peter, {\i H. hypoleucum} Arvet Touvet, {\i H. poliocephalum} (Naegeli & Peter) Schinz & Thell.;{\i  H. glaciale} / {\i pilosella}). •{\i  Alps}. Au Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b frigidarium} Naegeli & Peter, {\i Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  1}: 656 (1885) ({\i H. glaciale} /{\i  piloselloides}). •{\i  Alps.} Ga He It.
\par 

\par 
370}
\par