{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 able from {\i H}. × {\i floribundum} and has the same chromosome number, 2n = 27.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. H}. ×{\b  piloselliflorum} Naegeli & Peter, {\i Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  1}: 707 (1885) ({\i H. apatelium} Naegeli & Peter,{\i  H. callimorphum} Naegeli & Peter,{\i  H. callimorphoides} Zahn,{\i  H. chlorops} (Naegeli & Peter) Zahn, {\i H. iseranum} (Uechtr. ex Naegeli & Peter) Zahn;{\i  H. caespitosum} /{\i  lactucella} /{\i  pilosella}). Like{\i  H}. ×{\i  floribundum}, but with deeply furcate inflorescence. •{\i  N. & C. Europe.} Au Cz Ge Hu Po Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b pseudopiloselliflorum} Rehmann, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  47}: 306 (1897) ({\i H. caespitosum} / {\i lactucella }/{\i  pilosella} /{\i  praealtum}). •{\i  W. White Russia.} Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b lobarzewskii} Rehmann, {\i op. cit.} 305 (1897) ({\i H. caespitosum} /{\i  lactucella} /{\i  praealtum}). •{\i  E.C. Europe.} Au ?Po Rs (C, W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b chaetocephalum} H. Hofmann,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Naturw. Ges. Isis Dresden }{\b 1897}: 101 (1898) ({\i H. caespitosum} /{\i  peleteranum}). •{\i  E. Germany }({\i W. of Dresden}). Ge.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. × {\b dichotomum} Fries ex Lindeb. in Hartman, {\i Handb. Skand. Fl.} ed. 11, 35 (1879) ({\i H. dahlstedtianum }Zahn; {\i H. caespitosum} / {\i peleteranum} /{\i  praealtum}). •{\i  S.E. Sweden} ({\i Gotland}). Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. H}. ×{\b  duplex} Peter, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  5}: 475 (1884) ({\i H. prussicum} Naegeli & Peter,{\i  H. cernuiforme} (Naegeli & Peter) Zahn;{\i  H. caespitosum} /{\i  pilosella}). Differs from {\i H. caespitosum} in having a deeply furcate inflorescence, and from{\i  H. pilosella} in having more than 1 capitulum per stem. Very similar to {\i H. flagellare}, but usually with more numerous, smaller capitula. •{\i  N. & C. Europe; C. Jugoslavia.} Au Cz Fe Ge Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. × {\b leptoclados} Peter,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  5}: 280 (1884) ({\i H. caespitosum} / {\i pilosella }/{\i  piloselloides}). •{\i  S. Germany, Switzerland.} Ge He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  45. H}. × {\b  melinomelas} Peter,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  5}: 496 (1884) ({\i H. acrothyrsum} Naegeli & Peter,{\i  H. montanum }Naegeli & Peter; {\i H. caespitosum} / {\i pilosella} /{\i  praealtum}). Differs from {\i H. caespitosum} and {\i H. praeltum} in its lax, sometimes deeply furcate inflorescence, and from {\i H. pilosella} in having more than 1 capitulum per stem. •{\i  E.C. Europe; Baltic region.} Au Cz Rs (B, W) Su [Ho].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. H}. ×{\b  arvicola} Naegeli & Peter,{\i  Hier. Mittel-Eur. }{\b 1}: 666 (1885) ({\i H. caespitosum} /{\i  piloselloides}). Intermediate between the parents. Differs from {\i H. caespitosum} in its glaucous leaves, and from{\i  H. piloselloides} in having numerous stellate hairs on the peduncles. •{\i  C. Europe.} Au Cz Ge He Hu Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. H}. ×{\b  polymastix} Peter,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  6}: 123 (1884) ({\i H. obornyanum} Naegeli & Peter, nom. illegit.;{\i  H. caespitosum} / {\i praealtum}). Only those nothomorphs with long slender stolons can be distinguished from{\i  H}. × {\i arvicola}. •{\i  C. & N.E. Europe. }Au Cz Fe Ge Hu Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) [Ho].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. × {\b pawlowskiellum} Merxm., {\i Fragm. Fl. Geobot.}{\b  16}: 99 (1970) ({\i H. caespitosum} /{\i  pseudopilosella}). •{\i  S. Bulgaria }({\i Rodopi}). Bu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. H. aurantiacum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 801 (1753). Stolons more or less numerous, above or below ground, leafy. Rosette-leaves few, pale green or rather glaucous, obtuse to acute, attenuate at base, with numerous, pale simple eglandular hairs on both surfaces and the margin. Flowering stems 20-40(-65) cm, with sparse stellate, numerous, dark simple eglandular hairs 1-6 mm, and few, shorter, dark glandular hairs above, with 1-4 leaves like those of the rosette or bract-like. Inflorescence cymose-corymbose, often with long lower branches; capitula 2-12(-25). Involucral bracts 1·5-3 mm wide, lanceolate, obtuse to acute, with more or less numerous stellate hairs, numerous long, dark simple eglandular hairs and fewer, shorter, dark glandular hairs. Ligules orange-brown or -red, purplish when dry. 2n = 18, 21, 36, 45, 54, 63, 72.{\i  N. & C. Europe, mainly in the mountains, extending locally southwards to S.C. France and Bulgaria; widely cultivated and naturalized elsewhere.} Au Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge He It Ju No Po Rm Rs (*C, W) Su [Be Br Da Ho Is].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   The natural distribution of the following two subspecies is made uncertain by the occurrence of intermediates and by the naturalization of both subspecies, particularly of subsp. ({\b b}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b aurantiacum}: Stolons rather short and mostly underground. Rosette-leaves 100-200(-300) × 22-60(-70) mm, lanceolate. Involucral bracts 8-11 mm. 2n = 36.{\i  Mainly in the Alps and W. Carpathians.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b carpathicola} Naegeli & Peter,{\i  Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  1}: 290 (1885): Stolons often long and leafy, usually above ground. Rosette-leaves 60-100 (-160) × 12-20(-30) mm, usually oblong-lanceolate or oblanceolate. Involucral bracts 5-8 mm.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Most hybrids of{\i  H. aurantiacum} can be recognized by the amount of red in the ligules.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. H}. × {\b fuscatrum} Naegeli & Peter, {\i op. cit. }315 (1885) ({\i H. aurantiacum} /{\i  caespitosum}). Intermediate between the parents and distinguished from both by the presence of both yellow and red in the ligules. •{\i  N., C. & E. Europe.} Au Bu Cz Fe Gr He It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, C, W) Su [Ge Ho].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  The taxa placed in {\i H. aurantiacum} grex croceum by Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  79}({\b IV.280}): 1245-1247 (1923) are morphologically indistinguishable from{\i  H}. × {\i fuscatrum}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. × {\b norrliniforme} Pohle & Zahn, {\i Allgem. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  13}: 111 (1907) ({\i H. tephranthelum} (Zahn) Juxip;{\i  H. aurantiacum} /{\i  caespitosum} / {\i cymosum}). •{\i  Subarctic Russia.} Rs (N).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. × {\b dimorphoides} Norrlin, {\i Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  2}({\b 4}): 133 (1884) ({\i H. norrlinii} Naegeli & Peter,{\i  H. vittatum} (Lindeb.) Dahlst.;{\i  H. aurantiacum} /{\i  caespitosum} /{\i  cymosum} /{\i  lactucella}). •{\i  Finland}. Fe.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b subdecolorans} (Norrlin) Dahlst.,{\i  Acta Horti Berg.}{\b  2}({\b 4}): 22 (1894) ({\i H. aurantiacum} /{\i  caespitosum} /{\i  lactucella}). •{\i  Norway, Sweden.} No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. H}. ×{\b  guthnickianum} Hegetschw., {\i Fl. Schweiz} 781 (1840) ({\i H. aurantiacum} /{\i  cymosum}). Differs from {\i H. aurantiacum} in usually having some yellow in the ligules and in its smaller capitula and leaves, and from{\i  H. cymosum} in having at least a red stripe on the ligules. •{\i  Alps; Carpathians; mountains of Balkan peninsula.} .Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    Through much of its range this taxon is an obvious hybrid, but in the S.W. Alps uniform populations indistinguishable from it occur outside the range of {\i H. aurantiacum}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b atrocrinitum} Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Not. Pl. Alp.} 24 (1883) ({\i H. naegelii} (Norrlin ex Naegeli & Peter) Zahn, non Burnat & Gremli;{\i  H. aurantiacum} /{\i  cymosum} /{\i  glaciale}). •{\i  Alps.} Au He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. H}. ×{\b  plaicense} Woloszczak, {\i Spraw. Kom. Fizyogr. Krakow. }{\b 22}: 201 (1898) ({\i H. fuscescens} (Naegeli & Peter) Zahn;{\i  H}.
\par 

\par 
374}
\par