{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. H}. ×{\b  spurium} Chaix ex Froelich in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  7}: 204 (1838) ({\i H. canum} Peter, non Vuk., {\i H. laschii} Zahn; {\i H. cymosum} /{\i  pilosella}). Differs from {\i H. cymosum} in having few capitula on longer peduncles, and from {\i H. pilosella} in having more than 1 capitulum per stem. Difficult to distinguish from {\i H}. × {\i anchusoides}, but sometimes has longer, more slender stolons. •{\i  N. & C. Europe.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He *Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. H}. ×{\b  fallacinum} F. W. Schultz, {\i Arch. Fl. Fr. Allem.} 56 (1844) ({\i H. rhyparum} (Naegeli & Peter) Zahn; {\i H. cymosum} /{\i  pilosella} / {\i piloselloides}). Differs from {\i H. cymosum} and{\i  H. piloselloides} in its laxer inflorescence of often larger capitula and from {\i H. pilosella} in having more than 1 capitulum per stem. From {\i H}. × {\i anchusoides} it differs in having long, often slender stolons. •{\i  C. Europe, extending to S.W. Alps and W. Ukraine.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. × {\b subcymiflorum} Oborny & Zahn,{\i  Verh. Naturf. Ver. Brunn}{\b  44}: 226 (1905) ({\i H. prantlii} (Naegeli & Peter) Zahn,{\i  H. subgermaniciforme} Zahn; {\i H. cymosum} /{\i  pilosella} / {\i praealtum}). •{\i  C. Europe.} Au Cz Ge Hu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. H}. ×{\b  zizianum} Tausch,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 11} (Ergänz. 1): 62 (1828) ({\i H. bodewigianum} Zahn; {\i H. cymosum} /{\i  piloselloides}). Like{\i  H. piloselloides} but with dense stellate hairs on the peduncles. Very difficult to distinguish from {\i H. cymosum} but its leaves are usually glaucous and less hairy. Very similar to {\i H. praealtum}, but its leaves are usually more hairy. {\i  C. & S. Europe.} Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W) Sa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. × {\b litardiereanum} Zahn in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich}{\b  82}({\b IV.280}): 1499 (1923) ({\i H. cymosum} /{\i  piloselloides} /{\i  pseudopilosella}). •{\i  Corse.} Co.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. H}. ×{\b  densiflorum} Tausch,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 11} (Ergänz. 1): 59 (1828) ({\i H. pseudomagyaricum} Zahn,{\i  H. tauschii} Zahn; {\i H. cymosum} /{\i  praealtum}). Distinguishable from {\i H}. ×{\i  zizianum} only when growing with the parents and in often having long slender stolons.{\i  Throughout much of Europe except the west.} Al Au Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C) Sa Su [Ho].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. H. caespitosum} Dumort.,{\i  Fl. Belg.} 62 (1827) ({\i H. pratense} Tausch). Rosette-leaves (35-)50-200 × 7-25 mm, oblanceolate or oblong-spathulate, acute or obtuse, long-attenuate at base, entire or rarely minutely denticulate, with more or less numerous, long simple eglandular hairs. Flowering stems (20-)30-50(-80) cm, with sparse stellate hairs, numerous, unequal simple eglandular hairs and few, short glandular hairs, with 1-3 leaves like those of the rosette or bract-like. Inflorescence cymose-corymbose; capitula 3-50. Involucral bracts (5-)1-9 × 1-1·25 mm, linear-lanceolate, usually obtuse, with sparse stellate hairs, numerous simple eglandular hairs and numerous, shorter, dark glandular hairs. Ligules pale yellow. 2n = 18, 21, 36, 45. {\i  N., C. & E. Europe.} Au Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hu Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su [Be Br Da Ho].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Simple eglandular hairs of involucre mostly less than 
\par 
  1 mm; stolons usually underground, rarely above ground 
\par 
  and then very short ......................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b brevipilum}
\par 
1 Simple eglandular hairs of involucre mostly more than
\par 
  1 mm; stolons above ground, obviously leafy
\par 
2 Involucre dark, the bracts with only a narrow, pale
\par 
  margin; leaves green .................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b caespitosum}
\par 
2 Involucre pale, the bracts with a broad, pale margin;
\par 
  leaves slightly glaucous ............................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b colliniforme}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b caespitosum}: Stolons above ground, with large leaves. Leaves green. Involucre dark; bracts with narrow pale margins and simple eglandular hairs mostly 1-3 mm. 2n = 45.{\i  Mainly in C. & E. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b colliniforme} (Peter) P. D. Sell,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 259 (1976) ({\i H. collinum }subsp.{\i  colliniforme }Peter): Stolons above ground, with large leaves. Leaves slightly glaucous. Involucre rather pale; bracts with wide pale margins, with simple eglandular hairs mostly 1-3 mm.{\i  Mainly in N. & E. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b brevipilum} (Naegeli & Peter) P. D. Sell, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i H. pratense }subsp. {\i brevipilum} Naegeli & Peter): Stolons usually underground, or above ground and with small leaves. Leaves slightly glaucous. Involucre rather pale; bracts with narrow pale margins and simple eglandular hairs mostly 0·5-1 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  E., E.C. & S.E. Europe}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. H}. ×{\b  ambiguum} Ehrh., {\i Beitr. Naturk.}{\b  5}: 178 (1790) ({\i H. caespitosum} /{\i  cymosum}). Differs from{\i  H. caespitosum} in having dense stellate hairs on the involucral bracts, and from {\i H. cymosum} in having long stolons. 2n = 36, 45. •{\i  N. & C. Europe; Macedonia.} Au Cz Da Fe Ge ?Gr He ?Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. H}. ×{\b  dubium} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed 2, 1125 (1763) ({\i H. scandinavicum} Dahlst.;{\i  H. caespitosum} /{\i  cymosum} /{\i  lactucella}). Differs from {\i H. caespitosum} in its lack of stolons, from{\i  H. cymosum} in its fewer and larger capitula, and from {\i H. lactucella} in its taller habit, lack of stolons and stellate hairs on the leaves. 2n = 36, 45. •{\i  N., N.C. & E.C. Europe.} Au Cz Da Fe Ge Hu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b H}. × {\b poliodermum} Dahlst., {\i Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} nov. ser.,{\b  23}({\b 15}): 119 (1890) ({\i H. transbalticum} Dahlst.; {\i H. caespitosum }/{\i  cymosum} /{\i  lactucella }/{\i  pilosella}). •{\i  Baltic region and C. Russia.} Rs (B, C) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. H}. ×{\b  macranthelum} Naegeli & Peter,{\i  Hier. Mittel-Eur. }{\b 1}: 473 (1885) ({\i H. caespitosum} /{\i  cymosum} /{\i  pilosella}). Differs from {\i H. caespitosum} in having short or no stolons, from {\i H. cymosum} in its fewer, larger capitula, and from{\i  H. pilosella} in having 2-25( 40) capitula per stem. 2n = 45. •{\i  N. & C. Europe.} Fe Ge No Po Rs (N, B, C, ?W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b solacolui} Prodan ex E. I. Nyárády in Savul., {\i Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  10}: 723 (1965) ({\i H. caespitosum} /{\i  echioides}). •{\i  S.E. Romania.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b wolgense} Zahn,{\i  Sched. Fl. Ross.}{\b  6}: 93 (1908) ({\i H. caespitosum} / {\i echioides} /{\i  lactucella} / {\i praealtum}). •{\i  C. Russia.} Rs (C).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b aneimenum} Naegeli & Peter, {\i Hier. Mittel.-Eur.}{\b  1}: 687 (1885) ({\i H.caespitosum} /{\i  hoppeanum} / {\i pilosella} /{\i  piloselloides}). •{\i   S. Germany }({\i Bayern}). Ge.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. H}. ×{\b  floribundum} Wimmer & Grab.,{\i  Fl. Siles.} {\b 2}({\b 2}): 204 (1829) ({\i H. cochleatum} (Naegeli & Peter) Norrlin, {\i H. longiscapum} (Boiss. & Kotschy ex Naegeli & Peter) Zahn;{\i  H. caespitosum} /{\i  lactucella}). Intermediate between the parents. Differs from{\i  H. caespitosum} in its glaucous leaves, and from{\i  H. lactucella} in its taller habit. 2n = 27. •{\i  N. & C. Europe, southwards to N. Switzerland and the E. Carpathians.} Au Cz Da Fe Ge He Ho Hu Is No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    The only representative of{\i  Hieracium} Subgen.{\i  Pilosella} in Iceland has been described as {\b H. islandicum }(Lange) Dahlst., {\i Acta Horti Berg.}{\b  2}({\b 4}): 15 (1894) ({\i H. depilans} Dahlst., {\i H. islandiciforme} Dahlst.), but it is sexual, is morphologically indistinguish
\par 

\par 
373}
\par