{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. erythrocarpum } Peter, {\i Nachr. Königl. Ges. Wiss. Götting.} ({\i Math.-Phys. Kl.}) {\b 1898}: 36 (1898) ({\i H. murorum} / {\i sparsum}). {\i Balkan peninsula; S. Carpathians.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. eversianum } group ({\i H. incisum} / {\i vulgatum}). •{\i  Vorarlberg.} Au. (Including{\b  H. eversianum} Arvet-Touvet ex J. Murr,{\i  Deutsche Bot. Monatsschr.}{\b  15}: 282 (1897). Au.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. incisiceps } Rohlena & Zahn,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  6}: 229 (1909) ({\i H. bifidum} / {\i villosum}). •{\i  Crna Gora.} Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. molinieranum } Arvet-Touvet & Gaut.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  51}: 34 (1905) ({\i H. murorum} /{\i  kerneri}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. peterfii } E. I. Nyárády & Zahn, {\i Bull. Grad. Bot. Univ. Cluj}{\b  8}: 82 (1928). •{\i  S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. prinzii } group ({\i H. murorum }/ {\i humile}). •{\i  Alps.} Au Ga Ge He. (Including {\b H. prinzii} (Kaeser ex Zahn) Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  76}({\b IV.280}): 522 (1921). He.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. prodanianum } E. I. Nyárády & Zahn,{\i  Bul. Grad. Bot. Univ. Cluj}{\b  8}: 73 (1928) ({\i H. rotundatum} /{\i  sparsum}). •{\i  S.W. & C. Romania.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pseudorionii } group ({\i H. pictiforme} (Zahn) Zahn, non Arvet Touvet & Belli;{\i  H. glaucinum} / {\i pictum}). •{\i  S.W. & S.C. Alps.} He It. (Including {\b H. pseudorionii} (Zahn) P. D. Sell & C. West,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 265 (1976) ({\i H. pictiforme} subsp.{\i  pseudorionii} Zahn). He.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. retyezatense } group ({\i H. bifidum} /{\i  sparsum}). •{\i  Balkan peninsula; S. Carpathians.} Bu Gr Ju Rm. (Including {\b H. retyezatense} Degen & Zahn,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  5}: 87 (1906). Bu Rm.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. rupicoliforme } group ({\i H. incisum} / {\i schmidtii}). •{\i  C. Alps.} He. (Including {\b H. rupicoliforme} Zahn in Koch,{\i  Syn. Deutsch. Fl.} ed. 3,{\b  2}: 1811 (1901). He.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. solidagineum } group ({\i H. murorum} (vel {\i glaucinum}) /{\i  sonchoides}). 400-1600(-2000){\i  m. • Pyrenees.} Ga Hs. (Including{\b  H. solidagineum} Fries, {\i Uppsala Univ. Årsskr. }{\b 1862} ({\i Math. Nat., Epicr. Hier.}): 55 (1862). Ga Hs.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. tephropogon } group ({\i H. incisum }/ {\i dollineri}). •{\i  E. Alps.} Au He It Ju. (Including {\b H. tephropogon} Zahn in Koch,{\i  Syn. Deutsch. Fl.} ed. 3, {\b 2}: 1820 (1901). Au He It.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. trichopsis } (Zahn) Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich} {\b 76}({\b IV.280}): 513 (1921) ({\i H. incisum} / {\i cirritum}). •{\i  C. & E. Alps.} Au He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (ii) Like ({\b i}) but basal leaves usually fewer, sometimes withered at anthesis, the cauline 2-20(-numerous).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 71. H. vulgatum} group ({\i H. levicaule} Jordan). Stems 20-80 cm, with stellate and simple eglandular hairs. Leaves with simple eglandular hairs which are usually sparse above, sometimes with stellate hairs beneath; basal numerous, 15-150 × 10-45 mm, lanceolate to ovate, obtuse to acute, denticulate to dentate; cauline 2-10(-15), like the basal, the lower usually petiolate, the upper smaller. Capitula 1-20(-numerous); peduncles with dense stellate hairs, few to numerous simple eglandular hairs, and often a few glandular hairs. Involucre 8-11 × 7-10 mm; bracts obtuse to acute, with few to numerous stellate hairs, numerous simple eglandular hairs and few to numerous glandular hairs. Stigmas discoloured. Ligules glabrous or with simple eglandular hairs at apex. 2n = 27.{\i  Much of Europe, but absent from many of the islands and parts of the south.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, ?W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. calcigenum } Rehmann,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  23}: 212 (1873). • Au Cz Ge Po Rm Rs (?W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. lepidulum } (Stenström) Omang,{\i  Nyt Mag. Naturvid.} ({\i Christiania}){\b  43}: 291 (1905). • Au Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge He Hu It No Po Su.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. neopinnatifidum } Pugsley,{\i  Jour. Ecol.}{\b  33}: 346 (1946) ({\i H. pinnatifidum }Lönnr. ex Dahlst., non Willd.). • Au Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho Hu It No Po Su Rs (B).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. vulgatum } Fries,{\i  Nov. Fl. Suec. }76 (1819). 2n = 21. Au Be Br Da Fe Ga Ge Hb It Ju No Rm Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 72. H. benzianum} group ({\i H. incisum} /{\i  vulgatum}). Like {\b 71} but involucral bracts very long-acute. •{\i  C. & E. Alps.} Au Ge He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. benzianum } J. Murr & Zahn in Koch, {\i Syn. Deutsch. Fl.} ed. 3, {\b 2}: 1821 (1901). Au He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 73. H. maculatum} group ({\i H. glaucinum }/ {\i vulgatum}). Like {\b 71} but leaves spotted or blotched with brownish-purple, the cauline 2-4(-8); involucre with numerous small glandular hairs and few to numerous simple eglandular hairs. 2n = 27.{\i  W. & C. Europe, extending locally south-eastwards to Bulgaria.} Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. approximatum } Jordan, {\i Cat. Jard. Dijon} 20 (1848). • Au Be Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hu Ju Rm.
\par 
  {\b H. asperatum } Jordan ex Boreau,{\i  Fl. Centre Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  2}: 406 (1857). • Au Ga Ge He.
\par 
  {\b H. commixtum } Jordan, {\i Cat. Jard. Dijon} 20 (1848). Au Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Po.
\par 
  {\b H. divisum } Jordan, {\i op. cit}. 21 (1848). • Au Ga Ge He Ho Hu It.
\par 
  {\b H. maculatum } Sm. in Sowerby,{\i  Engl. Bot.}{\b  30}: 2121 (1810). 2n = 21. Au Br Cz Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu It Ju Rm.
\par 
  {\b H. pollichiae } Schultz Bip.,{\i  Pollichia }{\b 13}: 23 (1855). Au Be Br Bu Ga Ge He Ho Hu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 74. H. caesium} group. Like {\b 71} but leaves more or less glaucous, the cauline 2-4; capitula 1-10; simple eglandular hairs of involucre often dark at base. 2n = 21, 36.{\i  Europe, southwards to N. Italy and S. Romania.} Au Br Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hu Is It No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. caesiomurorum } Lindeb.,{\i  Hier. Scand. Exsicc.}{\b  2}: 59 (1872). 2n = 36. Br Da Fe Ga It No Rs (C) Su.
\par 
  {\b H. caesium } (Fries) Fries,{\i  Nova Acta Reg. Soc. Sci. Upsal.}{\b  14}: 112 (1848). Au Cz Da Fe Ga Ju No Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par 
  {\b H. galbanum } Dahlst. ex N. J. Andersson,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1890}: 92 (1890). Au Cz Fe Ge Hu No Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par 
  {\b H. holopleuroides } Dahlst., {\i Bot. Tidsskr.}{\b  20}: 353 (1896). • Is.
\par 
  {\b H. orcadense } W. R. Linton, {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}){\b  31}: 196 (1893) ({\i H. euprepes} F. J. Hanb., non Peter). • Br Fa Hb.
\par 
  {\b H. subramosum } Lönnr., {\i Öfvers. Kongl. Vet.-Akad. Förhandl.}{\b  39}({\b 4}): 86 (1882). • Br Da No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 75. H. hypastrum} Zahn,{\i  Neue Denkschr. Schweiz. Ges. Naturw.}{\b  40}: 524 (1906) ({\i H. humile} /{\i  vulgatum}). Like {\b 71} but leaves with margin and midrib beneath with sparse, minute glandular hairs. •{\i  Switzerland and W. Austria.} Au He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 76. H. ramosum} group ({\i H. caesium} /{\i  laevigatum}). Stems 40-80 cm, with scattered stellate and few to numerous simple eglandular hairs. Leaves with numerous simple eglandular hairs or subglabrous above, sometimes with stellate hairs beneath; basal few
\par 

\par 
378}
\par