{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 without or with few simple eglandular hairs. 2n = 36, 45. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b anadenium} (Naegeli & Peter) P. D. Sell,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 71}: 260 (1976) ({\i H. florentinum} subsp.{\i  anadenium} Naegeli & Peter): Stolons very short or absent. Involucral bracts and peduncles with numerous simple eglandular hairs, without or with few glandular hairs.{\i  Mainly in C. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b bauhinii} (Besser) Petunnikov in Syreistschikov,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mosk. Gub.}{\b  3}: 357 (1910) ({\i H. bauhinii} Besser): Stolons long and slender. Involucral bracts with numerous simple eglandular hairs, without or with few glandular hairs. 2n = 45.{\i  Mainly in E. & C. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b thaumasium} (Peter) P. D. Sell.{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 260 (1976) ({\i H. magyaricum} subsp.{\i  thaumasium} Peter): Stolons long and slender. Involucral bracts with numerous glandular hairs, without or with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs. {\i  C. & E. Europe}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. H. cymosum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1126 (1763). Stolons, when present, usually short and underground. Rosette-leaves 30-170 × 5-25 mm, mostly oblanceolate, sometimes narrowly elliptical, acute to obtuse, long-attenuate at base, usually entire, rarely minutely denticulate, with more or less numerous, subrigid simple eglandular hairs. Flowering stems 30-80(-100) cm, with few to numerous stellate hairs, numerous simple eglandular hairs and sometimes a few short glandular hairs, with 1-4 leaves like those of the rosette or bract-like. Inflorescence cymose-corymbose, the main branches often subumbellate; capitula (10-)20-80(-100). Involucral bracts (4-)5-8·5 × 0·75-1 mm, linear-lanceolate, more or less acute, with more or less numerous stellate hairs, numerous simple eglandular hairs and few to numerous, shorter, dark glandular hairs. 2n = 36, 54, 63.{\i  Much of Europe, but absent from most of the west.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Sa Su Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucral bracts with numerous or dense glandular hairs,
\par 
  without or with few simple eglandular hairs ................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b cymigerum}
\par 
1 Involucral bracts with dense simple eglandular hairs,
\par 
  without or with few glandular hairs
\par 
2 Inflorescence compact, with short branches ..................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b sabinum}
\par 
2 Inflorescence more or less umbellate, with long branches
\par 
  .......................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b cymosum}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sabinum} (Sebastiani & Mauri) Naegeli & Peter, {\i Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  1}: 407 (1885): Inflorescence compact, with short branches. Involucral bracts with dense simple eglandular hairs, without or with few glandular hairs.{\i  Appennini; mountains of C. & S.E. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cymosum}: Inflorescence more or less umbellate, with long branches. Involucral bracts with dense simple eglandular hairs, without or with few glandular hairs.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species, but mainly in the lowlands}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b cymigerum} (Reichenb.) Peter,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  5}: 272 (1884): Inflorescence lax to more or less compact. Involucral bracts with numerous or dense glandular hairs, without or with few simple eglandular hairs. 2n = 36.{\i  N., C. & E. Europe.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. H}. ×{\b  fallax} Willd., {\i Enum. Pl. Horti Berol.} 822 (1809) ({\i H. cymosum} /{\i  echioides}). Like {\i H. cymosum} but with the simple eglandular hairs more rigid. Differs from {\i H. echioides} in its more compact inflorescence of smaller capitula. {\i N., C. & E. Europe.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Hu Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  When growing with its parents an obvious hybrid, but plants morphologically similar occur well outside the range of one or both parents; these may be of different origin.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b crassisetum} Peter,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  5}: 489 (1884) ({\i H. cinereiforme} Meissner & Zahn, {\i H. fuckelianum }Touton & Zahn,{\i  H. subfallaciforme }(Zahn) Juxip;{\i  H. cymosum} / {\i echioides} / {\i pilosella}).{\i  From W. Germany to N.C. Russia.} Ge Po Rs (B, C).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b sparsiforme} Peter,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  6}: 127 (1884) ({\i H. setifolium} Touton; {\i H. cymosum} / {\i echioides} /{\i  pilosella} / {\i praealtum}). •{\i  W. Germany} ({\i West of Mainz}). Ge.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b pseudocalodon} Peter, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  6}: 118 (1884) ({\i H. cymosum} / {\i echioides} /{\i  piloselloides}). •{\i  N.W.Czechoslovakia} ({\i near Teplice}). Cz.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b megatrichum} Borbás, {\i Budapest. Körny. Növ.} 95 (1879) ({\i H. chaetocymum} Degen & Zahn;{\i  H. cymosum} / {\i echioides} /{\i  praealtum}). •{\i   Hungary, Romania.} Hu Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b laggeri} (Schultz Bip. ex Reichenb. fil.) Fries, {\i Uppsala Univ. Arsskr.}{\b  1862} ({\i Math. Nat., Epicr. Hier}.): 27 (1862) ({\i H. chabertii} F. O. Wolf, {\i H. densicapillum} Naegeli & Peter;{\i  H. cymosum} /{\i  glaciale}). •{\i  Alps.} Au Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b tendinum} Naegeli & Peter,{\i  Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  1}: 453 (1885) ({\i H. cymosum} /{\i  glaciale} / {\i lactucella}). •{\i  S. Alps}. Au Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b tinctilingua} (Zahn) Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  82}({\b IV. 280}): 1340 (1923) ({\i H. cymosum} / {\i glaciale} / {\i lactucella} / {\i pilosella}). •{\i  Maritime Alps.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b H}. × {\b pseudotrichodes} Zahn in Koch,{\i  Syn. Deutsch. Fl}. ed. 3,{\b  2}: 1869 (1901) ({\i H. cymosum} /{\i  glaciale} / {\i pilosell}a). •{\i  S.W. & C. Alps.} Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b halacsyi} Heldr. ex Halácsy,{\i  Consp. Fl. Graec.}{\b  2}: 235 (1902) ({\i H. subspurium} Bornm. & Zahn;{\i  H. cymosum} /{\i  hoppeanum}). {\i  S. Alps; Greece.} Gr It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. H}. ×{\b  sciadophorum} Naegeli & Peter,{\i  Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  1}: 440 (1885) ({\i H. cymosum} /{\i  lactucella}). Like {\i H. lactucella} but without stolons and with stellate hairs on the under surface of the leaves. Differs from{\i  H. cymosum} in its shorter stem, glaucous more obtuse leaves and less numerous capitula. •{\i  C. Europe extending to S.W. Alps and N.C. Russia; S. Sweden.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Po Rm Rs (C, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b suprafloccosum} (Naegeli & Peter) Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  82}({\b IV.280}): 1333 (1923) ({\i H. cymosum} / {\i lactucella }/{\i  pilosella}). •{\i  Austria, Czechoslovakia.} Au Cz.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b pseudosulphureum} Touton,{\i  Jahrb. Nassau. Ver. Naturk.}{\b  74}: 30 (1922) ({\i H. cymosum} / {\i lactucella} /{\i  piloselloides}). •{\i  W. Germany} ({\i south of Mainz}). Ge
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b hybridum} Chaix ex Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph.} {\b 3}: 100 (1788) ({\i H. lautareticum} Rouy;{\i  H. cymosum} / {\i peleteranum}). •{\i  S.W. Alps; S.E. Germany}. Ga Ge It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b fuernrohri} Vollmann,{\i  Denkschr. Bayer. Bot. Ges. Regensb.}{\b  9}: 72 (1905) ({\i H. cymosum} /{\i  peleteranum }/{\i  pilosella}). •{\i  S.E. Germany} ({\i near Regensburg}). Ge.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. H}. ×{\b  anchusoides} (Arvet-Touvet) Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Spicil. Rar. Nov. Hier.} 23 (1881) ({\i H. neohybridum} Arvet-Touvet,{\i  H. pseudohybridum} Arvet-Touvet;{\i  H. cymosum} / {\i peleteranum }(vel {\i pilosella}){\i  piloselloides}). Stolons usually 0 or very short. Differs from {\i H. cymosum} and {\i H. piloselloides} in its larger capitula and more lax inflorescence, and from {\i H. peleteranum} in its 7-20(-30) capitula per stem. •{\i  C. & S. Europe, southwards to E. Spain and C. Italy.} Co Cz Ga Ge He Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   In the southern part of its range this taxon often occurs in the absence of one or more of its parents.
\par 

\par 
372}
\par