{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. integratum } (Dahlst. ex Stenström) Dahlst., {\i op. cit.} 112 (1893). • Au Br Cz Da Gr Hu Ju No Su.
\par 
 {\b H. murorum } L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 802 (1753). Although this name has always been used for this group of plants in the aggregate sense, it has never been typified and it is uncertain to which of the segregates the name applies.
\par 
 {\b H. oblongum } Jordan, {\i Cat. Jard. Grenoble}{\b  1849}: 7 (1849). • Al Au Br Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Rm.
\par 
 {\b H. pellucidum } Laest.,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} 172 (1824). • Br Da Fe No Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par 
 {\b H. praecurrens } Vuk., {\i Rad Jugosl. Akad. Znan. Umj.}{\b  58}: 167 (1881). • Al Au Bu Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs (W). (This species shows some characters of {\i H. rotundatum}.)
\par 
 {\b H. semisilvaticum } (Zahn) P. D. Sell & C. West, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 266 (1976) ({\i H. murorum} subsp.{\i  semisilvaticum} Zahn). • Al Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He It Ju Rm.
\par 
 {\b H. subbifidiforme } (Zahn) P. D. Sell & C. West, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i H. murorum} subsp. {\i subbifidiforme} Zahn). • Cz Ge Hu Ju Po Rm.
\par 
 {\b H. tenuiflorum } Arvet-Touvet ex C. Bicknell,{\i  Fl. Bordighera} 173 (1896). • Co Ga He It.
\par 
 {\b H. triangulare } Almq., {\i Stud. Hier.} xiv (1881). •{\i  Fennoscandia and Baltic region}. Fe No Rs (C) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 66. H. glaucinum} group ({\i H. praecox} Schultz Bip.; {\i H. murorum / schmidtii}). Like {\b 65} but leaves more or less glaucous and often spotted or blotched, the hairs on the margin often subrigid; involucre with dense, dark glandular hairs and numerous simple eglandular hairs. 2n = 27, 36.{\i  Rocky places and open woods; widespread also as a ruderal. From Ireland and Spain eastward to Sweden, Poland and Bulgaria.} Au Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. bounophilum } Jordan ex Boreau,{\i  Fl. Centre Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  2}: 412 (1857). • Co Cz Ga Ge It Po.
\par 
 {\b H. cinerascens } Jordan,{\i  Cat. Jard. Grenoble}{\b  1849}: 17 (1849). • Bu Co Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu.
\par 
 {\b H. glaucinum } Jordan,{\i  Cat. Jard. Dijon} 22 (1848). Au Co Cz Ga Ge Hs Ju.
\par 
 {\b H. gougetianum } Gren. & Godron, {\i Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 368 (1851). 2n = 27. •  Cz Ga Ge Hb He Hs.
\par 
 {\b H. praecox } Schultz Bip.,{\i  Pollichia}{\b  9}: 35 (1851). • Au Cz Ga Ge Ho Hs.
\par 
 {\b H. scotostictum } Hyl., {\i Symb. Bot. Upsal.}{\b  7}({\b 1}): 127 (1943). 2n = 27. • Au Br Da Ge Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 67. H. bifidum} group. Like {\b 65} but stem without glandular hairs and usually with only a few simple eglandular hairs; leaves more or less glaucous, glabrous or nearly so above; capitula usually few; peduncles long, usually with numerous simple eglandular hairs, usually without glandular hairs; involucral bracts with dense stellate hairs, numerous simple eglandular hairs and few to numerous glandular hairs. 2n = 27, 36.{\i  Throughout a large part of Europe, but absent from much of the south-east and south-west.} Al Au Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Su.
\par 

\par 
 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. ammobium } P. D. Sell & C. West,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 262 (1976) ({\i H. bifidum} subsp.{\i  psammogenes }Zahn, non{\i  H. psammogenes} Omang). • Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Rm.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. bifidum } Kit. in Hornem., {\i Hort. Hafn.}{\b  2}: 761 (1851). Although this name has always been used for this group of plants in the aggregate sense, it has never been typified and it is uncertain to which segregate the name applies.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. caesiiflorum } Almq. ex Norrlin,{\i  Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  3}({\b 4}): 96 (1888). Al Au Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju No Rm Rs (N, C) Su.
\par 
 {\b H. canitiosum } Dahlst., {\i Bot. Not. }{\b 1892}: 155 (1892). Au Bu Cz Ga He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B) Su.
\par 
 {\b H. cardiobasis } (Zahn) Juxip in Schischkin & Bobrov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  30}: 372 (1960). Al Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm Rs (C).
\par 
 {\b H. cirritum } Arvet-Touvet, {\i Monogr. Hier.} 21 (1873). • Alps. Au Ga He It. (This species shows some characters of the {\i H. piliferum} group.)
\par 
 {\b H. macropholidium } (Jonsson) Dahlst., {\i Ark.Bot.} {\b 3}({\b 10}): 35 (1904). • Is.
\par 
 {\b H. pallescens } Waldst. & Kit., {\i Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  3}: 241 (1808-1809). Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Rm.
\par 
 {\b H. sanguineum } (A. Ley) W. R. Linton,{\i  Brit. Hier.} 37 (1905). • Br Hb.
\par 
 {\b H. stenolepis } Lindeb. in Hartman,{\i  Handb. Skand. Fl.} ed. 11, 45 (1879). Al Au Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B) Su.
\par 
 {\b H. trebevicianum } K. Malý, {\i Glasn. Muz. Bosni Herceg.}{\b  11}: 149 (1899). Al Bu Cz Ju Rm (W). (This species has some characters of{\i  H. rotundatum}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 68. H. subcaesiiforme} (Zahn) Zahn in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich}{\b  76}({\b IV.280}): 524 (1921) ({\i H. bifidum} / {\i humile}). Like {\b 65} but leaves subglabrous above, the margin and petioles with minute glandular hairs; involucre with numerous simple eglandular hairs and few small glandular hairs. •{\i  Alps.} Au Ga Ge It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 69. H. fuscocinereum} group. Like {\b 65} but with numerous, pale, simple eglandular hairs and fewer, small glandular hairs on the involucre.{\i  N. & N.C. Europe.} Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Is No Po Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. chlorellum } Norrlin, {\i Acta Soc. Fauna  Fl. Fenn.}{\b  3}({\b 4}): 97 (1888). • Da Fe No Rs (N) Su.
\par 
 {\b H. fuscocinereum } Norrlin, {\i op. cit.} 92 (1888). • No Su.
\par 
 {\b H. oistophyllum } Pugsley,{\i  Jour. Bot. }({\i London}) {\b 79}: 194 (1941) ({\i H. sagittatum} (Lindeb.) Norrlin, non Hoffmanns. & Link). Br Da Fe Ge Is No Po Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par 
 {\b H. philanthrax } (Stenström) K. Joh. & Sam., {\i Dalarnes Hier. Silvat.} 66 (1923). Da Fe Ga No Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par 
 {\b H. trichotum } (Jónsson) Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot. }{\b 3}({\b 10}): 40 (1904) ({\i H. hemitrichotum }(Zahn) Ostenf. & Gröntved, nom. illegit.). • Is.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 70. H. incisum} group ({\i H. bifidum} /{\i  dentatum}). Like {\b 65} but leaves with dense, simple eglandular hairs up to 3 mm; involucre with numerous simple eglandular and few small glandular hairs. •{\i  Alps; W. Carpathians.} Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. incisum } Hoppe in Sturm,{\i  Deutschl. Fl. }{\b 39}: t. 622 (1815). Au Cz Ga Ge He Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Other species and groups in (i):
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. adusticeps } group ({\i H. melanops} Arvet-Touvet;{\i  H. murorum} / {\i piliferum}). •{\i  Alps.} Au Ga Ge He It. (Including {\b H. adusticeps} Zahn, Hier. Alpes Marit. 165 (1916). Au Ga He It.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. atropictum } Arvet-Touvet & Gaut., {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  51}: lxxvii (1905) ({\i H. glaucinum} /{\i  lawsonii}). •{\i  E. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b H. cirritogenes } Zahn, {\i Hier. Alpes Marit. }198 (1916) ({\i H. bifidum} / {\i schmidtii}). •{\i  Alpi Marittime}. It.
\par 

\par 
377}
\par