{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min51}{\revtim\yr1999\mo1\dy20\hr11\min15}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1052}{\nofchars6002}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 or absent; peduncles and pedicels partly deflexed under the leaves, not coalescing nor encircling fruit. Calyx absent. Corolla yellow, rotate, 4-lobed; stigmas capitate. Fruit dry; mericarps 1-2, glabrous or hairy.
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28  C. articulata}{\fs28  (L.) Ehrend., }{\i\fs28 Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b\fs28  22}{\fs28 : 396 (1958), an annual species of the arid regions of S.W. Asia, with smooth stems and bracts and bracteoles greatly enlarged in fruit, has once been reported from Krym, but apparently only as a casual.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Peduncles with 2 bracts
\par 2 Hairs of stem 1-2 mm; roots mainly adventitious ........................ }{\b\fs28 1. laevipes}{\fs28 
\par 2 Stems glabrous or with hairs less than 1 mm;
\par   adventitious roots absent or few ...................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. taurica}{\fs28  
\par 1 Peduncles without bracts
\par 3 Annual .................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 5. pedemontana}{\fs28 
\par 3 Perennial
\par 4 Stems mostly unbranched, glabrous or with slender hairs ............... }{\b\fs28 3. glabra}{\fs28 
\par 4 Stems branched, with coarse hairs ............................................. }{\b\fs28 4. balcanica}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. C. laevipes}{\fs28  Opiz, }{\i\fs28 Seznam }{\fs28 34 (1852) (}{\i\fs28 Galium cruciata}{\fs28  (L.) Scop., }{\i\fs28 Cruciata chersonensis}{\fs28  auct.). Herbaceous perennial with weak primary root, subterranean stolons, and slender rhizome with extensive adventitious roots. Stems 20-60 cm, slender; internodes 14-18, elongating to 4\'b75-8\'b75 cm, mostly with patent hairs 1-2 mm. Leaves 12-20 \'d7 4-10 mm, rather thin, broadly lanceolate to ovate, acute, 3-veined, more or less hairy, yellowish in the flowering region, later green. Cymes usually with 5-9 flowers; peduncles and pedicels usually hairy, elongating in fruit, bracteoles enlarging slightly, but scarcely more than 8 mm. Flowers c. 2-3 mm; styles divided to the base. Fruit with 1-2 mericarps 1\'b78-2\'b77 mm in diameter, globose to ovoid, glabrous. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Grassland and open woods. W., C. & S. Europe, extending to S.C. Russia.}{\fs28  Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Hb].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. C. taurica}{\fs28  (Pallas ex Willd.) Ehrend.,}{\i\fs28  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b\fs28  22}{\fs28 : 393 (1958) (}{\i\fs28 Galium coronatum }{\fs28 Sibth. & Sm.). Like }{\b\fs28 1 }{\fs28 but usually rather woody, with strong primary root, few or no adventitious roots and few or no stolons; stems 10-30 cm, usually stout; internodes 8-13, elongating to 1\'b75-4\'b75 cm, glabrous or with hairs up to 0\'b78 mm; leaves 8-18 \'d7 4-12 mm, somewhat coriaceous, narrowly elliptical to nearly orbicular, obtuse or acute, glabrous or hairy; bracteoles enlarging, often more than 10 mm; flowers c. 2\'b75-4 mm; fruit usually with 1 mericarp 3-4 mm, globose, glabrous or hairy. }{\i\fs28 Dry rocks and steppes. E. Greece; Krym.}{\fs28  Gr Rs (K). (}{\i\fs28 S.W. Asia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par  This polymorphic polyploid complex is represented in Europe by two subspecies.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 euboea}{\fs28  (Ehrend.) Ehrend.,}{\i\fs28  Pl. Syst. Evol.}{\b\fs28  124}{\fs28 : 178 (1975) (}{\i\fs28 Galium coronatum}{\fs28  var. }{\i\fs28 euboeum}{\fs28  Ehrend.): Entirely glabrous. Leaves on vegetative shoots and base of flowering stems broadly elliptical to nearly orbicular. Cymes deflexed in fruit; bracteoles broadly obovate. \bullet }{\i\fs28  E. Greece}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Evvoia}{\fs28 ).
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 taurica}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Valantia taurica }{\fs28 Pallas ex Willd., }{\i\fs28 Cruciata coronata}{\fs28  (Sibth. & Sm.) Ehrend. subsp.}{\i\fs28  taurica}{\fs28  (Pallas ex Willd.) Ehrend.,}{\i\fs28  Galium tauricum}{\fs28  (Pallas ex Willd.) Roemer & Schultes; incl.}{\i\fs28  G. chersonense}{\fs28  (Willd.) Roemer & Schultes, }{\i\fs28 G. braunii}{\fs28  Zelen.,}{\i\fs28  G. decoronatum}{\fs28  Klokov, }{\i\fs28 G. neotauricum}{\fs28  Klokov): Usually hairy on stems, or at least on pedicels. Leaves on vegetative shoots and base of flowering stems usually narrowly oblong. Cymes strongly divaricate after flowering; bracteoles narrowly obovate. Fruit hairy, rarely glabrous. 2n = 44. }{\i\fs28  Krym}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par   There is great variability in leaf-shape and hairiness within and between populations from Krym, but no reason for the recognition of several species.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. C. glabra}{\fs28  (L.) Ehrend., }{\i\fs28 Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b\fs28  22}{\fs28 : 393 (1958) (}{\i\fs28 Galium vernum}{\fs28  Scop.). Herbaceous perennial with subterranean stolons. Stems c. 5-20 cm, usually without lateral branches; longest internodes 1\'b75-3 cm, glabrous or sometimes with slender, patent hairs 0\'b74-0\'b78 mm. Leaves in flowering region 7-16 \'d7 3-7 mm, yellowish, later green, narrowly to broadly ovate or elliptical, acute, 3-veined. Cymes 3- to 5-flowered, without bracteoles; peduncles and pedicels usually glabrous, scarcely elongating in fruit. Flowers c. 2\'b75-3\'b75 mm; styles divided to c. \'bd . Fruit usually with 1 mericarp 1\'b75-2\'b78 mm, pyriform, nearly always glabrous. 2n = 22, 44.  }{\i\fs28 S. & S.C. Europe, extending northwards to C. Poland and S.C. Russia.}{\fs28  Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga *Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W) Sa ?Si.
\par 
\par   Rather variable. Hairy variants occur mainly in S.W. Europe. Diploid plants have been found in Portugal and the S.W. Alps. Tetraploids are widespread, but cannot yet be distinguished morphologically from the diploids.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. C. balcanica}{\fs28  Ehrend., }{\i\fs28 Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  68}{\fs28 : 272 (1974). Like }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 but flowering stems 3-12 cm, with lateral branches; longest internodes 1-1\'b75 cm, with coarse hairs c. 0\'b75 mm; leaves 7-13 \'d7 3-4 mm; peduncles and pedicels hairy.}{\i\fs28  Mountain screes. \bullet  S.W.Jugoslavia.}{\fs28  Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. C. pedemontana}{\fs28  (Bellardi) Ehrend., }{\i\fs28 Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b\fs28  22}{\fs28 : 396 (1958) (}{\i\fs28 Valantia pedemontana}{\fs28  Bellardi, }{\i\fs28 Galium pedemontanum}{\fs28  (Bellardi) All.). Annual. Stems 10-35 cm, simple or somewhat branched from the base, rough and adhesive, with patent hairs and small recurved prickles. Leaves 3-11 \'d7 2-4 mm, uniformly green, ovate or elliptical, acute, slightly hairy, 1-veined; lateral veins obscure; margins revolute. Cymes without bracteoles, (1-)2- to 3-flowered, much shorter than subtending leaves. Flowers 0\'b75-1 mm, hermaphrodite; styles united in lower third. Fruit with 1 or 2 mericarps c. 1 mm, reniform, glabrous. 2n = 18. }{\i\fs28 Dry grassland and scrub. S. & S.C. Europe.}{\fs28  Al Au Bu Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 8.        Valantia}{\fs28              L.
\par }{\fs24 By F. Ehrendorfer
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs. Leaves 1-veined, in whorls of 4. Inflorescence leafy, narrow, scarcely branched, with whorls of short, axillary 3-flowered cymes; central flower hermaphrodite, corolla 4-lobed; lateral flowers male, corolla 3-lobed. Peduncles and pedicels deflexed between leaves, coalescing, enlarging and encircling fruit, with bristles or hooks on outside. Calyx absent. Corolla cup-shaped to rotate; stigmas capitate. Fruit dry; mericarps 1-2, papillose or glabrous, usually remaining within peduncle and pedicel cavity.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Perennial; hermaphrodite flowers about 2\'b75 mm; fruit
\par   separating easily from peduncle and pedicel .................................... }{\b\fs28 1. aprica}{\fs28 
\par 1 Annual; hermaphrodite flowers not more than 2 mm; fruit
\par   separating with difficulty from peduncle and pedicel
\par 2 Scabrid-hispid; peduncle without dorsal horn ............................... }{\b\fs28 2. hispida}{\fs28 
\par 2 Slightly hairy towards apex; peduncle with conspicuous
\par   dorsal horn ...................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. muralis}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. V. aprica}{\fs28  (Sibth. & Sm.) Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 10}{\fs28 ): 72 (1849). Caespitose perennial. Stems 5-20 cm; internodes up to 20 mm, smooth, glabrous or with short hairs. Leaves 3-6 \'d7 1\'b75-2\'b75 mm, somewhat fleshy, obovate, obtuse or mucronate. Peduncle and pedicels broadly coalescent, usually with dorsal bristles, not tightly encircling fruit. Hermaphrodite
\par 
\par 37}
\par }