{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 or absent, 25-90 × 12-30 mm, elliptical or lanceolate-oblong, obtuse to acute, denticulate to deeply dentate, petiolate; cauline 4-15(-18), the lower like the basal, petiolate, the upper smaller, lanceolate or ovate, sessile. Capitula 3-15; peduncles with numerous stellate and sometimes a few simple eglandular hairs. Involucre (8-)10-12 × 8-10 mm; bracts obtuse or subacute, with few to numerous stellate hairs, few to numerous simple eglandular and sometimes a few glandular hairs. Stigmas yellow or discoloured. Ligules glabrous. 2n = 27. •{\i  E.C. Europe; Fennoscandia.} Au Cz Da Fe He Hu No Rm Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. ramosum } Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 1579 (1803). Au Cz Hu Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 77. H. argillaceum} group ({\i H. lachenalii }auct., non C. C. Gmelin). Stems 30-100 cm, with numerous simple eglandular hairs especially below and numerous stellate and numerous glandular hairs above. Leaves with simple eglandular hairs which are sometimes sparse above; basal few to numerous, 25-110 × 10-40 mm, elliptical, ovate or lanceolate, usually acute, denticulate to deeply dentate, mostly cuneate at base; cauline 4-20, the lower like the basal, petiolate, the upper smaller and sessile. Capitula 3-50(-numerous); peduncles with dense stellate and numerous glandular hairs, sometimes with an occasional eglandular hair. Involucre 9-11 × 8-10 mm; bracts acute, with numerous stellate, numerous glandular and sometimes an occasional simple eglandular hair. Stigmas yellow or discoloured. Ligules usually with simple eglandular hairs at apex. 2n = 27.{\i  Most of Europe except the Mediterranean region and the southeast.} Au Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. acuminatum } Jordan, {\i Cat. Jard. Grenoble }{\b 1849}: 17 (1849) ({\i H. lachenalii} auct., non C. C. Gmelin). 2n = 27. Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm.
\par 
 {\b H. argillaceum } Jordan, {\i loc. cit.} (1849). • Au Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm.
\par 
 {\b H. aspernatum } Jordan ex Boreau,{\i  Fl. Centre Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  2}: 400 (1857). • Au Be Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm.
\par 
 {\b H. chlorophyllum } Jordan ex Boreau,{\i  op. cit.} 399 (1857). • Au Be Co Cz Ge He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rs (B).
\par 
 {\b H. deductum } Sudre,{\i  Hier. Centr. Fr.} 57 (1902). • Au Ga Ge He Hu It Po.
\par 
 {\b H. jablonicense } Woloszcsak,{\i  Spraw. Kom. Fizyogr. Krakow.}{\b  25}: 66(1890). Au Bu Cz Ju Rm Rs (W). (This species shows some characters of {\i H. rotundatum}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 78. H. rotundatum} Kit. ex Schultes, {\i Österreichs Fl.} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 439 (1814). Like {\b 77} but leaves obtuse, remotely undulate-dentate, with dense, simple eglandular hairs throughout, the cauline (1-)2-5(-13); involucre 7-8 mm, with few or no stellate hairs.{\i  E.C. Europe and N. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Bu Cz Ju ?Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 79. H. diaphanum} group. Like {\b 77} but stellate hairs on involucre sparse or absent. 2n = 27.{\i  N. & C. Europe, extending southwards to S. France & C. Jugoslavia.} Au Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. anfractum } (Fries) Fries,{\i  Öfvers. Kongl. Vet.-Akad. Förhandl.}{\b  13}: 148 (1856). Au Cz Da Ga Ge He Hu No Po Rm Su.
\par 
 {\b H. diaphanoides } Lindeb.,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1882}: 121 (1882). • Au Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par 
 {\b H. diaphanum } Fries, {\i Nov. Fl. Suec}. 75 (1819). 2n = 27. • Au Br Cz Ge He No Po Su.
\par 
 {\b H. festinum } Jordan ex Boreau,{\i  Fl. Centre Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  2}: 399 (1857). Au Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 
 {\b H. irriguum } (Fries) Dahlst.,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.,} nov. ser. {\b 26}({\b 3}): 126 (1894). • Au Ga Ge He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Other species and groups in (ii):
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. biharianum } Prodan & Zahn in Ascherson & Graebner, {\i Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  12}({\b 3}): 687 (1938). •{\i  Transylvania.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. buianum } Prodan,{\i  Fl. Det. Descr. România} ed. 2, 1116 (1939). •{\i  Romania.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. caesiogenum } Woloszczak & Zahn in Reichenb. fil.,{\i  Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  19}({\b 2}): 106 (1901) ({\i H. caesium} /{\i  vulgatum}). •{\i  Romania and Ukrainian Carpathians.} Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pelesii } Grec.,{\i  Consp. Fl. Roman.} 373 (1898). •{\i  Romania.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. phaedrocheilon } Zahn in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich}{\b  76}({\b IV.280}): 483 (1921) ({\i H. rotundatum} / {\i vulgatum} / {\i bifidum}). •{\i  Romania.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pseudocaesium } Degen & Zahn,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  5}: 88 (1906) ({\i H. caesium} / {\i sparsum}). •{\i  S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. smolandicum } group ({\i H. caesium} / {\i vulgatum}). {\i Fennoscandia.} No Su. ({\i N. America}.) (Including{\b  H. smolandicum} (Almq. ex Dahlst.) Dahlst. in Lindman, {\i Svensk Fanerogamfl.} 623 (1918). 2n = 27. Su.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. subpatulum } Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich }{\b 76}({\b IV.280}): 110 (1921) ({\i H. chondrillifolium} / {\i murorum}). {\i  S.E. Alps.} It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. subpojoritense } Prodan,{\i  Fl. Det. Descr. România }ed. 2, 1181 (1939). •{\i  Romania.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. subrigidum } group ({\i H. macrotonum} Dahlst.;{\i  H. caesium} / {\i laevigatum}). •{\i  Fennoscandia.} Fe No Su. (Including {\b H. subrigidum} (Almq. ex Stenström) Norrlin in Cajander, {\i Suomen Kasvio }124 (1906). Fe No Su.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. tajanum } K. Malý and Zahn,{\i  Glasn. Mus. Bosni Herceg.}{\b  37}: 58 (1925) ({\i H. racemosum} / {\i rotundatum}). •{\i  Romania. }Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. tschamkorijense } group ({\i H. sparsum} /{\i  vulgatum}).{\i  Bulgaria, Romania. }Bu Rm. ({\i W. Asia}.) (Including {\b H. tschamkorijense} Zahn, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok }{\b 10}: 172 (1911). • Bu.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. urumoffii } Nejc. & Zahn, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  5}: 89 (1906) ({\i H. incisum} / {\i sparsum}). •{\i  Bulgaria} ({\i Stara Planina}). Bu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. vladeasae } Prodan, {\i Bul. Sti. Acad. Rep. Pop. Române }({\i Sect. Biol., Sti. Agric}.) {\b 9}: 317 (1951). •{\i  Romania. }Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. vurtopicum } Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich }{\b 79}({\b IV.280}): 1051 (1922)({\i H. pseudocaesium} / {\i rotundatum}). •{\i  S.Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. wolffii } group ({\i H. argillaceum} /{\i  murorum} / {\i rotundatum}). •{\i  Stara Planina; Tatry.} Bu Cz. (Including {\b H. wolffii} Zahn in Ascherson & Graebner, {\i Syn. Mitteleur. Fl. }{\b 12}({\b 2}): 774 (1935). Bu.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (iii) Leaves more or less glaucous, the basal numerous, the cauline 0-1(-2); with more or less rigid simple eglandular hairs on the margin and sometimes the upper surface. Capitula 1-12(-18). Ligules glabrous or with a few short simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas yellow. Achenes 3-4·5 mm, dark. Margins of receptacular pits dentate, sometimes slightly ciliate-dentate.
\par 

\par 
379}
\par