{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i aurantiacum} / {\i cymosum} /{\i  lactucella}). Like{\i  H. × guthnickianum} but with few or no stellate hairs on the lower surface of the leaves. •{\i  Alps; E. Carpathians; W.C. Sweden.} Au He It Rs (W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. H}. ×{\b  biflorum} Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Essai Pl. Dauph.} 40 (1871) ({\i H. aurantiacum} /{\i  cymosum} /{\i  pilosella}). Differs from all its parents and from{\i  H. × guthnickianum} and{\i  H. × plaicense} by its deeply furcate inflorescence. •{\i  Alps; N. & C. parts of Balkan peninsula.} ?Al Au Bu Ga He Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. × {\b muscelii} Prodan,{\i  Bul. Sti. Acad. Rep. Pop. Române} ser. bot.,{\i  9}: 311 (1957) ({\i H. aurantiacum} /{\i  echioides} /{\i  praealtum}). •{\i  S. Carpathians}. Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. × {\b macutense} K. Malý & Zahn,{\i  Glasn. Muz. Bosni Herceg.}{\b  37}: 49 (1925) ({\i H. aurantiacum} / {\i cymosum} /{\i  praealtum}). •{\i  E. Bosna. }Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. × {\b rubrum} Peter, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 64}: 126 (1881) ({\i H. aurantiacum} /{\i  flagellare}). •{\i  Sudeten Mts.; W. Romania.} Cz Po Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. × {\b aurantellum} Naegeli & Peter,{\i  Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  1}: 347 (1885) ({\i H. aurantiacum} /{\i  glaciale}). •{\i  S. Alps.} Au Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. × {\b nothum} Huter, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 20}: 338 (1870) ({\i H. aurantiacum} /{\i  glaciale }/ {\i hoppeanum}). •{\i  E. & E.C. Alps.} Au Ge He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. × {\b amaurocephalum} Peter, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  5}: 471 (1884) ({\i H. rubellum} Peter, {\i H. krafftianum} Schwimmer & Zahn,{\i  H. subeminens} Touton & Zahn;{\i  H. aurantiacum} /{\i  glaciale }/{\i  hoppeanum} /{\i  lactucella}). •{\i  E. Switzerland} ({\i Graubünden}). He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. × {\b substoloniflorum} Peter,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  5}: 263 (1884) ({\i H. erectum} (Naegeli & Peter) Zahn, {\i H. rubriflorum} Zahn;{\i  H. aurantiacum} / {\i hoppeanum}). •{\i  E.C. & E. Alps.} Au Ge He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. × {\b eminens} Peter, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  5}: 469 (1884) ({\i H. mirabile} Naegeli & Peter; {\i H. aurantiacum} /{\i  hoppeanum} /{\i  lactucella}). •{\i  E. C. & E. Alps.} Ge He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. H}. ×{\b  fuscum} Vill. in Vill., G. Lauth & A. Nestler,{\i  Précis Voy. Bot.} 19 (1812) ({\i H. blyttianum} Fries;{\i  H. aurantiacum }/{\i  lactucella}). Variable; sometimes more like one parent than the other. Differs from {\i H. aurantiacum} in its glaucous leaves and smaller capitula, and from {\i H. lactucella} in its taller habit, more numerous capitula and reddish or striped ligules. 2n = 54. •{\i  From Norway and N.W. Russia to the Alps and C. Jugoslavia.} Au Cz Fe Ga Ge He It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) [Ho].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. H}. ×{\b  peteranum} Kaeser, {\i Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges.}{\b  11}: 193 (1901) ({\i H. aurantiacum} / {\i lactucella} /{\i  pilosella}). Differs from all its parents and{\i  H. × fuscum} in its deeply furcate inflorescence of 2-5 capitula. •{\i  C. Europe; Fennoscandia.} Au Cz Ge He It No Po Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. × {\b moechiadium} Peter,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  5}: 491 (1884) ({\i H. cineraria} Naegeli & Peter, nom. illegit.; {\i H. aurantiacum} /{\i  lactucella} /{\i  pilosella }/{\i  praealtum}). •{\i  S. Norway} ({\i Telemark}). No.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. × {\b hyperboreum} Fries, {\i Nova Acta Reg. Soc. Sci. Upsal.}{\b  14}: 28 (1848) ({\i H. aurantiacum} /{\i  lactucella} /{\i  praealtum}). •{\i  Norway; Sudeten Mts.} ?Cz No Po.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. × {\b bryhnii} Blytt ex Omang,{\i  Nyt Mag. Naturvid.} ({\i Christiania}){\b  48}: 21 (1910) ({\i H. aurantiacum} /{\i  peleteranum}). •{\i  S. Norway} ({\i Setesdal}). No.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. H}. ×{\b  stoloniflorum} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  3}: 303 (1812) ({\i H. aurantiacum} /{\i  pilosella}). Variable; sometimes more like one parent than the other. Differs from its parents in its lax, often deeply furcate inflorescence. 2n = 45, 46. •{\i  C. Europe; N.W. Russia.} Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Rm Rs (N, C, W) [Br Ho Su].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b trigenes} Peter,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  6}: 122 (1884) ({\i H. dybowskianum} Rehmann; {\i H. aurantiacum} /{\i  pilosella} /{\i  praealtum}). •{\i  E.C. Europe.} Au Rs (C).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  56. H}. × {\b calomastix} Peter, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  6}: 121 (1884) ({\i H. aurantiacum} /{\i  praealtum}). Differs from {\i H. aurantiacum} in its indumentum of sparse simple eglandular hairs, and from {\i H. praealtum} in its reddish ligules. •{\i  E.C. Europe.} Au Cz ?Rm Rs (C, W) [Ho].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b atramentarium} (Naegeli & Peter) Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  82}({\b IV.280} ): 1472 (1923) ({\i H. aurantiacum} /{\i  piloselloides}). •{\i  C. Europe, from S.E. Germany to C. Romania.} Cz Ge Po Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b fulgens} Naegeli & Peter, {\i Hier. Mittel.-Eur. }{\b 1}: 349(1885) ({\i H. aurantiacum} /{\i  sphaerocephalum}). •{\i  E. Alps.} Au He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. H. echioides} Lumn.,{\i  Fl. Poson.} 348 (1791). Stolons usually absent, rarely long, leafy and bearing capitula. Rosette-leaves 30-170 × 5-17 mm, narrowly elliptical, subacute or obtuse, entire, long-attenuate at base, withering early, with stellate hairs numerous below and less numerous above, and with more or less numerous, rigid, usually appressed, bulbous-based simple eglandular hairs. Flowering stems 25-110 cm, with more or less numerous stellate hairs and more or less numerous, usually appressed and forwardly directed, rarely patent, rigid simple eglandular hairs, without glandular hairs, with (3-)5-20 leaves, the lower like those of the rosette, the upper very narrowly linear. Inflorescence more or less cymose-corymbose; capitula (5-)10-70. Involucral bracts 6-10 × 1-1·5 mm, linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, tomentose with stellate, and more or less numerous simple eglandular hairs, without glandular hairs. Ligules yellow. 2n = 36.{\i  Dry grassland and sandy ground. C. & S. Europe.} Au Bu Cz Ge Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b echioides}: Simple eglandular hairs of flowering stem appressed and forwardly directed. 2n = 36.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b procerum} (Fries) P. D. Sell,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 259 (1976) ({\i H. procerum} Fries): Simple eglandular hairs of flowering stem patent.{\i  Krym}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Most hybrids of this species can be recognized by the presence of some rigid hairs and they often have numerous cauline leaves like{\i  H. echioides}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. H}. ×{\b  macrotrichum} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 1}({\b 4}): 29 (1844) ({\i H. erythrodontum} Zahn;{\i  H. echioides} /{\i  hoppeanum}). Variable; some plants are more like one parent than the other. Differs from both parents in its lax or deeply furcate inflorescence of 3-15(-30) capitula. The hairs of the flowering stem are up to 18 mm, longer than those in any other taxon in the subgenus.{\i  E.C. Europe and Balkan peninsula.} Au Bu Gr Hu Ju ?Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b hortatschicum} Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  82}({\b IV.280}) 1515 (1923) ({\i H. echioides} /{\i  hoppeanum }/{\i  piloselloides}). •{\i  N. Greece} ({\i near Thessaloniki}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b budense} Borbás,{\i  Term.-Tud. Közl.}{\b  8}: 36 (1876) ({\i H. echioides} /{\i  hoppeanum} / {\i praealtum}). • Hungary ({\i near Budapest}). Hu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b tephroglaucum} Naegeli & Peter,{\i  Hier. Mittel-Eur. }{\b 1}: 513 (1885) ({\i H. echioides} / {\i lactucella}). •{\i  S.C. Czechoslovakia; C. Romania.} Cz Rm.
\par 

\par 
375}
\par