{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. H. sphaerocephalum} Froelich in Moessler, {\i Handb.} ed. 2,{\b  2}: 1386 (1828). Stolons absent or rarely short and thick. Rosette-leaves 20-80 × 6-14 mm, narrowly elliptical or narrowly oblanceolate, usually more or less acute, entire, gradually narrowed at base, glaucous, with few to numerous, rigid, long simple eglandular hairs, few to numerous stellate hairs mainly beneath, and few to numerous, minute glandular hairs. Flowering stems 9-30 cm, with numerous, long, rigid simple eglandular hairs, few to numerous stellate hairs, few to numerous, long, dark glandular hairs and few to numerous, minute, yellowish glandular hairs. Inflorescence lax; capitula (1-)2-4(-7); peduncles long. Involucral bracts 8-11 × 1-1·5 mm, broadly linear-lanceolate, more or less acute, with numerous stellate, numerous, long simple eglandular and few to numerous, dark glandular hairs. Ligules yellow, rarely with some red at apex. •{\i  E. & E.C. Alps. }Au Ge He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  This taxon is considered by Zahn to be intermediate between {\i H. glaciale} and {\i H. hoppeanum}, but it often occurs in fairly uniform populations without the parents and is best treated as a species.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. H. breviscapum} DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 5}: 439 (1815) ({\i H. pumilum} Lapeyr., non L.,{\i  H. candollei} Monnier, nom. illegit.). Stolons very short or absent. Rosette-leaves 20-50 × 2-6 mm, linear to oblanceolate, obtuse, with more or less numerous stellate and numerous, subrigid simple eglandular hairs 3-4 mm on both surfaces and minute glandular hairs on the margin and midrib. Flowering stems 2-10 cm, with dense stellate hairs, few to numerous simple eglandular hairs 2-3 mm, and few to numerous, small, dark glandular hairs, without or with 1(-2) linear leaves. Inflorescence irregularly cymose; capitula 1-6; peduncles short. Involucral bracts 6-7 × 0·75-1 mm, linear-lanceolate, more or less acute, with dense stellate hairs, dense, long, pale simple eglandular hairs and usually a few, small, dark glandular hairs. Ligules yellow, the outer usually red on outer face.{\i  Mountain rocks and pastures, }1950-2750 {\i m. • E. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. H. alpicola} Schleicher ex Gaudin,{\i  Fl. Helv. }{\b 5}: 73 (1829). Stolons absent. Rosette-leaves 25-100 × 3-7 mm, oblanceolate or very narrowly elliptical, mostly acute, with few stellate hairs and numerous, subrigid simple eglandular hairs 3-8 mm above and on the margin, and numerous stellate and minute glandular hairs and few simple eglandular hairs beneath. Flowering stems 10-25 cm, with numerous stellate hairs, numerous, subrigid simple eglandular hairs 3-8 mm, and few, small glandular hairs above, with 0-1(-3) leaves like those of the rosette. Inflorescence with 1-3(-5) capitula; peduncles short. Involucral bracts 7-12 × 0·75-1 mm, linear-lanceolate, mostly acute, with dense stellate hairs, villous with very dense simple eglandular hairs up to 8 mm and sometimes with a few, short glandular hairs. Ligules yellow. 2n = 36. {\i Mountain rocks and stony grassland. • C. Europe and Balkan peninsula.} ?Al Au Bu Cz Gr He It Ju Po Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b banaticola} Sudre,{\i  Bull. Acad. Int. Geogr. Bot.} ({\i Le Mans}) {\b 26}: 144 (1916) ({\i H. heuffelii} Janka, non Griseb., {\i H. oreophilum} Heuffel ex Zahn, nom. illegit.; {\i H. alpicola} /{\i  cymosum}). •{\i  N. part of Balkan peninsula; S.W. Romania.} Bu Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. × {\b annae-vetterae} Zahn in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur. }{\b 6}({\b 2}): 1211 (1929) ({\i H. alpicola} / {\i pilosella}). •{\i  Alpi Dolomitiche.} It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. H. piloselloides} Vill., {\i Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 34 (1775). Stolons usually absent, slender when present. Rosette-leaves 15-120 × 3-13 mm, linear, narrowly elliptical or oblanceolate, obtuse to acute, more or less glaucous, glabrous or with long, subrigid simple eglandular hairs. Flowering stems 15-50 cm, glabrous or with occasional glandular or simple eglandular hairs, with (0-)2-6(-10) leaves like those of the rosette and often more or less amplexicaul. Inflorescence lax; capitula 3-50; peduncles glabrous or with few glandular or simple eglandular hairs or with both, sometimes with a few stellate hairs. Involucral bracts 5-7 × 0·5-0·75 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, with few to numerous glandular hairs, sometimes a few stellate hairs and few to numerous simple eglandular hairs. Ligules yellow, rarely with a red stripe on outer face.{\i  C. & S. Europe}. Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju ?Po Rm Rs (W) Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b piloselloides} ({\i H. florentinum }All.): Involucral bracts with numerous glandular hairs, without or with an occasional simple eglandular hair. 2n = 36. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b megalomastix} (Naegeli & Peter) P.D. Sell,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 260 (1976) ({\i H. magyaricum} subsp.{\i  megalomastix} Naegeli & Peter): More frequently with stolons than subsp. ({\b a}). Involucral bracts with numerous simple eglandular hairs, without or with few glandular hairs. {\i C. & S.E. Europe}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pavichii} Heuffel,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 36}: 618 (1853), from C. & S.E. Europe (2n = 18), has been distinguished by its semiamplexicaul cauline leaves and long branches, but some plants in populations of {\i H. piloselloides} subsp. {\i piloselloides} have these characters.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. × {\b pseudeffusum} Peter, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  6}: 124 (1884) ({\i H. piloselloides} / {\i praealtum}). •{\i  Romania} ({\i north of Cluj}). Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H}. × {\b fulvisetum} Bertol.,{\i  Fl. Ital. }{\b 8}: 458 (1853) ({\i H. calabrum} Naegeli & Peter, {\i H. pseudopilosellinum} Zahn; {\i H. piloselloides} / {\i pseudopilosella}). •{\i  W. Italy, Corse.} Co It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. H. praealtum} Vill. ex Gochnat, {\i Tent. Pl. Cich.} 17 (1808). Stolons absent to very long and leafy, sometimes bearing a capitulum at apex. Rosette-leaves 30-180 × 5-12(-20) mm, oblanceolate, spathulate or narrowly elliptical, obtuse to acute, glabrous or with few to numerous, long, subrigid simple hairs on the margin and sometimes on the surfaces, sometimes with stellate hairs beneath. Flowering stems glabrous or with stellate hairs, simple eglandular hairs and glandular hairs, with 1-3(-9) leaves like those of the rosette but smaller. Inflorescence of few to many capitula usually in a cluster but sometimes with longer branches; peduncles with more or less dense stellate and few to numerous glandular and simple eglandular hairs. Involucral bracts 5-8·5 × 0·75-1 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, more or less acute, with more or less numerous stellate and simple eglandular and glandular hairs in various proportions. Ligules yellow, the outer sometimes with a red stripe on outer face.{\i  Much of Europe, but absent from many of the islands and from N. & E. Russia.} Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K) Sa Su Tu [Br Ho].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stolons absent or very short
\par 
2 Peduncles and involucral bracts with more or less numerous
\par 
  glandular hairs, without or with few simple eglandular 
\par 
  hairs ............................................................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b praealtum}
\par 
2 Peduncles and involucral bracts with numerous simple 
\par 
  eglandular hairs, without or with few glandular hairs
\par 
  ................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b anadenium} 
\par 
1 Stolons long and slender, sometimes with a capitulum at
\par 
  the apex
\par 
3 Involucral bracts with numerous simple eglandular hairs
\par 
  without or with few glandular hairs .............................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b bauhinii}
\par 
3 Involucral bracts with numerous glandular hairs, without
\par 
  or with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs ... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b thaumasium}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b praealtum}: Stolons very short or absent. Involucral bracts and peduncles with more or less numerous glandular hairs,
\par 

\par 
371}
\par