{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. × {\b tephrophyton} Oborny & Zahn, {\i Verh. Naturf. Ver. Brünn}{\b  43}: 77 (1905) ({\i H. echioides} /{\i  lactucella }/{\i  pilosella}). •{\i  S.C. Czechoslovakia }({\i near Znojmo}). Cz.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H}. × {\b occidentale} E. I. Nyárády, {\i Acta Fauna Fl. Universali }({\i Ser. Bot}.){\b  3}: 14 (1940) ({\i H. echioides} /{\i  lactucella }/{\i  praealtum}). •{\i  W.C. Romania}. Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. H}. ×{\b  bifurcum} Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc.} {\b 2}: 251 (1808) ({\i H. rothianum} Wallr.; {\i H. echioides} /{\i  pilosella}). Variable; some plants are more like one parent than the other. Differs from both parents in its lax to deeply furcate inflorescence with capitula intermediate in size.{\i  C., E. & S.E. Europe northwards to Latvia and southwards to Krym and Macedonia.} Au Bu Cz Ge Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. H}. ×{\b  heterodoxum} (Tausch) Naegeli & Peter, {\i Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  1}: 747 (1885) ({\i H. euchaetiiforme} Zahn,{\i  H. heterodoxiforme} Zahn ex Touton;{\i  H. echioides }/{\i  pilosella }/{\i  piloselloides}). Differs from{\i  H. echioides} in its indumentum being less rigid and its inflorescence more lax, from {\i H. pilosella} in having more than 1 capitulum per stem, and from{\i  H. piloselloides} in its larger capitula. Stolons absent or very short. •{\i  C. Europe.} Au Cz Ge Po Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. H}. ×{\b  euchaetium} Naegeli & Peter, {\i op. cit}. 764 (1885) ({\i H. echioides} /{\i  pilosella} /{\i  praealtum}). Differs from {\i H}. × {\i heterodoxum} in its long slender stolons. •{\i  C. & S.E. Europe}. Au Bu Cz Ge Hu Rm Rs (K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. H}. ×{\b  auriculoides} A. F. Lang, {\i Syll. Pl. Nov. Ratisbon.} ({\i Königl. Baier. Bot. Ges}.){\b  1}: 183 (1824) ({\i H. calodon} Tausch ex Peter;{\i  H. echioides }/{\i  piloselloides}). Differs from {\i H. echioides} in its less dense, less rigid indumentum, from{\i  H. piloselloides} in its larger capitula, and from{\i  H. × heterodoxum} in its more aggregated inflorescence. {\i C. & S.E. Europe.} Au Bu Cz Ge Gr Hu It Ju Rm Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 63. H}. ×{\b  echiogenes} (Naegeli & Peter) Juxip in Schischkin & Bobrov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  30}: 487 (1960) ({\i H. echioides} /{\i  praealtum}). Not distinguishable from {\i H. × auriculoides}. {\i H. piloselloides} and {\i H. praealtum} do not usually grow together.{\i  C. & C.E. Europe}. Au Bu Cz Ge Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  The correct distribution and synonymy of{\i  H. × auriculoides} and {\i H. × echiogenes} are difficult to ascertain.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. H. verruculatum} Link,{\i  Enum. Horti Berol. Alt.}{\b  2}: 287 (1822). Stolons absent. Rosette-leaves 30-200 × 5-40 mm, usually elliptical to linear-lanceolate, more or less acute, entire, attenuate at base, withering early, with numerous stellate hairs, few to numerous, rigid simple eglandular hairs and scattered, small glandular hairs. Flowering stems 45-110 cm, with numerous stellate and few to numerous glandular hairs throughout, with simple eglandular hairs only at the base, with 4-12 leaves smaller and narrower than those of the rosette and usually semiamplexicaul. Inflorescence laxly paniculate to umbellate; capitula 10-60. Involucral bracts 8-11 × 1-2 mm, linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, with dense stellate and yellowish-brown glandular hairs, without or with a few simple eglandular hairs. Ligules yellow.{\i  E.C. Russia.} Rs (C). ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Hieracium}. Stock erect or oblique, never stoloniferous. Stems usually solitary, sometimes few. Leaves entire to incisedentate, at least the basal usually petiolate; cauline solitary to numerous, usually large, rarely absent. Ligules usually yellow, rarely green or white; glabrous or hairy. Pollen rarely copious, sometimes absent. Achenes 2·5-5 mm; ribs apically confluent into an obscure ring; pappus-hairs in 2 rows, both long and short intermixed. Receptacular pits shortly dentate to fimbriate-dentate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   (A) Leaves usually without glandular or plumose hairs, the basal usually numerous, the cauline few to numerous, or absent. Capitula few to numerous. Receptacular pits dentate, fimbriate-dentate or ciliate-dentate. Mainly early-flowering (March-July), though some plants continue to flower throughout the year.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (i) Leaves green or glaucous; basal numerous; cauline 0-2(-3). Capitula 1-15 (-numerous); inflorescences often corymbose; peduncles often arcuate. Ligules glabrous or with simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas yellow or discoloured. Achenes 3-4 mm, dark. Margins of receptacular pits more or less dentate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. H. murorum} group. Stems (10-)20-50(-80) cm, with few to numerous stellate and glandular hairs at least in the upper part. Leaves with simple eglandular hairs throughout or glabrous above, and sometimes with stellate hairs beneath; basal very variable, numerous, 20-150 × 15-70 mm, green, elliptical, ovate, lanceolate or oblong, obtuse to acute, entire to deeply laciniate-dentate (the teeth often more or less mammiform), attenuate to truncate at base, the outer usually broader, more obtuse and less dentate than the inner; cauline 0-1(-2), like the basal or bractlike. Capitula (1-)4-15(-numerous), often more or less corymbosely arranged; peduncles often arcuate, with dense stellate and glandular hairs and sometimes an occasional simple eglandular hair. Involucre 7·5-14 × 5-12 mm; bracts obtuse to acute, with numerous glandular hairs, usually few to numerous stellate hairs and sometimes a few eglandular hairs. Stigmas yellow or discoloured. Ligules glabrous or with simple eglandular hairs at apex. 2n = 27, 36.{\i  Most of Europe}. All except Az Bl Cr Fa Sb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  It is difficult to give with confidence the original native distribution. Plants of this group are certainly native in rocky places, grassland and open woodland in much of Europe. In the lowlands they often occur on disturbed ground and other open habitats, which they may have reached relatively recently.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  K. H. Zahn in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich }{\b 75-76}({\b IV.280}): 287-342 (1921) describes 345 subspecies and many varieties under{\i  H. murorum}, and numerous other taxa have been described since. The quick spread of species of this group over large areas of disturbed land may ensure the survival of new variants more readily than in the case of species growing in native habitats where competition may allow only a few achenes to germinate. N. Hylander, {\i Symb. Bot. Upsal.}{\b  7}({\b 1}): 125-274 (1943), has described 143 species, most of them new, belonging to this and the following two aggregate species, which have been introduced into grasslands in Sweden. Many of them are not known elsewhere.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. densiglandulum} P. D. Sell & C. West, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71} : 263 (1976) ({\i H. glandulosissimum} (Dahlst.) K. Joh., non Brenner). • Au Bu Cz Fe Ge He Hu Su.
\par 
{\b  H. exotericum} Jordan ex Boreau, {\i Fl. Centre Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  2}: 417 (1857). Al Br Co Cz Da Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Rm.
\par 
{\b  H. gentile} Jordan ex Boreau, {\i op. cit.} 415 (1857). Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho It Ju Po Rs (B, C, K).
\par 
 {\b H. grandidens} Dahlst., {\i Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.}{\b  25}({\b 3}): 126 (1893). 2n = 27. Au Br Co Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Su.
\par 

\par 
376}
\par