{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min51}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min52}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords931}{\nofchars5311}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 flowers c. 2\'b75 mm in diameter, rotate, yellowish-white to pinkish. Mericarp 1, 1\'b74-1\'b76 mm, reniform. 2n = 22. }{\i\fs28 Mountain rocks and screes. \bullet  S. Albania, S. & W. Greece, Kriti.}{\fs28  Al Cr Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. V. hispida}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Syst. Nat.}{\fs28  ed. 10,}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 1307 (1759). Annual. Stems 6-20 cm; lower internodes up to 25 mm, much abbreviated in inflorescence, more or less scabrid-hispid, particularly above. Leaves 6-10 \'d7 2-3\'b75 mm, narrowly obovate to oblanceolate, usually mucronate. Peduncle and pedicels broadly coalescent and strongly thickening, tightly encircling the fruit, dorsally with about 15-25 straight bristles. Hermaphrodite flowers 1\'b75-2 mm, more or less cup-shaped. Mericarps usually 2, 1\'b71-1\'b74 mm, papillose. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Rocks and other dry places. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.}{\fs28  Bl Co Cr *Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. V. muralis}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  1051 (1753). Like }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 but smaller; stems usually not more than 15 cm, and internodes up to about 12 mm, glabrescent, more or less pubescent only above. Leaves 3-6\'b75 \'d7 2-2\'b75 mm, obtuse. Peduncle and pedicels with conspicuous dorsal horn; horn and pedicels with hooked bristles. Hermaphrodite flowers 1-1\'b76 mm. Mericarp usually 1, 1-1\'b72 mm, smooth. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Rocky ground, walls and dry waste places. Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.}{\fs28  Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 9.              Rubia}{\fs28               L.
\par }{\fs24 By P.W. Ball.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Herbaceous or woody perennials. Leaves in whorls of 4-8, at least above, aculeolate on the margin and midrib beneath. Flowers in axillary cymes or panicles. Calyx minute or absent. Corolla with short tube and usually 5 lobes; stigmas capitate. Fruit fleshy, usually with only one, 1-seeded, mericarp developing.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Anthers 0\'b75-0\'b76 mm, linear-oblong, 5-6 times as long as wide ...}{\b\fs28 4. tinctorum}{\fs28 
\par 1 Anthers 0\'b72-0\'b73 mm, orbicular-ovate to suborbicular,
\par   not more than twice as long as wide
\par 2 Stems entirely herbaceous; lower leaves opposite ......................... }{\b\fs28 3. tatarica}{\fs28 
\par 2 Stems woody below and persistent; all leaves in whorls of 4-8
\par 3 Cymes 4-10 cm, distinctly exceeding the leaves;
\par   corolla-lobes 2-3 mm ................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. peregrina}{\fs28 
\par 3 Cymes 1-2 cm, shorter than or about equalling the leaves;
\par   corolla-lobes 3\'b75-4 mm ................................................................ }{\b\fs28 2. tenuifolia}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. R. peregrina}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  109 (1753) (incl. }{\i\fs28 R. reiseri }{\fs28 Hal\'e1csy ex Hayek). Stem 30-120 cm, climbing, glabrous or retrorse-aculeolate; lower part of stem woody and persistent. Leaves 15-60 \'d7 3-20 mm, in whorls of 4-8, linear to broadly ovate-elliptical, coriaceous, dark green, the lateral veins usually obscure. Cymes 4-10 cm, many-flowered, exceeding the leaves. Corolla 4-6 mm in diameter, yellowish-green; lobes 2-3 mm, cuspidate; anthers 0\'b72-0\'b73 mm, orbicular-ovate to suborbicular. 2n = 44. }{\i\fs28 Hedges, thickets and rocky ground. S. & W. Europe, northwards to}{\fs28  c. 53\'b0 30' }{\i\fs28 N. in W. Ireland.}{\fs28  Al Az Bl Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hb Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par Extremely variable in the shape and size of the leaves.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 R. angustifolia}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Mantissa }{\fs28 39 (1767) (}{\i\fs28 R. peregrina}{\fs28  var.}{\i\fs28  balearica}{\fs28  Willk.), from Islas Baleares, and perhaps also occurring in S. Spain, differs from }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  in being intricately caespitose, in having linear leaves 10-20 \'d7 1-4 mm, scabrid, retrorse-aculeolate on both surfaces and with revolute margins, and in having shorter, scarcely cuspidate corolla-lobes. It has 2n = 66.}{\i\fs28  Its status is uncertain, but it may be specifically distinct.}{\fs28 
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. R. tenuifolia}{\fs28  D'Urv., }{\i\fs28 Enum. }{\fs28 17 (1822) (}{\i\fs28 R. olivieri}{\fs28  A. Richard). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 but cymes 1-2 cm, shorter than or about equalling the leaves; corolla 7-8 mm in diameter; corolla-lobes 3\'b75-4 mm, acuminate.}{\i\fs28  Scrub and rocky ground. S. Greece and Aegean region.}{\fs28  Cr Gr Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. R. tatarica}{\fs28  (Trev.) Friedrich Schmidt Petrop.,}{\i\fs28  M\'e9m. Acad. Sci. P\'e9tersb.}{\fs28  ser. 7, }{\b\fs28 12}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 143 (1868). Stem 15-30 cm, erect, herbaceous. Leaves 15-60 \'d7 5-10 mm, the lower opposite, the middle and upper in whorls of 4, lanceolate, acuminate; lateral veins prominent beneath. Cymes 2-3 cm, usually not more than 10-flowered, shorter than or about equalling the leaves. Corolla c. 4 mm in diameter, greenish-yellow; lobes acuminate; anthers c. 0\'b72 mm, suborbicular.}{\i\fs28  Rocky, gravelly or sandy places. S.E. Ukraine, S.E. Russia}{\fs28 . Rs (W, E).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. R. tinctorum}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  109 (1753) (incl. }{\i\fs28 R. iberica}{\fs28  (Fischer ex DC.) C. Koch). Stem up to 100 cm, climbing. Leaves 20-100 \'d7 5-25 mm, in whorls of 4-6, lanceolate or oblong-elliptical, light green, with prominent lateral veins beneath. Cymes 5-30 cm, many-flowered, exceeding the leaves. Corolla 5-6 mm in diameter, pale yellow; lobes c. 3 mm, acuminate; anthers 0\'b75-0\'b76 mm, linear-oblong.}{\i\fs28  Hedges, thickets and waste places. Formerly cultivated for the dye}{\fs28  (madder)}{\i\fs28  extracted from its roots; widely naturalized in S. and C. Europe, and perhaps native in the E. Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  *Al *Cr *Gr *It *Ju *Si *Tu [Au Bl Bu Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu Lu Sa]. (}{\i\fs28 W. & C. Asia}{\fs28 ).
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs36 PLANTAGINALES
\par }
\pard \ {\fs36 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 163.          PLANTAGINACEAE}{\fs28 
\par }{\fs24 Edit. D. M. Moore.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Herbs or dwarf shrubs. Leaves usually in basal rosettes, sometimes opposite or alternate, exstipulate. Flowers (2-)4-merous, actinomorphic, usually hermaphrodite, bracteate, usually in spikes. Sepals connate at base, persistent. Corolla gamopetalous, scarious. Filaments long; anthers conspicuous. Ovary superior, 1- to 4-locular; style 1; ovules 1 to many, axile or basal. Fruit a circumscissile capsule or indehiscent; seeds endospermic, with straight embryo, often mucilaginous when wet.
\par 
\par Terrestrial; stolons absent; flowers mostly hermaphrodite;
\par   fruit a circumscissile capsule ........................................................ }{\b\fs28 1. Plantago}{\fs28 
\par Aquatic; stolons present; flowers unisexual; fruit indehiscent ...... }{\b\fs28 2. Littorella}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.             Plantago}{\fs28              L.
\par }{\fs24 By A.O. Chater & D. Cartier (spp. 4-10 & 15-17).
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Terrestrial herbs or dwarf shrubs. Leaves in basal rosettes, or opposite or alternate on branched stems. Flowers 4-merous, in pedunculate spikes, usually hermaphrodite. Corolla-lobes usually patent or deflexed. Stamens inserted on corolla-tube. Ovary 2- to 4-locular; ovules 2-many. Capsule circumscissile, 2-to 4-locular
\par 
\par   Literature: R. Pilger in Engler,}{\i\fs28  Pflanzenreich}{\b\fs28  102}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 IV.269}{\fs28 ): 39-432 (1937).
\par 
\par   In the descriptions measurements of the leaves include the petiole, descriptions of bracts refer to those in the middle of the spike unless otherwise indicated, and measurements of scape length include the spike.
\par 
\par 38}
\par }