{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. corruscans } Fries, {\i Uppsala Univ. Årsskr.}{\b  1862} ({\i Math. Nat., Epicr. Hier.}): 60 (1862) ({\i H. chloropsis }/ {\i glaucopsis}). •{\i  S.W. Alps}. Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. fastuosum } Zahn in Koch, {\i Syn. Deutsch. Fl.} ed. 3, {\b 2}: 1900 (1901) ({\i H. picroides} / {\i valdepilosum}). •{\i  E. Alps.} It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. glaucopsis } group ({\i H. chondrillifolium} /{\i  cydonifolium}). •{\i  S.W. Alps}. Ga It. (Including {\b H. glaucopsis} Gren. & Godron, {\i Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 355 (1850). Ga It.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. hispidulum } group ({\i H. humile} /{\i  scorzonerifolium}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga It. (Including {\b H. hispidulum} Arvet-Touvet, {\i Hier. Alpes Fr.} 43 (1888). Ga It.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. intumescens } Naegeli & Peter,{\i  Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  2}: 230 (1886) ({\i H. alpinum} / {\i glabratum}). •{\i  S.E. Alps}. It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. kalsianum } group ({\i H. picroides} /{\i  villosum}). •{\i  C. & E. Alps.} Au He It. (Including{\b  H. kalsianum }Huter,{\i  Zeitschr. Deutsch. Alpen-Ver. }{\b 2}: 557 (1871). Au It.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. krizsnae } Lengyel & Zahn,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  25}: 304 (1927) ({\i H. caesium }/ {\i villosum}). • Cz.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. malovanicum } Degen & Zahn, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  6}: 226 (1907). •{\i  W. Jugoslavia.} ?Al Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. misaucinum } group ({\i H. dentatum} /{\i  humile}). •{\i  S.W. & C. Alps.} Ga He. (Including {\b H. misaucinum} Naegeli & Peter,{\i  Nier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  2}: 238 (1886). Ga He.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. mollitum } Arvet-Touvet in Decne,{\i  Cat. Gr. Mus. Paris}{\b  1877}: 5 (1877) ({\i H. chloropsis} /{\i  valdepilosum}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. plantagineum } group ({\i H. dentatum} /{\i  scorzonerifolium}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga. (Including {\b H. plantagineum }Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Hier. Alpes Fr. }31 (1888) Ga.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. plumieri } Arvet-Touvet ex Wilczek,{\i  Bull. Trav. Soc. Murith.}{\b  31}: 105 (1902) ({\i H. sublongifolium} (Zahn) Zahn; {\i H. schmidtii} / {\i villosum}).{\i  E. & E.C. Alps.} He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. richenii } J. Murr,{\i  Jahres-Kat. Wien. Bot. Tauschver. }{\b 1900}: 132 (1900) ({\i H. bifidum} /{\i  chlorifolium}). •{\i  E. Alps.} Au.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. rostanii } group ({\i H. alpinum} / {\i villosum}). • Au It Rm. (Including{\b  H. rostanii} Naegeli & Peter,{\i  Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  2}: 229 (1886). It.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. sauzei } (Arvet-Touvet) Arvet-Touvet, {\i Hier. Gall. Hisp. Cat.} 60 (1913) ({\i H. schmidtii} /{\i  valdepilosum}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. silsinum } group ({\i H. valdepilosum} / {\i vulgatum}). •{\i  E. Alps.} He It Ju. (Including {\b H. silsinum} Naegeli & Peter, {\i Hier. Mittel Eur.}{\b  2}: 227 (1886). He.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. speciosum } Willd. ex Hornem., {\i Hort. Hafn.}{\b  2}: 764 (1815) ({\i H. scorzonerifolium} /{\i  umbellatum}). •{\i  Tatra.} Cz.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. spectabile } (Fries) Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  76}({\b IV.280}): 129 (1921) ({\i H.chloropsis} / {\i glaucopsis}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (viii) Plant usually with long, often flexuous simple eglandular hairs. Leaves more or less glaucous or pale green, rarely with small glandular hairs on margin; basal few to numerous; cauline 0-4, small. Capitula 1-3(-6). Peduncles long. Ligules glabrous or with a few short simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas yellow to discoloured. Achenes 2·5-3·5 mm, pale to dark brown. Margins of receptacular pits fimbriate-dentate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 120. H. piliferum} group. Stems 5-15(-40) cm, with few to numerous stellate hairs, villous with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs (rarely without simple eglandular hairs) and sometimes a few glandular hairs. Leaves with few to numerous long, flexuous simple eglandular hairs; basal few to numerous, 20-110 × 5-20 mm, lanceolate to oblong, acute to obtuse, usually entire, gradually narrowed at base into a short, winged petiole; cauline 0-1(-2). Capitula 1-2(-5). Involucre 9-15(-17) × 15-20 mm; bracts narrow, long-acute, with dense, long, flexuous simple eglandular hairs, often with a few small glandular hairs. Stigmas yellow or discoloured. Ligules glabrous. 1700-2800{\i  m. • Pyrenees; Alps; mountains of S.C. France; Carpathians; mountains of W. Jugoslavia.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. glanduliferum } Hoppe in Sturm, {\i Deutschl. Fl.}{\b  39}: 623 (1815). {\i Alps.} Au Ga He It Ju.
\par 
  {\b H. piliferum } Hoppe, {\i Bot. Taschenb.}{\b  1799}: 129 (1799). Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm.
\par 
  {\b H. subnivale } Gren. & Godron,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 357 (1850).{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 121. H. dasytrichum} group ({\i H. glanduliferum} /{\i  villosum}). Like {\b 120} but whole plant with dense simple eglandular hairs 5-10 mm and 2-4 ovate to lanceolate cauline leaves. 1800-2500 {\i m. • Alps.} Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. dasytrichum } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Monogr. Hier.} 25 (1873). Au Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 122. H. aphyllum} group ({\i H. dentatum} /{\i  piliferum}). Like {\b 120} but leaves elliptical to lanceolate, denticulate to dentate, the cauline 0-3; styles usually yellow. 1900-2300 {\i m. • Alps.} Ga Ge He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. aphyllum } Naegeli & Peter,{\i  Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  2}: 234 (1889). Ga He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 123. H. cochlearioides} group ({\i H. alpinum} /{\i  piliferum}). Like {\b 120} but leaves and involucre with small glandular hairs; ligules with short simple eglandular hairs at apex. 1700-2600 {\i m. •  Alps}. Au Ga Ge He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. cochlearioides } Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  76}({\b IV.280}): 141 (1921). Au He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 124. H. armerioides} group ({\i H. bifidum }/{\i  piliferum}). Stems 10-25(-35) cm, with dense stellate hairs, few to numerous simple eglandular hairs and numerous dark glandular hairs. Leaves with few to numerous long simple eglandular hairs; basal 5-8, 15-70 × 5-20 mm, mostly lanceolate, obtuse to acute, entire, gradually narrowed into a short petiole; cauline 0-1(-3), linear. Capitula 1-3(-6); peduncles with dense stellate hairs, few to numerous simple eglandular hairs and few to numerous dark glandular hairs. Involucre (8-)10-12(-15) × 10-15 mm; bracts long-acute, with dense, long simple eglandular hairs and few to numerous dark glandular hairs. Ligules glabrous. Stigmas yellow or discoloured. Achenes pale to dark brown. •{\i  Alps.} Au Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. absconditum } Huter ex Dalla Torre,{\i  Anleit. Beob. Bestimm. Alpenpfl. }264 (1882).{\i  E. Alps.} Au He It.
\par 
  {\b H. anadenum } (Burnat & Gremli) Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Hier. Alpes Fr.} 41 (1888).{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par 
  {\b H. armerioides } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Essai Pl. Dauph.} 48 (1871). {\i Alps.} Ga He It.
\par 
  {\b H. leucochlorum } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Monogr. Hier.} 28 (1873).{\i  Alps.} Ga He It.
\par 

\par 
386}
\par