{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. verbascifolium } Vill. in Vill., G. Lauth & A. Nestler, {\i Précis Voy. Bot.} 56 (1812).{\i  S.W. Alps. }Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 141. H. chaboissaei} group ({\i H. lanatum} /{\i  umbrosum}). Stems 30-60 cm, with stellate hairs, subplumose hairs and simple eglandular hairs. Leaves with dense subplumose hairs throughout; basal 45-65 × 15-22 mm, elliptical to lanceolate-elliptic, obtuse to acute, subentire to dentate, attenuate at base; cauline 2-6, like the basal, sessile. Capitula 2-5(-12); peduncles long, with dense stellate and glandular hairs and scattered simple eglandular hairs. Involucre 11-14 × 10-12 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, with stellate hairs, short simple eglandular hairs and more or less numerous glandular hairs. Stigmas discoloured. Ligules with hairs at apex. •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. chaboissaei } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Addit. Monogr. Hier.} 11 (1879). Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Other species and groups in (xiii):
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. amphisericophorum } Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  76}({\b VI.280}): 547 (1921) ({\i H. lanatum} /{\i  piliferum}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. argothrix } group ({\i H. lanatum }/{\i  valdepilosum}). •{\i  S.W. Alps}. Ga It. (Including {\b H. argothrix} Naegeli & Peter, {\i Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  2}: 303 (1889). Ga It.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. beyeri } Zahn in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich }{\b 76}({\b IV.280}): 548 (1921) ({\i H. lanatum} / {\i lawsonii}). •{\i  S.W.Alps.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. bornetii } Burnat & Gremli,{\i  Cat. Hier. Alpes Marit.} 29 (1883) ({\i H. humile} /{\i  lanatum}). •{\i  S.W. Alps; N. Appennini.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. burnatii } group ({\i H. glaucum } /{\i  lanatum}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga It. (Including {\b H. burnatii} Arvet-Touvet ex Burnat & Gremli,{\i  Cat. Hier. Alpes Marit.} 57 (1883). It.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. chlorelloides } Zahn,{\i  Hier. Alpes Marit.} 242 (1916) ({\i H. murorum} /{\i  pellitum}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. chloropsis } group ({\i H. chondrillifolium} / {\i lanatum}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga. (Including {\b H. chloropsis} Gren. & Godron, {\i Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 368 (1851). Ga.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. coronarifolium } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Monogr. Hier. }34 (1873) ({\i H. lanatum} / {\i verbascifolium}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. lannesianum } Arvet-Touvet, {\i Hier. Gall. Hisp. Cat.} 276 (1913) (?{\i H. pellitum} /{\i  viride}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. lychnioides } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Monogr. Hier.} 35 (1873) ({\i H. monnieri} /{\i  verbascifolium}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. monnieri } group ({\i H. chondrillifolium} /{\i  lanatum}). •{\i  S.W. Alps}. Ga. (Including {\b H. monnieri} Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Bull. Soc. Murith.}{\b  31}: 107 (1902). Ga.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. monregalense } group ({\i H. juranum} /{\i  lanatum}). 1500-2000 {\i m. • S.W. Alps.} Ga It. (Including{\b  H. monregalense} Burnat & Gremli,{\i  Cat. Hier. Alpes Marit.} 33 (1883). It.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pamphilii } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Hier. Alpes Fr.} 26 (1888) ({\i H. lanatum} / {\i scorzonerifolium}). •{\i  S.W. Alps}. Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pseudolaggeri } group ({\i H. jordanii }/{\i  murorum}). •{\i  W.C. Alps. }He. (Including{\b  H. pseudolaggeri} (Zahn) Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich }{\b 76}({\b IV.280}): 551 (1921). He.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pteropogon } Arvet-Touvet, {\i Addit. Monogr. Hier.} 11 (1879) ({\i H. lanatum} /{\i  villosum}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. ravaudii } Arvet-Touvet, {\i Monogr. Hier.} 38 (1873) ({\i H. amplexicaule} /{\i  lanatum}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. subpamphilii } Zahn,{\i  Hier. Alpes Marit.} 116 (1916) ({\i H. chloropsis} /{\i  pamphilii}). •{\i  Alpes Maritimes.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. subtomentosum } group ({\i H. chloropsis} /{\i  lanatum}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga It. (Including {\b H. subtomentosum} (Burnat & Gremli) Zahn, {\i Hier. Alpes Marit.} 231 (1916). Ga It.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (xiv) Leaves all cauline, or the basal withered at anthesis, numerous, usually more or less congested below, often more or less amplexicaul, with rather long, dense plumose hairs. Involucre large, with long simple eglandular or more or less plumose hairs or with stellate hairs, usually without glandular hairs. Stigmas yellow or discoloured. Achenes pale yellowish-brown or stramineous. Margins of receptacular pits shortly dentate, glabrous.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 142. H. pannosum} group. Stems 10-60 cm, villous with dense, long plumose hairs, simple eglandular hairs and numerous stellate hairs, without glandular hairs. Leaves all cauline, up to 12(-20), 40-200 × 12-55 mm, oblanceolate-oblong, obovate, oblanceolate or elliptical, obtuse to more or less acute, entire to dentate, narrowed at base, usually sessile, lanate with dense, long plumose hairs, without glandular hairs. Involucre (10-)13-20 × 15-25 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, villous, with few to numerous stellate and minute glandular hairs almost completely concealed by the dense, long, more or less plumose or simple eglandular hairs. Stigmas yellow or discoloured. Achenes pale yellowish-brown or stramineous. 2n = 36.{\i  Balkan peninsula, Aegean region.} Al Bu Cr Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. friwaldii } Reichenb. fil., {\i Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  19}({\b 1}): 94 (1859).{\i  Balkan peninsula, Kriti}. Al Cr Gr Ju.
\par 
 {\b H. pannosum } Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 1}({\b 4}): 32 (1844).{\i  Balkan peninsula, N. Aegean region.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 143. H. gymnocephalum} group. Stems 15-65 cm, with numerous long plumose hairs below and few or none above. Leaves up to 200 × 40 mm, all cauline but sometimes forming a false rosette near the base, up to 15, broadly elliptical or oblong, rarely lanceolate, obtuse to more or less acute, entire or slightly denticulate, long-attenuate into a sessile base, villous with dense plumose hairs and often minute glandular hairs on the margin. Capitula (1-)3-8(-30); peduncles remote, long, arcuate-erect, glabrous or with few simple eglandular or glandular hairs or with both. Involucre 12-15 × 12-15 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, glabrous or with a few simple eglandular or glandular hairs or with both. Ligules glabrous. Stigmas yellow. Achenes pale to blackish-brown. •{\i  W. Jugoslavia, Albania.} Al Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 
 {\b H. gymnocephalum } Griseb. ex Pant., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  23}: 266 (1873). Al Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 144. H. pichleri} group ({\i H. gymnocephalum} /{\i  pannosum}). Like {\b 143} but involucral bracts with more or less numerous simple eglandular or more or less plumose hairs. •{\i  W. Jugoslavia, N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pichleri} A. Kerner,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.} {\b 24}: 170 (1874). Al Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 145. H. gaudryi} group ({\i H. gymnocephalum } / {\i pannosum}). Like {\b 143} but involucral bracts and peduncles with dense simple eglandular or subplumose hairs and more or less dense stellate hairs. •{\i  N. & C. Greece, S. Albania.} Al Gr.
\par 

\par 
389}
\par