{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 stellate hairs, numerous short simple eglandular hairs and small glandular hairs. 2n = 27. •{\i  C. & W. Europe, extending to S. Sweden.} Br Cz Ga Ge Hb He Hs Hu It Lu No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. onosmoides } Fries, {\i Nova Acta Reg. Soc. Sci. Upsal.}{\b  14}: 102 (1848). Cz Ga Ge He Hs It No Su.
\par 
{\b  H. oreades} Fries, {\i op. cit.} 100 (1848). Ge No Su.
\par 
{\b  H. subrude} (Arvet-Touvet) Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Addit. Monogr. Hier.} 11 (1879). 2n = 27. Br Cz Ga Hb He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 87. H. saxifragum} group ({\i H. schmidtii} / {\i vulgatum}). Like {\b 86} but basal leaves few, glabrous or nearly so above; cauline 2-4(-6); peduncles and involucre with more numerous glandular hairs and few to numerous simple eglandular hairs. •{\i  N.W. Europe, extending eastwards to Finland and southwards to Corse.} Au Br Co Cz Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hs Hu Is It No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. argenteum } Fries, {\i Nova Acta Reg. Soc. Sci. Upsal.}{\b  14}: 99 (1848). Br Hb Is No Su.
\par 
 {\b H. extensum } Lübeck ex Lindeb. in Hartman,{\i  Handb. Skand. Fl.} ed. 11, 42 (1879). Su.
\par 
 {\b H. saxifragum } Fries,{\i  Nova Acta Reg. Soc. Sci. Upsal.}{\b  14}: 100 (1848). Au Cz Fe Ga Ge No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 88. H. scoticum} F. J. Hanb., {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}){\b  26}: 206 (1888) ({\i H. alatum} /{\i  saxifragum}). Stems 20-50 cm, with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs, those near the base often deflexed, sometimes with a few stellate and glandular hairs above. Leaves with simple eglandular hairs beneath and on margin and sometimes a few also above, the hairs on the margin more or less rigid; basal 40-120 × 15-60 mm, mostly broadly ovate, obtuse to acute, denticulate to serrate-dentate, cuneate at base, with short petiole; cauline (2-)3-7(-12), the lower like the basal, shortly petiolate, the upper lanceolate, sessile. Capitula (1-)2-8(-15); peduncles long, with numerous stellate hairs, few simple eglandular hairs and sometimes a few small glandular hairs. Involucre 10-15 × 10-15 mm; bracts broad, more or less acute, with few stellate hairs, numerous simple eglandular hairs and few glandular hairs. •{\i  British Isles, Færöer.} Br Fa Hb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 89. H. caledonicum} group ({\i H. alatum} / {\i schmidtii}). Like {\b 88} but cauline leaves 1-3; involucral bracts obtuse. 2n = 27. •{\i  British Isles, Færöer.} Br Fa Hb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. caledonicum } F. J. Hanb., {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 27}: 75 (1889). 2n = 27. Br Fa Hb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Other species and groups in ({\b iv}):
\par 
.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. angustatum } group ({\i H. angustatiforme} P. D. Sell & C. West, {\i H. cacuminum }(A. Ley) A. Ley,{\i  H. ericetorum} (Fries) Dahlst., non Freyn,{\i  H. imbricatum} Lindeb., {\i H. melanostictum} Dahlst., {\i H. microcymon} K. Joh.,{\i  H. nitens} Lindeb.;{\i  H. caesium} / {\i vulgatum}). •{\i  Fennoscandia; Britain.} Br Fe No Su. (Including {\b H. angustatum} Lindeb., {\i Hier. Scand. Exsicc. }{\b 2}: no. 64 (1868). Br No.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. lindebergii } (Nyman) Dahlst.,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} nov. ser., {\b 26}({\b 3}): 208 (1894) ({\i H. laevigatum} /{\i  saxifragum}). •{\i  Fennoscandia.} Fe No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. proximum } F. J. Hanb., {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}){\b  27}: 76 (1889) ({\i H. hanburyanum} Zahn, nom. illegit.; {\i H. alatum} / {\i onosmoides}). •{\i  Scotland.} Br.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. rosulatum } group ({\i H. nigrescens} /{\i  saxifragum}). •{\i  Norway.} No. (Including {\b H. rosulatum} Lindeb., {\i Hier. Scand. Exsicc.}{\b  3}: no. 117 (1878). No.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   (v) Apex of rhizome with dense, long hairs. Leaves usually more or less glaucous, with long simple or subplumose eglandular hairs especially on the margin, the midrib beneath and petiole, the basal numerous, the cauline 0-8, more or less amplexicaul. Capitula usually few on long peduncles. Ligules with few to dense short hairs at apex. Stigmas usually yellow. Achenes 1·5-3·5 mm, dark. Margins of receptacular pits dentate, usually densely ciliate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 90. H. laniferum} group. Stems 5-20(-30) cm, glabrous or nearly so. Leaves glaucous, glabrous or with subplumose hairs on the margin and midrib beneath; basal 40-80 × 5-10 mm, obovate, lanceolate-obovate or spathulate, obtuse to acute, entire to denticulate, narrowed into a winged petiole; cauline 0-3, small or bract-like; petioles with numerous, long, simple eglandular hairs. Capitula 1-2(-4), more or less nodding in bud; peduncles slender, glabrous or with a few stellate and small glandular hairs. Involucre 6-8 × 5-7 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, outer slightly squarrose, glabrous or with a few stellate or small glandular hairs. Achenes 1·5-2·5 mm. 2n = 18. 1500-2000 {\i m. • Mountains of E. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b H. laniferum } Cav., {\i Icon. Descr.}{\b  3}: 181 (1795). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 91. H. elisaeanum} group ({\i N. candidum} /{\i  laniferum}). Like {\b 90} but more hairy; cauline leaves ovate-cordate; capitula (1-)2-3(-8); involucre 7-9(-11) mm, with numerous stellate and few glandular hairs; achenes (1·5-)2·3-2·8 mm. 2n = 18. 1400-2200{\i  m. Mountains of E. Spain and Mallorca.} Bl Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. elisaeanum } Arvet-Touvet ex Willk., {\i Suppl. Prodr. Fl. Hisp.} 120 (1893). Bl Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 92. H. candidum} group. Stems 10-30 cm, glabrous or with a few short simple eglandular hairs at the base. Leaves with short, crispate subplumose hairs on the surface and longer subplumose hairs up to 3·5 mm on the midrib beneath and on the petioles, rarely glabrous; basal 40-80 × 5-15 mm, obovate or obovate-spathulate, oblong-lanceolate or lanceolate, obtuse to shortly acute, sinuate-denticulate, narrowed into a petiole; cauline 1-2(-3), broadly ovate-cordate, semiamplexicaul. Capitula 1-8, erect in bud; peduncles long, slender, arcuate, with 1-2 bracts, with scattered small glandular hairs and dense stellate hairs just below the capitulum. Involucre 6-9 × 5-8 mm; bracts narrow, more or less acute, with numerous stellate hairs and few to numerous glandular hairs. Achenes 1·5-2 mm. 550-1900{\i  m. • E. & C. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 
Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b H. candidum } Scheele, {\i Linnaea}{\b  32}: 673 (1863). Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 93. H. phlomoides} group. Stems 15-30(-40) cm, glabrous or nearly so. Leaves dark green or glaucous, with dense, more or less subplumose hairs 1-3 mm; basal 10-100 × 10-25 mm, obovate, obovate-oblong, elliptical or lanceolate, obtuse to shortly acute, entire to denticulate, narrowed into a short, winged petiole; cauline 1-2, ovate-lanceolate or lanceolate, more or less amplexicaul. Capitula (1-)2-5(-10); peduncles long, with 2-3 bracts, glabrous or with few stellate or small glandular hairs. Involucre 9-12 × 9-11 mm; bracts long-acute, glabrous or with sparse
\par 

\par 
381}
\par