{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 late to ovate, the lower narrowed into a short petiole, the upper sessile, sometimes with a few stellate hairs beneath. Capitula 1-4; peduncles with dense stellate and dense, long simple eglandular hairs. Involucre 11-18 × 10-15 mm; bracts linear to narrowly linear-lanceolate, long-acute, with dense, long, flexuous simple eglandular hairs up to 3 mm, and sometimes a few stellate hairs. Stigmas yellow or discoloured.{\i  Jura, Alps, Carpathians, C. Appennini, mountains of N. & C. Jugoslavia.} Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b H. dentatum } Hoppe in Sturm,{\i  Deutschl. Fl.}{\b  39}: 16 (1817). • Au Ga He It Rm Rs (W).
\par 
 {\b H. gaudinii } Christener, {\i Hier. Schweiz} 10 (1863). • Alps. Au Ga He It Ju.
\par 
 {\b H. pseudoporrectum } (Christener ex Naegeli & Peter) P. D. Sell & C. West.{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 265 (1976). •{\i  Alps.} Au Ga Ge He It.
\par 
 {\b H. subexpallens } (Zahn) P. D. Sell & C. West, {\i op. cit.} 266 (1976) ({\i H. dentatum} subsp.{\i  subexpallens} Zahn). Au Cz Ga He It Ju Po Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 115. H. chondrillifolium} group ({\i H. bifidum} /{\i  glaucum} / {\i villosum}). Stems 10-40 cm, glabrous or with occasional simple eglandular hairs. Leaves glabrous or with few simple eglandular hairs above, with numerous simple eglandular hairs and sometimes stellate hairs beneath; basal 40-100 × 5-15 mm, glaucous, lanceolate to narrowly elliptical, obtuse to acute, subentire to shallowly dentate, usually petiolate; cauline 2-6(-8), lanceolate, usually gradually becoming smaller up the stem. Capitula (1-)2-5; peduncles with few stellate hairs and few or no simple eglandular hairs. Involucre (10-)11-17 × 8-15 mm; bracts acute to obtuse, with more or less numerous stellate hairs, especially on the margin, numerous, long simple eglandular hairs and sometimes a few minute glandular hairs. Stigmas usually discoloured. •{\i  Alps; C. Appennini; W. Carpathians; C. Jugoslavia.} Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. aprutiorum } Sudre,{\i  Bull. Int. Acad. Géogr. Bot.} ({\i Le Mans}) {\b 26}: 147 (1916).{\i  Alps; C. Appennini.} Au Ga It.
\par 
 {\b H. chondrillifolium } Fries,{\i  Uppsala Univ. Ärsskr.}{\b  1862} ({\i Math. Nat., Epicr. Hier}.): 67 (1862).{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par 
 {\b H. melananthum } (Naegeli & Peter) P. D. Sell & C. West,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 264 (1976) ({\i H. subspeciosum} subsp.{\i  melananthum} Naegeli & Peter).{\i  Tatra.} Cz Po.
\par 
 {\b H. subspeciosum } Naegeli & Peter, {\i Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  2}: 147 (1886).{\i  Alps}. Au Ge He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 116. H. cryptadenum} group ({\i H. humile} /{\i  villosum}). Stems 20-50 cm, with numerous, patent simple eglandular hairs. Leaves with dense, patent simple eglandular hairs or sometimes glabrescent above; basal glaucous, more or less lanceolate, obtuse to acute, denticulate to dentate, subpetiolate; cauline 3-8, like the basal but the upper broadly ovate, rounded at base. Capitula (1-)2-3 (-6); peduncles with sparse to dense stellate and numerous simple eglandular hairs. Involucre 12-17 × 11-14 mm; bracts lanceolate, acute, with dense simple eglandular and scattered minute glandular hairs, without stellate hairs. Ligules with a few simple eglandular hairs. Stigmas yellowish. •{\i  Alps.} Au Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. cryptadenum } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  41}: 329 (1894). Au Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 117. H. valdepilosum} group ({\i H. prenanthoides} / {\i villosum}). Stems 30-50 cm, with numerous simple eglandular hairs up to 8 mm, and few stellate hairs above. Leaves entire to denticulate, with long simple eglandular hairs; basal few or absent, 50-110 × 10-30 mm, more or less elliptical, usually more or less acute, petiolate; cauline 7-13(-20), the lower like the basal but usually sessile, the median and upper lanceolate to ovate, sometimes panduriform, sessile, more or less amplexicaul. Capitula 1-6(-9); peduncles long, with dense stellate hairs, numerous, long simple eglandular hairs and sometimes a few small glandular hairs. Involucre 10-15(-18) × 10-15 mm; bracts long-acute, the outer often lax, with dense simple eglandular hairs up to 5 mm, sometimes with some stellate and small glandular hairs. Ligules sometimes with short simple eglandular hairs. Stigmas discoloured. •{\i  Mountains of C. Europe; C. Appennini.} Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. grabowskianum } Naegeli & Peter,{\i  Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  2}: 207 (1886). Cz Rm.
\par 
 {\b H. porrectum } Fries,{\i  Nova Acta Reg. Soc. Sci. Upsal.}{\b  14}: 106 (1848).{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga.
\par 
 {\b H. subglabrescens } (Zahn) P. D. Sell & C. West,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 71}: 267 (1976) ({\i H. valdepilosum} subsp.{\i  subglabrescens} Zahn).{\i  Alps.} Au Ga Ge He.
\par 
 {\b H. valdepilosum } Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 34 (1779).{\i  S.W. & W.C. Alps.} Ga He It.
\par 
 {\b H. willdenowianum } (Zahn) P. D. Sell & C. West,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 267 (1976) ({\i H. valdepilosum} subsp. {\i willdenowianum} Zahn). Au Ga He Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 118. H. wilczekianum} group ({\i H. bifidum }/{\i  valdepilosum}). Like {\b 117} but simple eglandular hairs sparser and shorter and glandular hairs often obvious; capitula (1-)3-20; involucre 10-12 mm. •{\i  Alps.} Au Ga He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. wilczekianum } Arvet-Touvet, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss. }{\b 5}: 732 (1897). Ga He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 119. H. chlorifolium} group ({\i H. glaucum} / {\i valdepilosum}). Like {\b 117} but simple eglandular hairs up to 3 mm and glandular hairs absent; capitula 1-10(-15); involucre 12-17 mm, bracts sometimes obtuse, often with stellate hairs, simple eglandular hairs 1-2·5 mm; stigmas sometimes yellow. •{\i  Alps; C. Appennini.} Au Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. chlorifolium } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Essai Pl. Dauph.} 44 (1871). Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Other species and groups in (vii):
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. andrasovszkyi } group ({\i H. naegelianum} / {\i pilosum}). 1600 2200{\i  m. • Borders of Albania and Jugoslavia}. Al Ju. (Including {\b H. andrasovszkyi} Zahn in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich }{\b 79}({\b IV.280}): 1032 (1921). Al Ju.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. arlbergense } Evers ex J. Murr, {\i Allgem. Bot. Zeitschr., Beih.}{\b  1}: 3 (1899) ({\i H. chlorifolium} /{\i  wilczekianum}). •{\i  Vorarlberg.} Au.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. braunianum } Chenevard & Zahn,{\i  Annu. Cons. Jard. Bot. Genève}{\b  9}: 52 (1905) ({\i H. chondrillifolium }/{\i  humile}). •{\i  C. Alps.} He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. corrensii } Kaeser ex Zahn in Koch, {\i Syn. Deutsch. Fl.} ed. 3, {\b 2}: 1874 (1901) ({\i H. humile} / {\i valdepilosum}).{\i  W.C. Alps.} He.
\par 

\par 
385}
\par