{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 133. H. leiopogon} group ({\i H. glaucinum }/{\i  pictum}). Stems 10-35 cm, with stellate and numerous simple eglandular hairs throughout and glandular hairs above. Leaves with dense, dentate or subplumose hairs throughout and with minute glandular hairs on the margin; basal 20-50 × 10-15 mm, more or less glaucous, ovate, narrowly elliptical or oblong-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, dentate or lobate-dentate; cauline 0-1(-2). Capitula (1-)2-5(-7); peduncles with dense stellate and numerous glandular hairs, without simple eglandular hairs. Involucre 9-12 × 7-9 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, more or less acute, with dense stellate and numerous small glandular hairs, sometimes with a few simple eglandular hairs. Stigmas yellow. •{\i  S.W. Alps; Corse.} Co Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. leiopogon } Gren. ex Verlot,{\i  Cat. Pl. Dauph.} 396 (1872). Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 134. H. rupestre} All.,{\i  Auct. Fl. Pedem.} 12 (1789) ({\i H. humile} /{\i  pictum}). Stems 5-25 cm, with more or less numerous simple eglandular hairs throughout and stellate and glandular hairs above. Leaves glabrous or subglabrous above, with rigid subplumose hairs and few minute glandular hairs on the margin, and softer, subplumose and sometimes stellate hairs beneath; basal 10-50 × 3-15 mm, glaucous, obovate, ovate-lanceolate or spathulate, obtuse, denticulate to sinuate- or incise-dentate; cauline 0-1(-2), small. Capitula 1-3(-5); peduncles very long, with stellate hairs, dense short glandular hairs and scattered simple eglandular hairs. Involucre 9-11 × 7-10 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acuminate, with stellate hairs which are dense on the margin, and more or less numerous simple eglandular and scattered glandular hairs. Stigmas more or less yellow. •{\i  S.W. Alps; C. Appennini.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Other species in (xi):
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. barbulare } Zahn in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich }{\b 76}({\b IV.280}): 538 (1921) ({\i H. leiopogon} /{\i  murorum}). •{\i  S.W. Alps}. Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. leiophaeum } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Hier. Gall. Hisp. Cat.} 287 (1913) ({\i H.pictum} / {\i hypochoeroides}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. oreiocephalum } Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich }{\b 76}({\b IV.280}): 539 (1921) ({\i H. caesioides} /{\i  schmidtii}). •{\i  S.W. Alps}. Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. sandozianum } Zahn in Koch, {\i Syn. Deutsch. Fl.} ed. 3,{\b  2}: 1829 (1901) ({\i H. pictum} /{\i  saxifragum}). •{\i  S.W. & W.C. Alps.} Ga He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (xii) Leaves rather large, the cauline few to rather numerous, evenly distributed, villous with crispate, subplumose or plumose hairs throughout. Involucre villous with dense, long simple eglandular hairs, without stellate and usually without glandular hairs. Achenes 3·5-4 mm, dark. Margin of receptacular pits shortly dentate, glabrous.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 135. H. lanatum} group. Stems 10-50 cm, with numerous, sometimes dense stellate hairs and villous with dense, white, crispate simple eglandular hairs or subplumose hairs, usually without glandular hairs. Leaves villous with dense, white, crispate subplumose or plumose hairs, sometimes with stellate hairs beneath; basal 35-100 × 15-40 mm, elliptical, lanceolate or ovate, the outer obtuse, the inner acute, all usually entire or with few teeth, occasionally more strongly dentate, attenuate at base; cauline 2-5(-8), like the basal but often sessile, the upper bractlike. Capitula (2-)3-7(-12); peduncles very long, clothed like the stem. Involucre 12-18 × 10-15 mm; bracts long-acute, villous with dense, white, crispate simple eglandular hairs, without stellate and usually without glandular hairs. Stigmas yellow. Ligules glabrous or with a few short hairs at apex. 300-2100{\i  m. • S.E. France, W. Switzerland, N.W. Italy}. Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. andryaloides } Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 35 (1779). {\i S.E. France, N.W. Italy.} Ga It.
\par 
 {\b H. lanatum } Vill., {\i loc. cit.} (1779). {\i From the Jura to the Alpi Apuane. }Ga He It.
\par 
 {\b H. liottardii } Vill., {\i loc. cit.} (1779). {\i S.E. France, N.W. Italy.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (xiii) Like (xii) but hairs usually less plumose; glandular and stellate hairs often present; involucre usually smaller; ligules often with obvious hairs at apex.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 136. H. erioleucum} group ({\i H. lanatum }/ {\i villosum}). Stems (6-)20-40 cm, with dense, more or less plumose hairs 4-7 mm throughout and stellate hairs at least above. Leaves 35-100 × 15-40 mm, entire or with few teeth, with dense white, crispate, more or less plumose hairs 4-7 mm; basal elliptical, lanceolate or ovate, the outer obtuse, the inner acute, attenuate at base; cauline 3-6, more or less ovate-cordate, more or less amplexicaul. Capitula 2-6; peduncles long, clothed like stem. Involucre 12-20 × 10-15 mm; bracts broad, long-acute, the outer more or less squarrose, villous with dense white, crispate, more or less plumose hairs 4-7 mm. Stigmas yellow. Ligules usually with short simple eglandular hairs at apex. •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. erioleucum } Zahn,{\i  Hier. Alpes Marit.} 227 (1916). Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 137. H. jordanii} group ({\i H. bifidum} /{\i  lanatum}). Like {\b 136} but hairs less numerous, subplumose; leaves more strongly dentate, the cauline narrower, abruptly decreasing in size up the stem, not amplexicaul. •{\i  S.W. & W.C. Alps.} Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. jordanii } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Hier. Alpes Fr}. 60 (1888). Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 138. H. pellitum} group ({\i H. bifidum }/{\i  lanatum}). Like {\b 136} but hairs less dense especially on upper surface of leaves and less distinctly plumose; cauline leaves not amplexicaul, narrower; involucre 10-15 mm, usually with some stellate hairs. •{\i  S.W. Alps; C. Appennini; Sardegna.} Ga He It Sa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. oligocephalum } Arvet-Touvet, {\i Suppl. Monogr. Hier.} 13 (1876).{\i  S.W. Alps; C. Appennini}. Ga It.
\par 
 {\b H. pellitum } Fries,{\i  Uppsala Univ. Årsskr.}{\b  1862} ({\i Math. Nat., Epicr. Hier}.): 79 (1862). {\i Alpes Maritimes.} Ga.
\par 
 {\b H. pseudolanatum } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Essai Pl. Dauph.} 46 (1871).{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 139. H. lansicum} group ({\i H. humile} / {\i lanatum}). Like {\b 136} but leaves more dentate, often lobate-dentate, the cauline not amplexicaul, with minute glandular hairs on the margin; ligules sometimes with long hairs at apex. •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga ?It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. lansicum } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Monogr. Hier.} 37 (1873). Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 140. H. verbascifolium} group ({\i H. lanatum} /{\i  prenanthoides}). Like {\b 136} but cauline leaves 5-10(-16); stigmas discoloured. 1500-2000{\i  m. • S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 
 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. menthifolium } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Not. Pl. Alpes} 22 (1883).{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par 
 {\b H. thapsoides } Arvet-Touvet, {\i Monogr. Hier.} 33 (1873).{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga.
\par 

\par 
388}
\par