{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 108. H. longifolium} Schleicher ex Froelich in DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 7}: 229 (1838) ({\i H. alatum} /{\i  villosum}). Like {\b 106} but with longer, flexuous simple eglandular hairs throughout, those of the lower part of the stem up to 8 mm, those of the involucre 2-4 mm; stigmas yellow. •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Other species and groups in (vi):
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. fontanesianum } Arvet-Touvet & Gaut.,{\i  Hier. Gall. Hisp.} ({\i Exsicc}.){\b  20}: no. 1590-1597 (1908) ({\i H. alatum} / {\i colmeiroanum}). •{\i  C. Pyrenees.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b H. gastonianum } group ({\i H. alatum} /{\i  subsericeum}). 800-1500{\i  m. • C. Pyrenees.} Ga. (Including {\b H. gastonianum} Arvet-Touvet, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  5}: 724 (1897). Ga.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. intertextum } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Essai Pl. Dauph.} 45 (1871) ({\i H. alatum} /{\i  schmidtii}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. loeflingianum } Arvet-Touvet & Gaut., {\i Hier. Gall. Hisp.} ({\i Exsicc.}) {\b 19}: no. 311 (1908) ({\i H. bourgaei} /{\i  candidum}). •{\i  C. Pyrenees}. Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  H.souliei} group ({\i H. alatum} / {\i subsericeum}). 1400-2150{\i  m. • Pyrenees.} Ga Hs. (Including {\b H. souliei} Arvet-Touvet & Gaut.,{\i  Hier. Gall. Hisp.} ({\i Exsicc}.){\b  20}: no. 1587-1588 (1908). Ga Hs.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. wilczekii } Zahn in Ascherson & Graebner, {\i Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  12}({\b 2}): 238 (1935). •{\i  W. Switzerland} ({\i Vaud}). He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (vii) Plant with very long simple eglandular hairs. Leaves more or less glaucous, rarely with small glandular hairs on margin; basal usually present; cauline (2-)3-13(-15). Capitula few. Peduncles long. Ligules usually glabrous, sometimes with a few short hairs at the apex. Stigmas yellow or discoloured. Achenes dark. Margins of receptacular pits fimbriate-dentate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 109. H. villosum} group. Stems 15-30(-40) cm, with numerous stellate and very dense, white, soft simple eglandular hairs 4-10 (-12) mm. Leaves with dense simple eglandular hairs up to 8 mm; basal few to many, 45-85(-100) × (10-)12-20(-25) mm, oblong to lanceolate, obtuse to acute, usually with undulate margin, entire to shortly dentate, gradually narrowed into a subpetiolate base; cauline (2-)4-8(-15), gradually decreasing in size up the stem, the uppermost bract-like, the lower narrow at the base, the remainder broad, rounded or more or less amplexicaul at the base. Capitula (1-)2-4; peduncles long, straight, with dense stellate and long simple eglandular hairs, without glandular hairs. Involucre 14-17(-23) × 12-20(-25) mm; bracts lanceolate to linear, long-acute or acuminate, the outer more or less squarrose, with very dense simple eglandular hairs up to 5 mm, without or with few minute glandular hairs. Stigmas yellow or discoloured. 2n = 27, 36. {\i Stony and grassy places; calcicole. • Mountains of Europe, from the Jura and Carpathians to the S.W. Alps, S. Appennini and N. Bulgaria.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. villosum } Jacq.,{\i  Enum. Stirp. Vindob.} 142 (1762). Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 110. H. pilosum} group ({\i H. morisianum} Reichenb. fil.). Like {\b 109} but cauline leaves (2-)3-6, often much smaller; involucral bracts narrower, linear to linear-lanceolate, all appressed. 2n = 27, 36. •{\i  From the Jura and Carpathians to the S.W. Alps, C. Appennini and Macedonia.} Al Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. canalense } Pacher, {\i Jahrb. Naturh. Landes-Mus. Kärnten}{\b  22}: 94 (1893). Au Ga He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. pilosum } Schleicher ex Froelich in DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  7}: 229 (1838). Al Au Cz Ge It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 111. H. scorzonerifolium} group ({\i H. bupleuroides} (vel{\i  glaucum})/ {\i villosum}). Stems 30-60 cm, with scattered stellate hairs, and usually more or less numerous, flexuous simple eglandular hairs up to 5 mm. Leaves with numerous long simple eglandular hairs, but mainly beneath and on the margin; basal 30-90 × 4-10 mm, lanceolate to narrowly elliptical, more or less acute, entire to denticulate, narrowed at base; cauline 2-7(-12), like the basal, but gradually decreasing in size up the stem. Capitula 1-4(-12); peduncles with dense stellate hairs and more or less numerous, long simple eglandular hairs. Involucre (10-)13-17 × 6-13 mm; bracts linear to narrowly linear-lanceolate, acute, with more or less numerous stellate hairs and more or less dense simple eglandular hairs 3-6 mm. Ligules glabrous. Stigmas yellow or discoloured. 2n = 36. •{\i  From the Jura and the Carpathians to the S.W. Alps, S. Appennini and Crna Gora.} Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. flexuosum } Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd., {\i Sp. Pl. }{\b 3}: 1581 (1803). Ga He It Ju.
\par 
  {\b H. pseudopantotrichum } (Zahn) P. D. Sell & C. West,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 265 (1976) ({\i H.scorzonerifolium} subsp.{\i  pseudopantotrichum }Zahn). Au Ga He It Ju.
\par 
  {\b H. scorzonerifolium } Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 35 (1779). Au Cz Ga Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 112. H. leucophaeum} group ({\i H. humile} /{\i  scorzonerifolium}). Like {\b 111} but leaf-margin, peduncles and involucral bracts with few glandular hairs. •{\i  Jura, S.W. & C. Alps; C. & S. Appennini.} Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. leucophaeum } Gren. & Godron,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 354 (1851). {\i S.W. Alps.} Ga He.
\par 
  {\b H. nematopodum } (Zahn) P. D. Sell & C. West,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 71}: 265 (1976) ({\i H.leucophaeum} subsp. {\i nematopodum} Zahn).{\i  C. Appennini.} It.
\par 
  {\b H. petrophilum } Godet ex Fries, {\i Uppsala Univ. Årsskr. }{\b 1862} ({\i Math. Nat., Epicr. Hier.}): 65 (1862). Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 113. H. ctenodon} group ({\i H. villosum} / {\i vulgatum}). Stems up to 50 cm, with numerous simple eglandular hairs. Leaves with more or less numerous simple eglandular hairs on both surfaces and the margin; basal more or less oblong, obtuse to acute, long-petiolate, sometimes absent; cauline (3-)5-9(-12), ovate, elliptical or rhombic, attenuate at base. Capitula 3-10; peduncles with numerous stellate and few glandular hairs. Involucre 10-15 × 8-13 mm; bracts narrow, long-acute, with numerous stellate and few glandular hairs. Ligules glabrous or with small simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas discoloured. •{\i  E. & E.C. Alps}. Au He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. ctenodon } Naegeli & Peter,{\i  Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  2}: 202 (1886). Au It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 114. H. dentatum} group ({\i H. bifidum} / {\i villosum}). Stems 14-40 cm, with few to numerous stellate and few to numerous simple eglandular hairs. Leaves with simple eglandular hairs on both surfaces and the margin; basal 20-70 × 9-20 mm, green or glaucescent, the outer more or less spathulate or obovate, the inner elliptical, oblong to lanceolate, obtuse to acute, entire to shallowly dentate, narrowed into a petiole; cauline 2-10, lanceo
\par 

\par 
384}
\par