{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 80. H. schmidtii} group. Stems 10-40(-50) cm, with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs throughout and numerous, sometimes dense stellate hairs and few to numerous glandular hairs above. Leaves thick, rarely spotted, with numerous rigid simple eglandular hairs on margin and usually also above, with numerous, soft simple eglandular hairs beneath, with few to many stellate hairs beneath and sometimes also above, and sometimes with minute glandular hairs on the margin; basal 30-110 × 10-50 mm, elliptical, ovate-lanceolate or lanceolate, sometimes oblong-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, subentire to deeply dentate, the outer rounded to truncate at base, the inner cuneate or attenuate into a long petiole; cauline 0-1(-2), like the inner basal, often shortly petiolate, often bract-like. Capitula (1-)2-12(-18); peduncles usually long, straight, with dense stellate hairs, numerous, sometimes dense glandular hairs and often a few simple eglandular hairs. Involucre 9-12(-14) × 9-14 mm; bracts narrow, acute, with few to numerous stellate, glandular and simple eglandular hairs. 2n = 21, 36.{\i  Most of Europe except U.S.S.R.} Au Be Br Bu Co Cr Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Hs Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Sa Si Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. bohatschianum } Zahn, {\i Ann. Hist. Mus. Nat. Hung.}{\b  8}: 98 (1910). •{\i  S.W. Romania. }Rm.
\par 
 {\b H. comatulum } Jordan ex Boreau,{\i  Fl. Centre Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  2}: 410 (1857). • Co Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Lu Sa.
\par 
 {\b H. graniticum } Schultz Bip.,{\i  Bonplandia} 331 (1862). • Au Cz Ga Ju.
\par 
 {\b H. lasiophyllum } Koch,{\i  Syn. Fl. Germ.} ed. 2, 522 (1844). • Br Ga Hb Hu It Ju Rm.
\par 
 {\b H. pallidum } Biv.,{\i  Nuove Piante Ined.} 11 (1838). • Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Si.
\par 
 {\b H. neorupicola } P. D. Sell & C. West,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 265 (1976) ({\i H. rupicola} Fries, non Jordan). • Ga Ge He Hs Hu It.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. schmidtii } Tausch, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 11} (Ergänz. 1): 65 (1828). 2n = 27. • Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Hb Hs Hu Is It Ju No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 81. H. hypochoeroides} group ({\i H. wiesbaurianum }Uechtr. ex Baenitz;{\i  H. bifidum} / {\i schmidtii}). Like {\b 80} but leaves often ovate and usually more or less truncate at base, often deeply dentate, with hairs less rigid and sparse above; involucral bracts with dense stellate hairs. 2n = 27, 36. •{\i  C., W. & S. Europe.} Au Br Co Cz Fa Ga Ge Gr Hb He Hu It Ju No Rm Sa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. hypochoeroides } Gibson,{\i  Phytologist }({\i Newman}) {\b 1}: 907 (1844). Br Hb.
\par 
 {\b H. planchonianum } Timb.-Lagr., {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  5}: 508 (1858). Ga Sa.
\par 
 {\b H. wiesbaurianum } Uechtr. ex Baenitz, {\i Herb. Eur. Prosp.}{\b  1879}: 5 (1879). Au Cz Ga Hu It Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 82. H. sommerfeltii} group ({\i H. bifidum} / {\i schmidtii} / {\i vulgatum}). Like {\b 80} but with all leaves more or less narrowly lanceolate and attenuate at base, usually spotted, subglabrous above and with subrigid hairs on the margin. •{\i  C. & N.W. Europe.} Au Br Cz Ga Ge He Hu Is No.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. sommerfeltii } Lindeb., {\i Hier. Scand. Exsicc.}{\b  2}: no. 66 (1872). Br No.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 83. H. aymericianum} group ({\i H. alatum} / {\i schmidtii}). Stems 20-40 cm, with few simple eglandular hairs. Leaves with simple eglandular hairs on the margin and midrib, those of the margin more or less rigid, usually subglabrous above; basal 25-110 × 10-30 mm, elliptical or lanceolate, obtuse to acute, more or less dentate (the teeth often mammiform), long-attenuate into a petiole; cauline 1-2, the lower like the basal but sessile, the upper bract-like. Capitula 2-8(-20); peduncles long, with numerous stellate and glandular hairs, sometimes with simple eglandular hairs. Involucre 10-15 × 10-13 mm; bracts acute, with few stellate hairs, few to numerous simple eglandular hairs and numerous unequal glandular hairs. •{\i  Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. aymericianum } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  41}: 346 (1894). Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 84. H. bourgaei} group ({\i H. bicolor} Scheele; {\i H. schmidtii }/ {\i solidagineum} (vel {\i eriopogon})). Like {\b 83} but apex of rhizome slightly hairy; leaves with numerous simple eglandular hairs above; involucre with numerous simple eglandular hairs and few small glandular hairs.  •{\i  Pyrenees, N. & E. Spain, N. Portugal.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. bourgaei } Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 3}): 102 (1856). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 85. H. stelligerum} group. Stems 6-30 cm, with stellate and sometimes a few simple eglandular and glandular hairs. Leaves with dense stellate hairs on both surfaces and more or less rigid simple eglandular hairs on the margin and midrib beneath; basal 20-90 × 8-22 mm, elliptical, oblong, ovate to lanceolate, obtuse to acute, denticulate to dentate, cuneate, attenuate or truncate at base; cauline 0-1, lanceolate, linear or bract-like. Capitula (1-)2-7; peduncles with numerous stellate and often many small glandular or simple eglandular hairs, or with both. Involucre 9-10 × 5-8 mm; bracts acute, with numerous stellate and sparse simple eglandular and glandular hairs. •{\i  S. France; Transylvania; Wales.} Br Ga Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. cillense } Pugsley,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 79}: 183 (1941). {\i Wales}. Br.
\par 
 {\b H. simonkaianum } (Zahn) P. D. Sell & C. West,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 71}: 266 (1976) ({\i H. substellatum }subsp.{\i  simonkaianum} Zahn).{\i  Transylvania.} Rm.
\par 
 {\b H. stelligerum } Froelich in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  7}: 214 (1838).{\i  S. France.} Ga.
\par 
 {\b H. substellatum } Arvet-Touvet & Gaut.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  40}: ccxxxvi (1893).{\i  S. France.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (iv) Like ({\b iii}) but basal leaves usually few and cauline leaves 2-12.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 86. H. onosmoides} group ({\i H. schmidtii} / {\i vulgatum}). Stems 30-60(-70) cm, with numerous simple eglandular hairs throughout and numerous stellate hairs above. Leaves more or less glaucous, with numerous simple eglandular hairs, those of the margin and upper surface rigid, occasionally with a few minute glandular hairs on the margin, sometimes with stellate hairs beneath; basal 30-100 × 10-30 mm, lanceolate, oblong-lanceolate or ovate, obtuse to acute, denticulate to serrate-dentate, attenuate into an often broadly winged petiole; cauline 2-12, the lower like the basal, sessile or subpetiolate, the upper bract-like. Capitula 2-25(-30); peduncles with dense stellate hairs, few to numerous small glandular hairs and simple eglandular hairs. Involucre 9-12(-15) × 9-12 mm; bracts narrow, more or less acute, with few
\par 

\par 
380}
\par