{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 103. H. aragonense} group ({\i H. elisaeanum} /{\i  glaucinum}). Stems 5-50 cm, with simple eglandular hairs on the lower half. Leaves glabrous above, with numerous simple eglandular hairs beneath and on the margin; basal 40-60 × 20-30 mm, ovate, lanceolate or elliptical, obtuse to acute, denticulate to dentate near the base, narrowed into a petiole; cauline 0-1(-2), small. Capitula 1-3; peduncles with numerous stellate and sparse glandular hairs. Involucre 8-10 × 6-9 mm; bracts acute, with few stellate hairs, numerous glandular hairs and sometimes a few simple eglandular hairs. Stigmas yellow or discoloured. Margins of receptacular pits subulate-dentate, sparsely ciliate. •{\i  S. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. aragonense } Scheele, {\i Linnaea}{\b  32}: 667 (1863). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 104. H. loscosianum} group ({\i H. baeticum} Arvet-Touvet & Reverchon;{\i  H. elisaeanum} /{\i  glaucinum} (vel {\i murorum})). Stems 10-40 cm, with few simple eglandular hairs throughout and few stellate and glandular hairs above. Leaves with long, dense simple eglandular hairs which are sometimes sparse above, sometimes spotted; basal 25-50 × 5-20 mm, oblong, elliptical, ovate or lanceolate, obtuse to subacute, subentire to sparsely dentate or sinuately lobed, abruptly contracted into a petiole; cauline 0-1, lanceolate. Capitula (1-)2-5(-9); peduncles with stellate and sometimes a few simple eglandular hairs. Involucre 8-10 × 6-9 mm; bracts obtuse to acute, with numerous glandular hairs, few to numerous stellate hairs and sometimes a few simple eglandular hairs. Stigmas yellow or discoloured. Achenes 3-3·5 mm. 1200-1900{\i  m. • S., E. & C. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. loscosianum } Scheele, {\i Linnaea}{\b  32}: 668 (1863). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Other species and groups in (v):
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. aurense } Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich} {\b 75}({\b IV.280}): 159 (1921) ({\i H. cerinthoides} / {\i lawsonii}). •{\i  W. Pyrenees.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. bowlesianum } Arvet-Touvet & Gaut.,{\i  Hier. Gall. Hisp.} ({\i Exsicc.}) {\b 19}: no. 307 (1908) ({\i H. cordifolium} / {\i phlomoides}). 1700-2000{\i  m. • E. Pyrenees. }Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. coleoidiforme } Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich }{\b 75}({\b IV.280}): 160 (1921) ({\i H. cerinthoides} /{\i  rupicaprinum}). 1600-2200{\i  m. • E. Pyrenees.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. colmeiroanum } group ({\i H. lawsonii} /{\i  subsericeum}). 1400-2300{\i  m. • E. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs. (Including{\b  H. colmeiroanum} Arvet-Touvet & Gaut.,{\i  Hier. Gall. Hisp. }({\i Exsicc}.) {\b 19}: no. 291 et 292 (1908). Hs.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. inuliflorum } Arvet-Touvet & Gaut.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  51}: xlv (1904) ({\i H. candidum} / {\i subsericeum}). •{\i  C. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. valirense } Arvet-Touvet & Gaut.,{\i  Hier. Gall. Hisp.} ({\i Exsicc}.) {\b 3}: no. 43 (1898) ({\i H. bourgaei} /{\i  phlomoides}). •{\i  C. Pyrenees.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. vellereum } group ({\i H. candidum} / {\i eriopogon}). •{\i  E. Pyrenees.} Hs. (Including {\b H. vellereum} Scheele ex Fries,{\i  Öfvers. Kongl. Vet.-Akad. Förhandl.}{\b  23}: 160 (1866). Hs.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (vi) Like ({\b v}) but rhizome without dense, long hairs; capitula sometimes up to 20(-25); stigmas yellow or discoloured; achenes 3-4 mm; margins of receptacular pits usually only sparsely ciliate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 105. H. cerinthoides} group. Stems 1-several, 25-40(-50) cm with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs and sometimes a few glandular and stellate hairs above. Leaves with simple eglandular hairs, especially on the margin and midrib beneath; basal few, 20-220 × 15-45 mm, elliptical, oblong-lanceolate or oblanceolate, obtuse to acute, usually entire, sometimes denticulate, gradually narrowed into a petiole, cauline 2-5, ovate-cordate or ovate-lanceolate, sometimes panduriform, more or less acute, amplexicaul. Capitula 1-5; peduncles with dense stellate and few to numerous glandular and simple eglandular hairs. Involucre 9-14(-18) × 10-15 mm; bracts long-acute, with numerous simple eglandular hairs and few to numerous glandular hairs. Ligules with simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas yellow. Achenes up to 4 mm. 1100-2200{\i  m. • Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. cerinthoides } L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 803 (1753). Ga Hs.
\par 
  {\b H. gymnocerinthe } Arvet-Touvet & Gaut.,{\i  Hier. Gall. Hisp.} ({\i Exsicc}.) {\b 1}: no. 37-40 (1897).{\i  E. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 
  {\b H. ramondii } Griseb., {\i Comment. Hier.} 20 (1852). Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 106. H. alatum} group. Stems 20-80 cm, with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs throughout and stellate and glandular hairs above. Leaves with simple eglandular hairs especially on the midrib beneath, margin and petiole, sometimes glabrescent above, sometimes with few to numerous stellate hairs beneath or on both surfaces; basal few, 30-120 × 15-40 mm, obovate, oblanceolate, ovate or elliptical, obtuse to acute, denticulate to more or less dentate, narrowed into a winged petiole; cauline 1-8, large, the lower like the basal, petiolate, the upper ovate to lanceolate, more or less amplexicaul. Capitula (1-)2-20(-25) peduncles with dense stellate hairs, numerous glandular hairs and few to numerous simple eglandular hairs. Involucre 10-15 × 10-15 mm; bracts long-acute or acuminate, with few to numerous unequal glandular hairs, few to numerous simple eglandular hairs and few to numerous stellate hairs. Ligules with short simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas usually discoloured. Achenes 3·5-4 mm. 2n = 27, 36. •{\i  W. Europe.} Br Fa Ga Hb He Hs Is It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. alatum } Lapeyr.,{\i  Hist. Abr. Pyr.} 478 (1813).{\i  S.W. France.} Ga.
\par 
  {\b H. anglicum } Fries,{\i  Nova Acta Reg. Soc. Sci. Upsal.}{\b  14}: 93 (1848) ({\i H. perampliforme} Dahlst.). 2n = 36. Br Fa Hb Is.
\par 
  {\b H. doronicoides } Arvet-Touvet, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  41}: 340 (1894). {\i E. Pyrenees}. Ga Hs.
\par 
  {\b H. exaltatum } Arvet-Touvet, {\i Spicil. Rar. Nov. Hier., Suppl.}{\b  1}: 41 (1886). {\i E. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 
  {\b H. flocculosum } Backh.,{\i  Monogr. Brit. Hier.} 60 (1856). Br Hb.
\par 
  {\b H. iricum } Fries,{\i  Nova Acta Reg. Soc. Sci. Upsal. }{\b 14}: 60 (1848) ({\i H. peramplum} Dahlst.). Br Fa Hb.
\par 
  {\b H. kalsoense } Dahlst. in Warming, {\i Bot. Færöes}{\b  2}: 645 (1903) . Fa.
\par 
  {\b H. mesopolium } Dahlst., {\i Ark. Bot.}{\b  3}({\b 10}): 27 (1904). Is.
\par 
  {\b H. olivaceum } Gren. & Godron,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 361 (1851). Ga Hs.
\par 
  {\b H. soyerioides } Arvet-Touvet & Gaut.,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss. }{\b 5}: 723 (1897). {\i C. Pyrenees.} Ga.
\par 
  {\b H. subluridum } Arvet-Touvet, {\i Addit. Monogr. Hier.} 12 (1879). Ga Hs.
\par 
  {\b H. vogesiacum } (Kirschleger) Fries,{\i  Nova Acta Reg. Soc. Sci. Upsal.}{\b  14}: 59 (1848) ({\i H. mougeotii} (Froelich ex Koch) Godron, nom. illegit.). 2n = 36. Ga He Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 107. H. lamprophyllum} group ({\i H. alatum }/{\i  cerinthoides}). Like {\b 106} but involucre with dense simple eglandular hairs and without or with very few glandular hairs. 1200-2150 {\i m. • Pyrenees. }Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. lamprophyllum } Scheele,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  31}: 653 (1862). Hs.
\par 

\par 
383}
\par