{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. mattfeldianum } Zahn, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  24}: 383 (1925) ({\i H. bifidum} /{\i  pannosum}). •{\i  S. Bulgaria.} Bu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. megalothecum } Zahn in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich }{\b 77}({\i IV.280}): 587 (1921). ({\i H. gymnocephalum} / {\i murorum}). •{\i  N. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. montenegrinum } Freyn,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  3}: 648 (1895) ({\i H. racemosum} / {\i waldsteinii}). •{\i  Crna Gora.} Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. nipholasium } Georgiev & Zahn, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Bulg.}{\b  6}: 75 (1934) ({\i H. heterogynum} /{\i  pannosum}). •{\i  S.W. Bulgaria.} Bu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. ossaeum } Zahn in Vandas,{\i  Reliq. Formánek.} 364 (1909) ({\i H. pilosissimum} /{\i  sparsum}). •{\i  S.E. Bulgaria, E.C. Greece}. Bu Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. parnassi } group ({\i H. murorum} / {\i pannosum}). •{\i  S.C. Greece; Kriti.} Cr Gr. (Including {\b H. parnassi} Fries,{\i  Nova Acta Reg. Soc. Sci. Upsal. }{\b 14}: 86 (1848). Gr.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. peristericum } Zahn in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich}{\b  77}({\b IV.280}): 591 (1921) ({\i H. heterogynum} /{\i  pannosum}). •{\i  N.C. Greece, S.W. Bulgaria.} Bu Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. phocaicum } Zahn,{\i  op. cit.} 586 (1921) ({\i N. bifidum} /{\i  pannosum}). •{\i  S.C. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pirinicola } Georgiev & Zahn,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Bulg.}{\b  4}: 80 (1931). •{\i  S.W. Bulgaria}. Bu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. portanum } Belli in Fiori & Paol.,{\i  Fl. Anal. Ital.}{\b  3}: 472 (1904) ({\i H. gymnocephalum }/{\i  heterogynum}). •{\i  S. Appennini; S. Jugoslavia.} It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pseudobracteolatum } (Zahn) Rech. fil., {\i Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 105}: 704 (1943). •{\i  N. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pseudorieni } group ({\i H. gymnocephalum} /{\i  tommasinii}). •{\i  C. Jugoslavia.} Ju. (Including {\b H. pseudorieni }Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich} {\b 77}({\b IV.280}): 598 (1921). Ju.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. scardicum } Bornm. & Zahn,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  16}: 294 (1919) ({\i H. naegelianum} /{\i  pannosum}). •{\i  S. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. stefanoffii } Zahn ex Markgraf in Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 970 (1932). •{\i  S.W. Bulgaria.} Bu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. thapsiformoides } G. Schneider ex K. Malý, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien }{\b 54}: 291 (1904) {\i H. plumulosiforme }G. Schneider ex Zahn; {\i H. tommasinii} /{\i  waldsteinii}). •{\i  C. & S.W. Jugoslavia, N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. triadanum } Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich} {\b 77}({\b IV.280}): 600 (1921) ({\i H. bracteolatum} /{\i  pannosum}). •{\i  S.E. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. turbinellum } Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich }{\b 79}({\b IV.280}): 1013 (1922) ({\i H. bracteolatum} /{\i  pannosum}). •{\i  S.E. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. wettsteinianum } Hayek & Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich} {\b 77}({\b IV.280}): 586 (1921) ({\i H. bifidum} /{\i  gymnocephalum}).c. 1800{\i  m. • Albania.} Al.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (C) Leaves with at least some (sometimes minute) glandular hairs especially along the margin; often whole plant glandular. Capitula solitary or few on long, erect peduncles and branches. Margins of receptacular pits dentate to dentate-fimbriate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (xvi) Leaves with simple eglandular and minute glandular hairs at least on the margin; cauline 0-4, narrow and bract-like. Capitula usually solitary, sometimes few, large. Involucre blackish. Ligules with simple eglandular hairs at the apex and sometimes also on outer surface. Margins of receptacular pits shortly dentate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 158. H. alpinum} group. Stems (5-)10-15(-35) cm, with stellate hairs, numerous dark simple eglandular hairs 3-8 mm, and often dark glandular hairs. Leaves with more or less dense, long, pale simple eglandular hairs, few to numerous minute glandular hairs on the margin and sometimes stellate hairs especially beneath; basal 20-100 × 5-15(-20) mm, numerous, the outer small, elliptical, obovate or oblong, obtuse, the remainder lingulate, spathulate or lanceolate, obtuse to acute, entire to deeply dentate, attenuate into a winged petiole; cauline 0-3(-8), lanceolate, linear or bract-like. Capitula usually 1, very rarely 2-3. Involucre (10-)12-20 × 7-18 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, with more or less dense simple eglandular hairs 2-5 mm, sometimes with few to numerous glandular hairs, without stellate hairs. Ligules with short simple eglandular hairs on outer surface and at apex. Stigmas usually yellow. 2n = 27. 800-3000 {\i m. N. & C. Europe.} Au Br Cz Fe Ga Ge He Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, C, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. alpinum } L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 800 (1753). Au Br Cz Fe Ga Ge He Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, C, W) Su.
\par 
 {\b H. apiculatum } Tausch, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 20} (Ergänz. 1): 70 (1837). •{\i  Carpathians, Sudeten Mts.} Cz Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 
 {\b H. halleri } Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  3}: 104 (1788). •{\i  Alps.} Au Ge He Ju.
\par 
 {\b H. holosericeum } Backh., {\i Monogr. Brit. Hier.} 19 (1856). • Br.
\par 
 {\b H. melanocephalum } Tausch, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}){\b  11} (Ergänz. 1): 63 (1828). • Au Cz Ga Ge It No Po Rm Rs (W) Su.
\par 
 {\b H. pseudofritzei } Benz & Zahn, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  52}: 264 (1902). •{\i  E. Alps; Carpathians.} Au Cz Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 
 {\b H. tubulosum } Tausch, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 20} (Ergänz. 1): 68 (1837). •{\i  Sudeten Mts, W. Carpathians.} Cz Po.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 159 H. nigrescens} group ({\i H. alpinum} /{\i  murorum}). Like {\b 158} but leaves 20-110 × 10-40 mm; stems more often with more than 1 capitulum; ligules often with simple eglandular hairs only at apex;stigmas often discoloured. 2n = 36. 800-3000{\i  m. N. & C. Europe.} Au Br Cz Fe Ga Ge He Is It No Po Rm Rs (N, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. adspersum } (Norrlin) Elfstr.,{\i  Hier. Alpina} 16 (1893). • No Rs (N) Su.
\par 
 {\b H. calenduliflorum } Backh.,{\i  Monogr. Brit. Hier.} 23 (1856). 2n = 36. • Scotland. Br.
\par 
 {\b H. decipiens } Tausch, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 20} (Ergänz. 1): 66 (1837). • Au Cz Ge Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 
 {\b H. frondiferum } (Elfstr.) Elfstr., {\i Hier. Alpina }21 (1893). No Rs (N) Su.
\par 
 {\b H. hanburyi } Pugsley, {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}){\b  79}: 178 (1941). 2n = 36. • Scotland. Br.
\par 
 {\b H. neorepandum } P. D. Sell & C. West,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 265 (1976) ({\i H. repandum} Dahlst., non Schrank). • Is.
\par 
 {\b H. nigrescens } Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 1574 (1803). • Au Cz Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 
 {\b H. praematurum } Elfstr., {\i Hier. Alpina} 24 (1893). • No Su.
\par 
 {\b H. pseudorhaeticum } (Zahn) P. D. Sell & C. West, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 266 (1976) ({\i H. nigrescens} subsp. {\i pseudorhaeticum} Zahn). •{\i  S. & S.W. Alps.} Ga He It.
\par 
 {\b H. rhaeticum } Fries, {\i Uppsala Univ. Årsskr.}{\b  1862} ({\i Math. Nat., Epicr. Hier}.): 46 (1862). •{\i  S.W. & C. Alps.} Ga He.
\par 
 {\b H. subpumilum } (Zahn) P. D. Sell & C. West,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 267 (1976) ({\i H. nigrescens} subsp.{\i  subpumilum} Zahn). •{\i  Alps.} Au Ge He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 160. H. pietroszense} group ({\i H. alpinum} /{\i  bifidum}). Like {\b 158} but leaves broader and more or less glabrous above; capitula 1-2;
\par 

\par 
392}
\par