{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b H. liptoviense } Borbás, {\i Term.-Tud. Közl.}{\b  26}: 498 (1894). Cz Po.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 166. H. krasanii} group ({\i H. alpinum} /{\i  rotundatum}). Like {\b 164} but with some leaves elliptical to ovate, entire to denticulate; petioles 50-120 mm; cauline leaves (1-)2-3(-5); involucre 8-11(-13) mm; stigmas yellow or discoloured. •{\i  E. & S. Carpathians.} Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. krasanii } Woloszczak,{\i  Spraw. Kom. Fizyogr. Krakow.}{\b  25}: 64 (1890). Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 167. H. rohacsense} group ({\i H. conspurcans} Norrlin; {\i H. alpinum} /{\i  bifidum}). Like {\b 164} but leaves often more glaucous; peduncles and involucral bracts with more or less numerous stellate hairs; involucral bracts with few to numerous glandular hairs.{\i  N. & C. Europe.} Au Br Cz Ge He Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. bifidellum } (Zahn) P. D. Sell & C. West, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 262 (1975) ({\i H. conspurcans} subsp. {\i bifidellum} Zahn). • Au Cz He Po.
\par 
 {\b H. bipediforme } Dahlst.,{\i  Ark. Bot. }{\b 3}({\b 10}): 22 (1904). • Is.
\par 
 {\b H. callistophyllum } F. J. Hanb.,{\i  Jour. Bot. }({\i London}) {\b 30}: 168 (1892). •{\i  Scotland.} Br.
\par 
 {\b H. conspurcans } Norrlin, {\i Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  3}({\b 4}): 98 (1888). • No Su.
\par 
 {\b H. rohacsense } Kit. ex Kanitz, {\i Linnaea}{\b  32}: 422 (1863). Au He Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 168. H. bocconei} group ({\i H. alpinum} / {\i vulgatum}). Stems 25-40 cm, with stellate hairs, simple eglandular hairs and glandular hairs. Leaves with numerous simple eglandular hairs and scattered stellate hairs (more numerous on midrib of cauline) and pale minute glandular hairs; basal 25-120 × 15-35 mm, lanceolate or more or less elliptical, obtuse to acute, denticulate to dentate (the teeth narrowly mammiform), attenuate at base into a short petiole; cauline 2-8, like the basal but becoming gradually smaller, the lower petiolate, the upper more or less sessile, sometimes semiamplexicaul. Capitula (1-)2-6; peduncles rather long, erect, with dense stellate hairs and more or less numerous dark-based simple eglandular hairs and dark glandular hairs. Involucre 9-13 × 8-12 mm, blackish; bracts broadly linear-lanceolate, obtuse to subacute, with few to numerous stellate hairs, few to numerous dark-based simple eglandular hairs, and numerous unequal, dark glandular hairs. Ligules with short simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas discoloured.  •{\i  Alps; W. Carpathians.} Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. bocconei } Griseb.,{\i  Comment. Hier.} 35 (1852).{\i  Alps. }Au Ga He It Ju.
\par 
{\b  H. cornense} (Zahn) P. D. Sell & C. West, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 263 (1976) ({\i H. bocconei }subsp.{\i  cornense} Zahn).{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga.
\par 
 {\b H. glandulosodentatum } Uechtr.,{\i  Jahresb. Schles. Ges. Vaterl. Kult.}{\b  53}: 143 (1876). 1000-1550{\i  m. W. Carpathians.} Cz.
\par 
 {\b H. kuekenthalianum } (Zahn) P. D. Sell & C. West,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 264 (1976) ({\i H. bocconei} subsp.{\i  kuekenthalianum} Zahn). •{\i  E. Alps.} Au He.
\par 
 {\b H. simia } (Huter ex Zahn) Zahn in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich }{\b 77}({\b IV.280}): 694 (1921). {\i  C. & E. Alps.} Au Ge He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 169. H. vollmannii} group ({\i H. bocconei} /{\i  murorum}). Like {\b 168} but base of leaves more or less truncate; cauline leaves (0-)2-4. •{\i  Alps.} Au Ge He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. vollmannii } Zahn in Koch,{\i  Syn. Deutsch. Fl}. ed. 3,{\b  2}: 1853 (1901). Au Ge He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Other species and groups in (xvii):
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. adenophyton } (Zahn) Zahn in Schinz & R. Keller, {\i Fl. Schweiz} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 317 (1905) ({\i H. atratum} /{\i  bocconei}). •{\i  C. Alps.} He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. antholzense } Zahn in Koch,{\i  Syn. Deutsch. Fl.} ed. 3,{\b  2}: 1815 (1901) ({\i H. bocconei} /{\i  valdepilosum}). •{\i  E. Alps.} Au.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. atratiforme } group ({\i H. rotundatum} /{\i  sparsum}). •{\i  S. Carpathians; N. Albania.} Al Rm. (Including {\b H. atratiforme }Simonkai,{\i  Enum. Fl. Transs.} 371 (1881). Al Rm.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. borzae } E. I. Nyárády & Zahn, {\i Bul. Grad. Bot. Cluj }{\b 13}: 63 (1933). •{\i  S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. bucuranum } E. I. Nyárády in Savul., {\i Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  10}: 668 (1965) ({\i H. rotundatum} /{\i  sparsum}). •{\i  S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. chlorobracteum } group ({\i H. alpinum} /{\i  murorum} /{\i  rotundatum}). •{\i  S. & E. Carpathians.} Rm Rs (W). (Including {\b H. chlorobracteum} Degen & Zahn, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok }{\b 7}: 122 (1908). Rm.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. czeremoszense } Woloszczak & Zahn, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  10}: 162 (1911) ({\i H. fritzei} / {\i rotundatum}). •{\i  E. Carpathians}. Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. filarszkyi } Jáv. & Zahn,{\i  Bot. Közl. }{\b 10}: 30 (1911) ({\i H. fritzei} / {\i sparsum}). •{\i  S. Carpathians}. Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. fritzeiforme } Zahn in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich}{\b  79}({\b IV.280}): 1061 (1922) ({\i H. fritzei} /{\i  sparsum}). •{\i  S. Carpathians}. Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. gorfenianum } Bornrn. & Zahn,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  32}: 185 (1933). •{\i  Tirol.} Au.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. gymnodermum } Benz & Zahn in Reichenb. fil.,{\i  Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b 19}({\b 2}): 323 (1911) ({\i H.atratum} /{\i  sparsum}). •{\i  E. Alps.} Au.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. lividorubens } group ({\i H. alpinum} /{\i  fuscocinereum}). 2n = 27. {\i Fennoscandia.} No Su. (Including {\b H. lividorubens} (Almq.) Elfstr., {\i Hier. Alpina} 57 (1893). Su.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. lomnicense } Woloszczak,{\i  Spraw. Kom. Fizyogr. Krakow.}{\b  25}: 65 (1890) ({\i H. fritzei} / {\i rotundatum}). •{\i  S. & E. Carpathians.} Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. napaeum } group ({\i H. alpinum }/{\i  bifidum}). •{\i  S. Carpathians.} Rm. (Including {\b H. napaeum }Zahn,{\i  Ann. Hist.-Nat. Mus. Hung.}{\b  8}: 79 (1910). Rm.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. negoiense } (Ravarut & E. I. Nyárády) Soó, {\i Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  14}: 153 (1968). •{\i  Romania.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. nyaradyanum } Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich }{\b 79}({\b IV.280}): 1061 (1922) ({\i H. chlorocephalum} / {\i sparsum}). •{\i  S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. paltinae } Jáv. & Zahn,{\i  Bot. Közl.}{\b  10}: 31 (1911) ({\i H. nigrescens}/{\i  sparsum}). 2n = 36. •{\i  S. Carpathians}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pawlowskianum } E. I. Nyárády in Savul., {\i Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  10}: 518 (1965). • {\i S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. paxianum } E. I. Nyárády & Zahn,{\i  Bul. Grad. Bot. Cluj}{\b  8}: 54 (1928). •{\i  S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pseudocaesiiforme } E. I. Nyárády & Zahn, {\i op. cit.} 80 (1928). •{\i  S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pseudodolichaetum } (Benz & Zahn) Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich }{\b 77}({\b IV.280}): 714 (1921) ({\i H. atratum} / {\i incisum}). •{\i  E. Alps.} Au Ge.
\par 

\par 
394}
\par