{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 153. H. pilosissimum} group ({\i H. pannosum} / {\i racemosum}). Stems 20-100 cm, with stellate and more or less dense plumose hairs. Leaves 6-20, 40-70 × 20-40 mm, all cauline, elliptical, oblong-elliptical, ovate-elliptical or oblong, acute to acuminate, denticulate to deeply dentate, narrowed or rounded at base, villous with dense, entangled, plumose or subplumose hairs, and usually a few minute glandular hairs on the margin. Capitula (1-)2-10; peduncles with more or less numerous stellate hairs, numerous simple eglandular or subplumose hairs and sometimes a few small glandular hairs. Involucre 10-17 × 8-14 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, with more or less numerous stellate, numerous simple eglandular and sometimes subplumose hairs, and usually a few small glandular hairs. Stigmas yellow. Ligules glabrous. Achenes pale brown.{\i  Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pilosissimum } Friv.,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb.}){\b  19}: 436 (1836). Al Bu Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 154. H. heldreichii} group ({\i H. pannosum} /{\i  racemosum}). Like {\b 153} but hairs less numerous and all subplumose; involucral bracts less acute. 2n = 27.{\i  Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. heldreichii } Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 3}({\b 3}): 102 (1856). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 155. H. sericophyllum} group ({\i H. naegelianum} / {\i pannosum}). Stems 10-20(-25) cm, with more or less numerous stellate and simple eglandular or sometimes subplumose hairs, and sometimes a few minute glandular hairs above. Leaves with dense simple eglandular and subplumose hairs, often with a few minute glandular hairs on the margin; basal 30-100(-150) × 10-18 mm, broadly lanceolate, acute, rarely obovate and obtuse, subentire or denticulate, attenuate at base; cauline 0-3, small, lanceolate. Capitula 1-few; peduncles with dense stellate hairs, and more or less numerous minute glandular and simple eglandular hairs. Involucre (9-)10-15 × 9-13 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, usually with stellate hairs, few minute glandular hairs and numerous short subplumose and simple eglandular hairs. Stigmas usually yellow. Achenes pale brown. •{\i  Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. sericophyllum } Nejc. & Zahn, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  5}: 93 (1906). Bu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 156. H. jankae} group ({\i H. pannosum} / {\i sparsum}). Stems 20-40(-50) cm, with dense simple eglandular and subplumose hairs 3-5(-6) mm, and more or less numerous stellate hairs above. Leaves 7-13(-15), 45-180 × 15-35 mm, sometimes forming a false rosette near the base, oblong-lanceolate or lanceolate, with more or less dense simple eglandular and subplumose hairs 1·5-4 mm; the upper bract-like, obtuse to acute, entire to denticulate (rarely dentate), sometimes slightly amplexicaul, the lower petiolate, the basal usually withered at anthesis. Capitula few to many; peduncles with more or less dense simple eglandular hairs, dense stellate hairs and often a few minute glandular hairs. Involucre 10-13 × 9-12 mm; bracts broadly linear-lanceolate, more or less acute, with scattered stellate hairs, sparse to dense, minute glandular and sometimes a few simple eglandular hairs. Ligules glabrous. Achenes pale brown. • {\i Bulgaria, S. & E. Jugoslavia, S.W. Romania.} Bu Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. jankae } Uechtr.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 23}: 239 (1873). Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 157. H. sartorianum} group ({\i H. lazistanum} /{\i  naegelianum}). Stems 10-30(-40) cm, with more or less numerous simple eglandular and subplumose hairs throughout, and numerous stellate hairs above. Leaves with numerous simple eglandular and subplumose hairs and sometimes occasional minute glandular hairs on the margin; basal 30-60 × 10-18 mm, sometimes withered at anthesis, oblong-lanceolate, lanceolate or elliptical, obtusely mucronate to subacute, entire to denticulate, attenuate below; cauline 0-2, narrowly lanceolate or linear, with stellate hairs beneath. Capitula 2-3(-10); peduncles long, with numerous stellate hairs, few to numerous simple eglandular hairs and usually a few minute glandular hairs. Involucre 8-12 × 8-11 mm; bracts narrowly linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, with rather dense stellate hairs, more or less numerous simple eglandular hairs and scattered minute glandular hairs. Ligules glabrous or with short simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas yellow to discoloured. 1625-2500{\i  m. • Greece, S. Albania.} Al Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. sartorianum } Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 7}):15(1846). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Other species and groups in (xv):
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. albanicum } group ({\i H. gymnocephalum} / {\i heterogynum}). •{\i  Albania, S.W. Jugoslavia.} Al Ju. (Including{\b  H. albanicum} Freyn, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  3}: 651 (1895). Al Ju.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. brevilanosum } Degen & Zahn,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  6}: 222 (1907) ({\i H. laevigatum} /{\i  waldsteinii}). •{\i  W. & C. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. chloropannosum } Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich }{\b 77}({\b IV.280}): 591 (1921) ({\i H. heterogynum} / {\i pannosum}). •{\i  Albania. }Al.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. coloriscapum } Rohlena & Zahn,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  6}: 240 (1909) ({\i H. gymnocephalum} /{\i  naegelianum}). •{\i  Crna Gora, N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. divergens } Naegeli & Peter,{\i  Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  2}: 332 (1889) ({\i H. latifolium} /{\i  pannosum}). •{\i  W. Bulgaria. }Bu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. eriobasis } group ({\i H. murorum }/ {\i pannosum}). •{\i  N. & C. Greece, Albania.} Al Gr. (Including {\b H. eriobasis} Freyn & Sint.,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss. }{\b 5}: 781 (1897). Al Gr.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. geminum } Hayek & Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich }{\b 77}({\b IV.280}): 586 (1921) ({\i H. bifidum} /{\i  gymnocephalum}). •{\i  N. Albania.} Al.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. gnilagredae } Zahn, {\i op. cit.} 600 (1921) ({\i H. calophyllum} /{\i  plumulosiforme}). •{\i  S.W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. gracilifurcum } Zahn, {\i op. cit.} 605 (1921) ({\i H. sericophyllum} / {\i murorum}). •{\i  E.C. Greece}. Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. graecum } group ({\i H. pannosum} / {\i naegelianum}). •{\i  C. & S. Greece; C. Appennini.} Gr It. (Including{\b  H. graecum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 3}): 101 (1856). Gr It.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. grossianum } Zahn,{\i  Allgem. Bot. Zeitschr.} 184 (1903) ({\i H. murorum} / {\i waldsteinii}). •{\i  Bosna.} Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. gugleranum } group ({\i H. murorum} / {\i plumulosiforme}). •{\i  W. Jugoslavia, N. Albania.} Al Ju. (Including {\b H. gugleranum }Zahn,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  8}: 309 (1909). Al Ju.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. kritschianum } Mattf. & Zahn,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  24}: 384 (1928) ({\i H. olympicum} /{\i  pannosum}). •{\i  S. Bulgaria.} Bu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. longifidum } Zahn in Vandas,{\i  Reliq. Formánek.} 363 (1909) ({\i H. heldreichii} / {\i sparsum}). •{\i  Macedonia}. Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. marmoreum } group ({\i H. latifolium} / {\i pannosum}). 2n = 27. •{\i  E. Jugoslavia, W. Bulgaria.} Bu Ju. (Including {\b H. marmoreum} Pancic & Vis.,{\i  Mem. Ist. Veneto}{\b  12}: 468 (1866). Bu Ju.)
\par 

\par 
391}
\par