{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 191. H. picroides} group ({\i H. intybaceum} /{\i  prenanthoides}). Stems 30-70 cm, with few stellate hairs and dense unequal slender glandular hairs, sometimes with a few simple eglandular hairs. Leaves all cauline or rarely also a few basal which wither early, 12-18(-numerous), 30-120 × 10-20(-25) mm, oblong-lanceolate, oblong-elliptical or oblong, sometimes panduriform, more or less acute, denticulate to dentate, with numerous, unequal glandular and usually some simple eglandular hairs; the lower narrowed at base, semiamplexicaul, the remainder broadly amplexicaul at base, sometimes with stellate hairs beneath. Capitula 2-12 (-many); peduncles with dense stellate and dense unequal glandular hairs, sometimes with occasional simple hairs. Involucre 10-13 × 9-11 mm; bracts broadly linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, with more or less numerous stellate hairs, dense unequal glandular hairs and sometimes some simple eglandular hairs. Ligules with numerous minute glandular hairs at apex. Stigmas discoloured. Receptacular pits dentate. 1700-2350{\i  m. •  Alps.} Au Ga Ge He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. ochroleucum } Schleicher ex Koch,{\i  Syn. Fl. Germ.} ed. 2, 528 (1844).{\i  Alps.} Au Ga It.
\par 
 {\b H. picroides } Vill. in Vill.,G. Lauth & A. Nestler,{\i  Précis Voy. Bot.} 22 (1812).{\i  Alps.} Au Ga Ge He It.
\par 
 {\b H. sieberi } Tausch,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 11} (Ergänz. 1): 75 (1828).{\i  Alps.} Au Ga He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 192. H. neopicris} group ({\i H. chamaepicris} / {\i prenanthoides}). Like {\b 191} but ligules with dense glandular hairs; receptacular pits fimbriate-dentate. •{\i  Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. neopicris } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Spicil. Rar. Nov. Hier. }34 (1881). Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Other species and groups in (xxii):
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  H. hermannii-zahnii} Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  77}({\b IV.280}): 852 (1921) ({\i H. epimedium }/{\i  picroides}). •{\i  E. Alps} (Kärnten). Au.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pseudostenoplecum } group ({\i H. juranum} /{\i  picroides}). 1500-2300{\i  m. • Alps.} Au He. (Including{\b  H. pseudostenoplecum} Zahn in Koch,{\i  Syn. Deutsch. Fl. }ed. 3,{\b  2}: 1900 (1901). Au He.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. stenoplecum } group ({\i H. intybaceum} / {\i prenanthoides}). •{\i  Alps.} Au Ga Ge He. (Including{\b  H. stenoplecum} Arvet-Touvet & Huter, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  41}: 363 (1894). Au Ga He.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. vetteranum } Ronniger & Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich }{\b 79}({\b IV.280}): 1062 (1922) ({\i H. picroides} /{\i  sparsum}). •{\i  Austria.} Au.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. xanthoprasinophyes } Zahn in Ascherson & Graebner, {\i Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  12}({\b 3}): 418 (1939). •{\i  S.E. Austria.} Au.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (xxiii) Whole plant with viscid glandular hairs, stellate and simple eglandular hairs sometimes present. Leaves all cauline, but often grouped in lower part of stem in a false rosette. Capitula 1-6, on long, erect peduncles. Involucre 12-18 mm. Ligules usually glabrous. Margins of receptacular pits dentate, sometimes ciliate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 193. H. intybaceum} All.,{\i  Auct. Syn. Stirp. Horti Taur.} 19 (1773). Stems 5-30 cm, with dense unequal, yellowish-green, viscid glandular hairs. Leaves 30-160 × 5-20 mm, numerous, all cauline, with dense, unequal, yellow, viscid glandular hairs; the lower sometimes forming a false rosette, yellowish-green, lanceolate or oblong to linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, dentate (the teeth often cusped), narrowed into a short, winged petiole, the upper smaller, more or less amplexicaul. Capitula 1-6; peduncles long (sometimes arising nearly at base of plant), leafy, with few to numerous stellate hairs and dense unequal, viscid glandular hairs. Involucre 12-18 × 10-18 mm; bracts oblong-lanceolate, mostly obtuse, with or without numerous stellate hairs and with dense unequal glandular hairs. Ligules whitish-yellow, glabrous. Stigmas discoloured. 2n = 27. •{\i   Alps.} Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 194. H. pallidiflorum} group ({\i H. intybaceum} /{\i  prenanthoides}). Like {\b 193} but leaves up to 15, more or less lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate and amplexicaul. •{\i  Alps; Pyrenees.} Au Ga He Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. lantoscanum } Burnat & Gremli,{\i  Cat. Hier. Alpes Marit.} 22 (1883). Ga He Hs It.
\par 
 {\b  H. pallidiflorum} Jordan ex Ascherson, {\i Flora }({\i Regensb}.){\b  37}: 119 (1854). Although this name has always been used for this group of plants in the aggregate sense, it has never been typified and it is uncertain to which segregate the name applies.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 195. H. khekianum} Zahn in Schinz & R. Keller,{\i  Fl. Schweiz} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 319 (1905) ({\i H. alpinum }/{\i  intybaceum}). Stems 10-20 cm, with numerous glandular hairs. Leaves in a false rosette near the base of stem, with 2-3 distant cauline leaves, lanceolate to spathulate, obtuse to acute, attenuate into a petiole, with numerous glandular and a few simple eglandular hairs. Capitula 1-2; peduncles very long, with dense glandular hairs. Involucre 12-15 × 10-13 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, more or less acute, with numerous glandular and very occasional solitary simple eglandular hairs. Ligules glabrous. Stigmas yellowish or discoloured. •{\i  C. Alps.} Au He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Other species in (xxiii):
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. adenodermum } Zahn in Koch,{\i  Syn. Deutsch. Fl.} ed. 3,{\b  2}: 1862 (1901) ({\i H. alpinum} /{\i  intybaceum} /{\i  murorum}). •{\i  C. Alps. }He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. andreanszkyanum } F. Kováts,{\i  Borbásia}{\b  5-6}: 77 (1946). •{\i  E. Alps.} Au.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. macrocephalum } Huter ex Dalla Torre,{\i  Anleit. Beob. Bestimm. Alpenfl.} 271 (1882) ({\i H. kalsianum} / {\i pallidiflorum}). 1900-2000 {\i m. • C. Alps.} Au.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   (D) Leaves more or less glaucous, often glabrous or nearly so, usually glabrous above, glandular and plumose hairs usually absent; basal few to numerous or absent at anthesis; cauline 3-numerous. Capitula few to numerous. Margins of receptacular pits dentate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   (xxiv) Leaves glaucous, glabrous or with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs mainly on the margin and midrib beneath; basal numerous; cauline 3-25. Capitula few to many, usually on long peduncles. Ligules glabrous or shortly ciliate. Stigmas yellow or discoloured. Margins of receptacular pits shortly dentate. Achenes yellowish- to dark brown.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 196. H. porrifolium} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 802 (1753). Stems 30-45(-60) cm, glabrous or nearly so. Basal leaves 25-140 × 1-3(4·5) mm, filiform to linear, acute, entire, rarely remotely denticulate, the margin often subrevolute and glabrous or with few long hairs; cauline (3-)5-15, like the basal. Capitula (2-)6-20(-30); peduncles long, slender, glabrous or with a few stellate hairs. Involucre 9-10(-11) × 9-10 mm; bracts linear to linear-lanceolate, more or less obtuse, with few to numerous stellate hairs especially on the margin and at the base, without simple eglandular hairs, without or with occasional small glandular hairs. Stigmas yellow or discoloured. Achenes pale yellowish-brown. 2n = 18.{\i  Rocky places and grassy slopes on limestone}; 60-400(-2100){\i  m. • S Alps. }Au It Ju.
\par 

\par 
399}
\par