{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 peduncles with dense stellate hairs; involucre c. 12 mm; bracts with more or less numerous stellate hairs; ligules usually glabrous; styles dark. •{\i  E. Alps; Carpathians; Norway.} Au Cz Ge It No Po Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pietroszense } Degen & Zahn,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  5}: 72 (1906). Au It Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (xvii) Leaves with simple eglandular hairs and a few minute glandular hairs on the margin; cauline 1-5(-8), often lanceolate. Capitula 1-10, dark; inflorescence often furcately divided; peduncles erect. Ligules usually with short simple eglandular hairs at apex. Margins of receptacular pits usually shortly dentate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 161. H. fritzei} group ({\i H. alpinum} /{\i  prenanthoides}). Stems (8-)12-25(-35) cm, with more or less numerous stellate hairs, more or less numerous, usually dark-based simple eglandular hairs and few short glandular hairs. Leaves with more or less numerous simple eglandular hairs, but sometimes subglabrous above; basal 25-60 × 9-15 mm, usually with a few simple eglandular hairs, more or less spathulate, narrowly elliptical or lanceolate, obtuse to acute, denticulate to shallowly dentate, attenuate into a short petiole; cauline (2-)3-5(-8), narrowly elliptical, oblong-lanceolate or lanceolate, more or less acute, denticulate to shallowly dentate, sessile, semiamplexicaul. Capitula 1-3(-10); peduncles with dense stellate hairs, more or less numerous simple eglandular hairs and few glandular hairs. Involucre 10-12(-15) × 9-11 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, without or with numerous stellate hairs, with numerous dark-based simple eglandular hairs and more or less numerous dark glandular hairs. Ligules with short simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas discoloured. {\i Mountains of E.C. Europe.} Cz Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. fritzei } F. W. Schultz,{\i  Flora }({\i Regensb}.){\b  30}: 281 (1872). Cz Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 
 {\b H. scitulum } Woloszczak, {\i Spraw. Kom. Fizyogr. Krakow.}{\b  21}: 128 (1887). Cz Po Rm Rs (W). (Has some characters of{\i  H. nigrescens} group.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 162. H. arolae} group ({\i H. alpinum} / {\i incisum}). Stems 10-20(-30) cm, with stellate hairs, few glandular hairs and numerous simple eglandular hairs 3-4 mm. Leaves with more or less numerous simple eglandular hairs and sparse, minute glandular hairs on the margin; basal numerous, pale glaucous-green, ovate, obovate or oblong-lanceolate, acute to acuminate, dentate, abruptly contracted or attenuate into a petiole; cauline 1-3, more or less lanceolate or bract-like, usually sessile. Capitula 1-4(-6); peduncles usually long, sometimes up to ½ as long as stem, with dense stellate hairs, more or less dense simple eglandular hairs and numerous glandular hairs. Involucre 9-15 × 8-12 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, more or less acute, with dense stellate hairs, dense simple eglandular hairs and numerous small glandular hairs. Ligules with short simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas discoloured. •{\i  E.C. & E. Alps; Carpathians.} Au He It Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. arolae } J. Murr in Dörfler,{\i  Hier. Norm. Sched.}{\b  32}: 42 (1897). Au He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 163. H. senescens} group ({\i H. alpinum} /{\i  schmidtii}). Stems 20-35(-60) cm, with few to numerous often dark-based simple eglandular hairs throughout, and numerous stellate and often glandular hairs above. Leaves with simple eglandular hairs, those on the upper surface and margin rigid, the margin usually with a few minute glandular hairs; basal 20-100 × 10-40 mm, oblanceolate, lanceolate, elliptic-lanceolate or oblong, obtuse to acute, more or less dentate, base attenuate into a petiole; cauline 1-3, like the basal or bract-like, sometimes with stellate hairs beneath. Capitula (1-)2-5(-6); peduncles with dense stellate hairs, scattered dark-based simple eglandular hairs and numerous dark glandular hairs. Involucre 10-15 × 8-15 mm, blackish; bracts broadly linear-lanceolate, more or less acute, with numerous dark or dark-based simple eglandular hairs (often tufted at apex of bract) and numerous dark, unequal glandular hairs, without or with more or less numerous stellate hairs. Ligules with short simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas yellow. •{\i  W.C. Alps; Scotland.} Br He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b H. senescens } Backh.,{\i  Monogr. Brit. Hier.} 32 (1856). Br.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 164. H. atratum} group ({\i H. alpinum} / {\i murorum}). Stems 20-45(-60) cm, with dark-based, simple eglandular hairs and stellate and dark glandular hairs above. Leaves with more or less numerous simple eglandular hairs, and usually with minute glandular hairs on the margin; basal 20-140 × 50 mm, elliptical, ovate, lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, obtuse to acuminate, shallowly to deeply dentate, truncate to attenuate at base, petiolate; cauline 1-2(-4), like the basal, but with more or less numerous stellate hairs beneath. Capitula (1-)2-10; peduncles erect, with stellate hairs, dark or dark-based simple eglandular hairs and shorter, dark glandular hairs. Involucre 10-16(-17) × 7-14 mm, dark; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, with numerous dark glandular hairs, sometimes also few to numerous dark or dark-based simple eglandular hairs, and sometimes a few stellate hairs. Ligules with more or less numerous short simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas discoloured. 2n = 27, 36.{\i  N. & C. Europe.} Au Br Cz Ga Ge He Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. atratum } Fries,{\i  Nova Acta Reg. Soc. Sci. Upsal.}{\b  14}: 105 (1848). •{\i  Alps.} Au Ga He It.
\par 
 {\b H. atrellum } (Zahn) Juxip in Schischkin & Bobrov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  30}: 189 (1960). Cz Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 
 {\b H. ovaliceps } Norrlin, {\i Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  3}({\b 4}): 82 (1888). No Rs (N) Su.
\par 
 {\b H. piciniforme } Dahlst.,{\i  Ark. Bot.}{\b  3}({\b 10}): 21 (1904). • Is.
\par 
 {\b H. samnaunicum } (Zahn) P. D. Sell & C. West, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 266 (1976) ({\i H. atratum} subsp.{\i  samnaunicum} Zahn). •{\i  C. & E. Alps. }Au He It.
\par 
 {\b H. schroeteranum } (Zahn) P. D. Sell & C. West, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i H. atratum} subsp. {\i schroeteranum} Zahn). •{\i  C. & E. Alps.} Au He It Ju.
\par 
 {\b H. sinuans } F. J. Hanb.,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 30}: 167 (1892). •{\i  Scotland.} Br.
\par 
 {\b H. submurorum } Lindeb. in Blytt, {\i Norg. Fl.}{\b  2}: 643 (1874). • Br No Su.
\par 
 {\b H. subnigrescens } (Fries ex Norrlin) Dahlst.,{\i  Acta Horti Berg.}{\b  2}({\b 4}): 121 (1894). Cz Ge No Po Rs (W) Su.
\par 
 {\b H. ussense } (Pohle & Zahn) Juxip in Schischkin & Bobrov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  30}: 192 (1960).{\i  N.E. Russia.} Rs (N).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 165. H. liptoviense} group ({\i H. atratum} / {\i vulgatum}). Like {\b 164} but leaves acutely serrate, with very long petioles; cauline leaves (1-)2-3(-4). •{\i  E. Alps; Sudeten Mts; Carpathians.} Au Cz Po Rs (W).
\par 

\par 
393}
\par