{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b H. pulmonarioides } Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 36 (1779). 2n = 36. •{\i  Pyrenees; Alps.} Au Co Ga Ge He It [Br Su].
\par 
 {\b H. speluncarum } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Spicil. Rar. Nov. Hier.} 28 (1881). 2n = 36. • Au Co Ga Ge He It [Br Ho].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 179. H. chamaepicris} Arvet-Touvet, {\i Annu. Cons. Jard. Bot. Genève}{\b  1}: 102 (1897) ({\i H. amplexicaule} /{\i  pallidiflorum}). Stems 10-35 cm, with numerous pale glandular hairs. Leaves with pale glandular hairs; basal and lowermost cauline crowded, ovate to lanceolate, obtuse to acute, irregularly dentate, attenuate into a winged petiole; remainder of cauline up to 8, like the basal, but rounded-amplexicaul at base. Capitula (1-)2-5(-12); peduncles long, arcuate, with numerous glandular hairs. Involucre 13-15 × 11-13 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, more or less acute, with numerous glandular hairs. Ligules with dense short simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas yellow. 500-1500{\i  m. • Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (xxi) Like (xx) but simple eglandular or subplumose hairs usually intermixed with the glandular hairs; cauline leaves often smaller and less amplexicaul; involucre usually 9-13(-15) mm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 180. H. pseudocerinthe} group ({\i H. amplexicaule} /{\i  lawsonii}). Stems 10-40 cm, with numerous pale glandular hairs, sometimes with simple eglandular hairs below. Leaves with pale glandular hairs usually only beneath and on margin; basal 70-120 × 15-30 mm, glaucous or dark green, more or less obovate to oblanceolate, obtuse to subacute, entire to denticulate, attenuate to a petiole; cauline 2-6, the lower like the basal, the upper ovate acuminate, more or less cordate, amplexicaul. Capitula (1-)2-6 (-20); peduncles arcuate, with stellate hairs and unequal, pale glandular hairs. Involucre 10-12(-13) × 6-9 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, long-acute, with sparse stellate hairs and dense unequal, pale glandular hairs. Ligules with numerous short simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas yellow or discoloured. 300-2300{\i  m. • N. Spain; Pyrenees; S. France; W. Alps.} Ga He Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pseudocerinthe } (Gaudin) Koch,{\i  Syn. Fl. Germ.} ed. 2 525 (1844). Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 181. H. rupicola} group ({\i H. leptocladum} (Griseb. ex Fries) Zahn, non Naegeli & Peter; {\i H. amplexicaule} / {\i lawsonii}). Like {\b 180} but leaves deeply and irregularly dentate. •{\i  N. Spain; S.W. Alps.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. rupicola } Jordan, {\i Cat. Jard. Dijon} 24 (1848). Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 182. H. cordatum} group ({\i H. amplexicaule} /{\i  cordifolium}). Stems 20-65 cm, with more or less numerous long, pale simple eglandular hairs, and pale glandular hairs often only above. Leaves with few to numerous small, pale glandular hairs and larger, pale simple eglandular hairs, and sometimes also dentate hairs; basal 30-130 × 15-30 mm, oblanceolate, obovate, oblong to narrowly elliptical, obtuse to subacute, entire or undulate-dentate, attenuate into a winged petiole; cauline (2-)3-7(-12), large, like the basal but cordate-amplexicaul. Capitula 3-8(-30); peduncles long, arcuate, with more or less numerous stellate and glandular hairs, without or with few simple eglandular hairs. Involucre 9-12 × 7-10 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, with sparse stellate hairs, more or less numerous unequal glandular hairs and sometimes some simple eglandular hairs. Ligules with short hairs at apex. Stigmas yellow. 500-1500{\i  m. • Pyrenees. }Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. cordatum } Scheele ex Costa, {\i Introd. Fl. Cataluña }158 (1864).{\i  E. Pyrenees}. Ga Hs.
\par 
 {\b H. hispanicum } Arvet-Touvet, {\i Not. Pl. Alpes} 19 (1883). 2n = 18. {\i E. Pyrenees. }Hs.
\par 
 {\b H. myagrifolium } Arvet-Touvet & Gaut.,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  5}: 719 (1897).{\i  E. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 
 {\b H. salvatorum } Arvet-Touvet & Gaut.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b 51}: xxxvii (1904).{\i  Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 
 {\b H. vayredanum } Arvet-Touvet, {\i Spicil. Rar. Nov. Hier., Suppl.} 2, 46 (1886).{\i  E. Pyrenees.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 183. H. glaucophyllum} group ({\i H. cordatum} / {\i solidagineum}). Like {\b 182} but cauline leaves 1-3(-4), very small; capitula 10-25. 600-900 {\i m. • E. Pyrenees.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. glaucophyllum } Scheele, {\i Linnaea}{\b  32}: 659 (1863). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 184. H. pardoanum} group ({\i H. eriopogon} /{\i  pseudocerinthe}). Stems 20-40 cm, with simple eglandular or subplumose hairs throughout and glandular hairs above. Leaves with numerous subplumose or simple eglandular and minute glandular hairs; basal 50-80 × 15-25 mm, oblong, elliptical or elliptic-lanceolate obtuse to acute, denticulate to dentate, attenuate into a petiole, cauline 2-4, lanceolate to ovate, acute to acuminate, sessile, semiamplexicaul. Capitula 2-12; peduncles long, arcuate, with few stellate hairs and numerous unequal glandular hairs. Involucre 10-12 × 8-10 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, with numerous unequal glandular hairs, without stellate or simple eglandular hairs. Ligules with short glandular hairs at apex. Stigmas yellow. 1200-1400{\i  m. • C. Pyrenees.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pardoanum } Arvet-Touvet & Gaut.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b 51}: xxxvii (1904). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 185. H. pedemontanum} Burnat & Gremli,{\i  Cat. Hier. Alp. Marit.} 27 (1883) ({\i H. amplexicaule} /{\i  lanatum}). Stems 15-40 cm, with dense subplumose and numerous glandular hairs. Leaves 30-150 × 10-50 mm, oblong, obovate or lanceolate, usually obtuse denticulate to dentate, attenuate into a winged petiole, with dense pale glandular and subplumose hairs; cauline 3-5(-6), like the basal, sessile, amplexicaul. Capitula (1-)2-7(-20); peduncles with stellate hairs, dense unequal glandular hairs and few subplumose hairs. Involucre (11-)12-12·5 × 9-12 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, long-acute, with numerous stellate, glandular and subplumose hairs. Ligules with dense short simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas more or less yellow. 1000-2000{\i  m. • S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 186. H. scapigerum} group ({\i H. breviscapum} Boiss., Orph. & Heldr., non DC.; {\i H. amplexicaule} /{\i  pannosum}). Stems 5-15 cm, with numerous subplumose hairs, stellate hairs and short glandular hairs. Leaves up to 10, 25-100 × 15-30 mm, mostly crowded near the base in a false rosette, ovate to oblong-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, irregularly dentate, attenuate into a short, winged petiole or sessile, with short glandular and longer subplumose hairs. Capitula 1-5; peduncles long, with stellate, glandular and subplumose hairs. Involucre 12-14 × 6-10 mm; bracts broadly linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, with numerous subplumose and short glandular hairs, without stellate hairs. Ligules glabrous. Stigmas yellow. Achenes pale brown. •{\i  Albania; Greece}. Al Gr.
\par 

\par 
397}
\par