{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min52}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min54}{\version2}{\edmins2}{\nofpages5}{\nofwords1145}{\nofchars6529}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28   }{\b\fs28 P. aristata}{\fs28  Michx, }{\i\fs28 Fl. Bor. Amer. }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 95 (1803), an annual with linear or linear-lanceolate, entire leaves in basal rosettes, terete scapes 10-20 cm, and cylindrical spikes with the lower bracts 15-30 mm, is a native of North America and has been reported as a casual in various parts of Europe; it is perhaps becoming naturalized.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Leaves opposite
\par 2 Dwarf shrub
\par 3 Leaves 1-6 \'d7 c. 0\'b71 cm, linear, entire or remotely
\par   denticulate ............................................................................ }{\b\fs28 34. sempervirens}{\fs28 
\par 3 Leaves 1-2 \'d7 0\'b72-0\'b75 cm, linear-lanceolate, strongly 
\par   dentate to \'b1 pinnatifid ............................................................... }{\b\fs28 35. asperrima}{\fs28  
\par 2 Annual
\par 4 Bracts all similar in shape, without lateral veins;
\par   plant usually strongly glandular-pubescent above ............................. }{\b\fs28 33. afra}{\fs28 
\par 4 Lowest bracts very different in shape from the upper, with
\par   lateral veins at the base; plant not or minutely glandular
\par   5 Stems with patent branches, deflexed-puberulent; lowest
\par   bracts lanceolate-caudate ........................................................... }{\b\fs28 31. squarrosa}{\fs28 
\par 5 Stems with ascending branches, pubescent with patent or
\par   ascending hairs; lowest bracts with orbicular-ovate 
\par   base and linear-subulate apex ...................................................... }{\b\fs28 32. arenaria}{\fs28 
\par 1 Leaves in basal rosettes, or rarely alternate 
\par 6 Corolla-tube hairy ................................................. (}{\b\fs28 4-10}{\fs28 ). }{\b\fs28 coronopus}{\fs28  group 
\par 6 Corolla-tube glabrous
\par 7 Anterior sepals connate for more than half their length
\par 8 Bracts and sepals densely villous ................................................ }{\b\fs28 23. lagopus}{\fs28 
\par 8 Bracts and sepals glabrous or very shortly hairy
\par 9 Roots not more than 0\'b775 mm thick; scapes usually 
\par   strongly 5-sulcate; rosettes usually several .............................. }{\b\fs28 20. lanceolata}{\fs28 
\par 9 Roots up to 2 mm thick; scapes 6- to 12-sulcate or -striate;
\par    rosettes usually solitary
\par 10 Leaves subglabrous; spikes 3-5 cm; bracts 4\'b75-6 mm ............. }{\b\fs28 21. altissima}{\fs28 
\par 10 Leaves \'b1 densely appressed-hairy; spikes 0\'b75-2 cm;
\par    bracts 2\'b75-4 mm .......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 22. argentea}{\fs28 
\par 7  Anterior sepals free for more than half their length
\par 11 Anterior sepals almost entirely scarious, with midrib
\par    extending to not more than half-way
\par 12 Perennial; corolla-lobes more than 2 mm .................. (}{\b\fs28 15-17}{\fs28 ). }{\b\fs28 atrata }{\fs28 group
\par 12 Annual; corolla-lobes less than 2 mm
\par 13 Bracts and sepals glabrous, not or scarcely ciliate .................. }{\b\fs28 27. loeflingii}{\fs28 
\par 13 Bracts villous and long-ciliate; sepals long-ciliate ....................... }{\b\fs28 28. notata}{\fs28 
\par 11 Anterior sepals with midrib extending \'b1 to apex
\par 14 Perennial; leaves lanceolate or elliptical to sub-
\par    orbicular, usually at least 1 cm wide
\par 15 Bracts not more than half as long as sepals .................................. }{\b\fs28 3. cornuti}{\fs28 
\par 15 Bracts more than half as long as sepals 
\par 16 Seeds (4-)6-34, ellipsoid or ellipsoid-trigonous ............................. }{\b\fs28 1. major}{\fs28  
\par 16 Seeds 2-5(-7), plano-convex or cymbiform 
\par 17 Leaves cordate or truncate at base; seeds 2 ........................... }{\b\fs28 14. reniformis}{\fs28  
\par 17 Leaves narrowed at base; seeds usually more than 2
\par 18 Petiole longer than lamina; plant blackening on drying ........... }{\b\fs28 13. maxima}{\fs28 
\par 18 Petiole not longer than lamina; plant not blackening 
\par    on drying 
\par 19 Leaves \'b1 densely hairy; stamens exserted for 8-13 mm;
\par    filaments lilac ................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 12. media}{\fs28  
\par 19 Leaves glabrous or sparsely hairy; stamens exserted 
\par    for not more than 5 mm; filaments whitish
\par 20 Spikes c. 1/3 as long as rest of scape at anthesis;
\par    seeds c. 1\'b725 mm, plano-convex ................................ }{\b\fs28 11. schwarzenbergiana}{\fs28 
\par 20 Spikes less than \'bc as long as rest of scape at 
\par    anthesis; seeds 2-2\'b75 mm, cymbiform ................................. }{\b\fs28 18. gentianoides}{\fs28 
\par 14 Leaves linear or linear-lanceolate, usually less than
\par    1 cm wide
\par 21 Perennial, often with strongly branched stock
\par 22 Spikes dense; scapes scarcely exceeding leaves;
\par    stamens exserted for not more than 1 mm ...................................... }{\b\fs28 25. ovata}{\fs28 
\par 22 Spikes usually lax below; scape about twice as long as leaves;
\par    stamens exserted for 4-7 mm ...................................................... }{\b\fs28 24. albicans}{\fs28  
\par 21 Annual
\par 23 Seeds 6-15, fusiform ................................................................ }{\b\fs28 2. tenuiflora}{\fs28 
\par 23 Seeds 2, cymbiform
\par 24 Seeds 4-5 mm; leaves usually alternate on a branched
\par    stem .................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 19. amplexicaulis}{\fs28 
\par 24 Seeds less than 4 mm; leaves in a basal rosette
\par 25 Scapes with patent hairs usually more than 1 mm;
\par    sepals unequal, the anterior 4-5 mm
\par 26 Corolla-lobes orbicular-ovate; scapes arcuate-recurved
\par    and thickened in fruit .................................................................... }{\b\fs28 30. cretica}{\fs28 
\par 26 Corolla-lobes ovate-lanceolate; scapes erect or 
\par    arcuate-recurved, but not thickened in fruit ............................... }{\b\fs28 29. bellardii}{\fs28 
\par 25 Scapes with \'b1 appressed hairs less than 1 mm;
\par    sepals 2\'b75-3 mm, subequal
\par 27 Corolla-lobes orbicular-ovate; seeds 2-2\'b75 mm ............................ }{\b\fs28 25. ovata}{\fs28 
\par 27 Corolla-lobes ovate-elliptical or elliptical;
\par    seeds 3-3\'b75 mm ............................................................................. }{\b\fs28 26. minuta}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Subgen. Plantago. Leaves in basal rosettes or alternate.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. P. major}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl. }{\fs28 112 (1753). Perennial with one or few rosettes. Leaves (1\'b75-)5-30(-40) \'d7 (0\'b75-)3-10(-15) cm; lamina ovate to elliptical, entire or irregularly dentate, 3- to 9-veined, glabrous or puberulent; petiole as long as lamina or shorter. Scapes equalling or exceeding leaves, striate or terete, with short, appressed or ascending hairs; spikes as long as or shorter than rest of scape, dense. Bracts 1-2 mm, ovate, glabrous. Sepals 1\'b75-2\'b75 mm, subequal, glabrous, green, with narrow scarious margins. Corolla-tube c. 2 mm, glabrous; lobes c. 1 mm, lanceolate to ovate, subobtuse, glabrous. Stamens exserted 2-3 mm. Capsule 2-4 mm; seeds (4-)6-34, 1-1\'b75 mm, ellipsoid or ellipsoid-trigonous.}{\i\fs28  Almost throughout Europe.}{\fs28  }{\i\fs28 All except Sb, but}{\fs28  }{\i\fs28 only naturalized in Is}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Leaves 5- to 9-veined, \'b1 cordate at base, thick, dark green, 
\par   glabrescent; spikes narrowed above; seeds (4-)6-10(-13) . (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 major}{\fs28 
\par 1 Leaves 3- to 5-veined, gradually narrowed into petiole,
\par   usually thin, yellowish-green, usually puberulent;
\par   spikes cylindrical; seeds 8-34
\par 2 Seeds 8-11 ...................................................................... (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 winteri}{\fs28 
\par 2 Seeds 14-34 ............................................................... (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 intermedia}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28   (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 major}{\fs28 : 2n = 12. }{\i\fs28 Usually in fairly dry and non-saline habitats. Throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par    (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 winteri}{\fs28  (Wirtgen.) W. Ludwig, }{\i\fs28 Jahrb. Nassau. Ver. Naturk. }{\b\fs28 92}{\fs28 : 21(1956).}{\i\fs28  Saline habitats. C.& N.E. Europe}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 intermedia}{\fs28  (DC.) Arcangeli,}{\i\fs28  Comp. Fl. Ital.}{\fs28  501 (1882) (}{\i\fs28 P. intermedia }{\fs28 DC.,}{\i\fs28  P. major}{\fs28  subsp. }{\i\fs28 pleiosperma}{\fs28  Pilger): 2n = 12. }{\i\fs28 Damp, especially saline habitats. Most of Europe.}{\fs28 
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. P. tenuiflora}{\fs28  Waldst. & Kit.,}{\i\fs28  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 37 (1800-1801). Annual with one rosette. Leaves 2-15 \'d7 0\'b705-0\'b72(-0\'b74) cm, linear, flat, entire or remotely dentate, 1-(to 3-)veined glabrous or sparsely hairy. Scapes about equalling leaves, terete subglabrous or with short ascending hairs; spikes up to about as long as rest of scape, lax, often interrupted at base. Bracts 1\'b75-2(-3\'b75) mm, ovate or ovate-lanceolate, glabrous. Sepals 1\'b75-2 mm, subequal, glabrous, green, with wide scarious margins Corolla-tube c. 2 mm, glabrous; lobes c. 0\'b775 mm, ovate lanceolate, subacute, glabrous. Stamens exserted 1-2 mm Capsule 3-4 mm; seeds 6-10(-15), 1-1\'b75 mm, fusiform. 2n = 24 }{\i\fs28 Usually on saline or strongly alkaline soils. E.C. & S.E. Europe}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 39}
\par }