{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. scapigerum } Boiss., Orph. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 3}): 103 (1856). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 187. H. urticaceum} group ({\i H. amplexicaule} /{\i  humile}). Stems 10-30 cm, with numerous subplumose hairs throughout and a few stellate and glandular hairs above. Leaves with subplumose and glandular hairs; basal 60-100 × 15-35 mm, elliptical to ovate or ovate-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, denticulate to dentate, attenuate into a winged petiole; cauline 3-6, like the basal, sessile or semiamplexicaul. Capitula 2-8(-16); peduncles long, with stellate, subplumose and glandular hairs. Involucre 12-15 × 10-14 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, mostly acute, with simple eglandular and glandular hairs, without stellate hairs. Ligules with short eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas yellow or slightly discoloured. •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. urticaceum } Arvet-Touvet & Ravaud in Arvet-Touvet, {\i Suppl. Monogr. Hier.} 10 (1876). Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Other species and groups in (xxi):
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. adenophorum } Scheele,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  32}: 682 (1863) ({\i H. cerinthoides} /{\i  cordatum}). •{\i  E. Pyrenees.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. ardissonei } Zahn, {\i Hier. Alpes Marit.} 404 (1916) ({\i H. amplexicaule} / {\i pictum}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. baenitzianum } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Spicil. Rar. Nov. Hier., Suppl.} 2, 47 (1886) ({\i H. amplexicaule} /{\i  candidum}). •{\i  C. Pyrenees. }Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. bicknellianum } Belli & Arvet-Touvet in Fiori & Paol.,{\i  Fl. Anal. Ital.}{\b  3}: 465 (1904) ({\i H. lawsonii} /{\i  pedemontanum}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. cavanillesianum } Arvet-Touvet & Gaut.,{\i  Hier. Gall. Hisp.} ({\i Exsicc}.) {\b 15}: no. 234 (1903) ({\i H. amplexicaule} / {\i cerinthoides}). •{\i  Pyrenees.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. chaixianum } Arvet-Touvet & Gaut., {\i op. cit.}{\b  13}: no. 870 (1902) ({\i H. pseudocerinthe} /{\i  leiopogon}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. digeneum } Burnat & Gremli, {\i Cat. Hier. Alpes Marit.} 34 (1883) ({\i H. amplexicaule} /{\i  lanatum}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. gavellei } De Retz,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  112}: 444 (1965) ({\i H. amplexicaule} /{\i  bifidum}). •{\i  Alpes Maritimes.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. glaucocerinthe } Arvet-Touvet & Gaut., {\i Hier. Gall. Hisp.} ({\i Exsicc}.){\b  13}: no. 197 (1902) ({\i H. amplexicaule} /{\i  rupicaprinum}). •{\i  C. Pyrenees.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. glaucophyllomorphum } Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  77}({\b IV. 280}): 731 (1921) ({\i H. amplexicaule} /{\i  phlomoides}). •{\i  W. Pyrenees.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. lachnopsilon } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  41}: 351 (1894) ({\i H. alatum} /{\i  cordatum}). •{\i  W. Pyrenees.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. oleaginicolor } (Zahn) Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich }{\b 77}({\b IV. 280}): 742 (1921) ({\i H. leptocladum} /{\i  rupestre}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. salvifolium } Arvet-Touvet & Gaut.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  41}: 352 (1894) ({\i H. cordatum} /{\i  sonchoides}). •{\i  W. Pyrenees.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. ucenicum } group ({\i H. amplexicaule} /{\i  lawsonii}). • {\i W. Alps; E. Pyrenees;} ?{\i Islas Baleares.} ?Bl Ga Hs. (Including{\b  H. ucenicum} Arvet-Touvet, {\i Hier. Alpes Fr.} 52 (1888). Ga.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. valentinum } Arvet-Touvet & Reverchon ex Willk., {\i Suppl. Prodr. Fl. Hisp. }119 (1893) ({\i H. amplexicaule} /{\i  elisaeanum}). •{\i  E. Spain} ({\i prov. Teruel}). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   (xxii) Plants usually with yellowish glandular hairs throughout, and few or no simple eglandular hairs. Basal leaves usually present but often withered at anthesis; cauline 2-18 (-numerous), more or less amplexicaul. Inflorescence of rather numerous large capitula on long peduncles. Ligules with numerous short simple eglandular or glandular hairs or with both. Achenes sometimes pale. Margins of receptacular pits usually fimbriate-dentate, sometimes dentate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 188. H. viscosum} group ({\i H. amplexicaule} /{\i  prenanthoides}). Plant yellowish-green; stems up to 70 cm, with numerous slender, yellowish glandular hairs and sometimes a few simple eglandular and stellate hairs. Leaves with numerous yellowish glandular hairs and usually a few simple eglandular hairs; basal obovate to lanceolate-oblong, narrowed into a petiole, usually withered at anthesis; cauline 5-15, 25-170 × 10-70 mm, ovate- to elliptic-oblong, often panduriform, denticulate to deeply dentate, sessile, more or less amplexicaul or auriculate-amplexicaul. Capitula 10-30(-numerous); peduncles long, with dense unequal glandular hairs, few to numerous stellate hairs and sometimes some simple eglandular hairs. Involucre 12-13(-15) × 8-10 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, more or less acute, with dense unequal glandular hairs and sometimes some simple eglandular hairs. Ligules with dense short simple eglandular or glandular hairs. Stigmas yellow or discoloured. Receptacular pits fimbriate-dentate. •{\i  W. Alps; Pyrenees; Corse.} Co Ga He Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. viscosum } Arvet-Touvet, {\i Suppl. Monogr. Hier.} 26 (1876). Co Ga He Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 189. H. ramosissimum} group ({\i H. amplexicaule} /{\i  prenanthoides}). Like {\b 188} but with dense stellate hairs on the involucral bracts; ligules with glandular hairs. •{\i  W. Alps; Appennini; Corse, Sardegna.} Co Ga He It Sa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   H. adenoclinium Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Hier. Alpes Fr.} 108 (1888).{\i  W. Alps; C. Appennini; Corse. }Co Ga It.
\par 
  {\b H. lactucifolium } Arvet-Touvet, {\i Monogr. Hier.} 44 (1873). {\i W. Alps; Appennini; Sardegna.} Ga It Sa.
\par 
  {\b H. ramosissimum } Schleicher ex Hegetschw.,{\i  Beytr. Krit. Aufzähl. Schweizerpfl.} 365 (1831).{\i  S.W. Alps; S.C. France.; Corse.} Co Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 190. H. arpadianum} group ({\i H. amplexicaule} /{\i  juranum}). Stems up to 60 cm, with numerous slender glandular hairs and often some simple eglandular or subplumose hairs. Leaves more or less glaucous, with glandular and sometimes simple eglandular hairs; basal 2-4, elliptical to ovate- or lanceolate-oblong, obtuse to acute, usually denticulate, rarely dentate, rounded to truncate at base, often plicate; cauline 3-6, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, the lower attenuate at base, petiolate, the upper sessile, amplexicaul, sometimes with stellate hairs beneath. Capitula 5-25; peduncles with numerous stellate and glandular hairs, and sometimes a few simple eglandular hairs. Involucre 8-9 × 7-8 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, more or less acute, with more or less numerous stellate and numerous glandular hairs, and sometimes an occasional simple eglandular hair. Ligules with more or less numerous short simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas discoloured. •{\i  Alpes Maritimes; W. Jugoslavia; E. Greece} ({\i Thessalia}). Gr It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  H. arpadianum} Zahn in Reichenb. fil., {\i Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  19}({\b 2}): 132 (1907). Ju.
\par 

\par 
398}
\par