{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pseudonigritum } Pax, {\i Grundz. Pflanzenverbr. Karp.}{\b  2}: 96 (1908). •{\i  Romania.} Rm.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pseudopaltinae } E. I. Nyárády & Zahn, {\i Bul. Grad. Bot. Cluj}{\b  8}: 79 (1928). •{\i  S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pseudotranssilvanicum } (Zahn) Zahn,{\i  op. cit. }73 (1928). •{\i  S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pseudovagneri } Zahn in Ascherson & Graebner, {\i Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  12}({\b 3}): 239 (1936). • Romania. Rm.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pseudoratezatense } E. I. Nyárády & Zahn, {\i Bul. Grad. Bot. Cluj}{\b  8}: 79 (1928). •{\i  S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. revucanum } E. I. Nyárády & Zahn in Ascherson & Graebner,{\i  Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  12}({\b 2}): 400 (1931) ({\i H. caesium} / {\i chlorocephalum}). •{\i  W. Carpathians.} Cz.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. serratum } group ({\i H. alpinum} /{\i  dentatum}). •{\i  Alps; W. Carpathians.} Au Cz He. (Including {\b H. serratum} Naegeli & Peter,{\i  Hier. Mittel-Eur. }{\b 2}: 200 (1886). Au.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. stenodontophyllum } E. I. Nyárády & Zahn,{\i  Bul. Grad. Bot. Cluj}{\b  8}: 60(1928). •{\i  S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. sterzingense } Zahn in Koch,{\i  Syn. Deutsch. Fl.} ed. 3, {\b 2}: 1893 (1901) ({\i H. bocconei} /{\i  umbrosum}). •{\i  E. Alps.} Au It.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. subeversianum } Vetter & Zahn,{\i  Sonderschr. Naturh. Komm. Yorarlb. Landesmus.}{\b  5}: 48(1928). • {\i Austria} ({\i Vorarlberg}). Au.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. tephrodermum } group ({\i H. bifidum} / {\i bocconei} / {\i villosum}). •{\i  E. Alps.} Au. (Including {\b H. tephrodermum} Zahn in Koch, {\i Syn. Deutsch. Fl.} ed. 3, {\b 2}: 1854 (1901). Au.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. thomasianum } Zahn in Schinz & R. Keller,{\i  Fl. Schweiz} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 315 (1905) ({\i H. atratum} / {\i bifidum}). •{\i  C. Alps.} He.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. thomaissaeforme } (E. I. Nyárády) E. I. Nyárády in Savul.,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  10}: 517 (1965). •{\i  S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. trischistum } E. I. Nyárády & Zahn,{\i  Bul. Grad. Bot. Cluj}{\b  8}: 83 (1928). •{\i  S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. vagneri } group ({\i H. alpinum} /{\i  caesium}). •{\i  Sudeten Mts, Carpathians.} Cz Po Rm Rs (W). (Including {\b H. vagneri} Pax, {\i Grundz. Pflanzenverbr. Karp.}{\b  1}: 154 (1898). Cz Po Rm.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  (xviii) Leaves with at least some minute glandular hairs on the margin; basal absent, or if present usually withered at anthesis; cauline (1-)2-12, small, at least the upper more or less amplexicaul. Inflorescence of few capitula usually on erect peduncles. Involucre blackish. Ligules usually with short simple eglandular hairs at apex.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 170. H. sudeticum} group ({\i H. alpinum} / {\i prenanthoides}). Stems 15-40(-60) cm, with dense long simple eglandular hairs throughout and few stellate and glandular hairs above. Leaves with long simple eglandular hairs throughout and few small glandular hairs on the margin; basal absent or withering early; cauline 15-60 × 6-20 mm, many, oblong, merging into linear bracts, denticulate to dentate, more or less amplexicaul. Capitula (1-)2-12; peduncles with few to numerous stellate, simple eglandular and glandular hairs. Involucre 10-12 × 7-9 mm; bracts broadly linear-lanceolate, obtuse to subacute, with numerous long simple eglandular hairs, numerous unequal glandular hairs and few stellate hairs. Ligules with very short simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas discoloured. 800-1500{\i  m. • Sudeten Mts, Carpathians.} Cz Po Rm ?Rs (W).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pedunculare } Tausch, {\i Flora }({\i Regensb}.) {\b 11} (Ergänz. 1): 76 (1828).{\i  Sudeten Mts. }Cz.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. sudeticum } Sternb.,{\i  Denkschr. Bayer. Bot. Ges. Regensb.}{\b  1}({\b 2}): 62 (1818) ({\i H. bohemicum} Fries).{\i  Carpathians.} Cz Po Rm ?Rs (W).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 171. H. nigritum} group ({\i H. fritzei} / {\i murorum}). Stems 15-35 cm, with numerous simple eglandular hairs. Leaves with numerous simple eglandular hairs throughout, the upper sometimes with stellate hairs beneath, the margin with small glandular hairs; basal obovate to oblong, obtuse, or narrower and acute, more or less dentate, attenuate into a petiole; cauline (1-)2-4(-8), sessile, semiamplexicaul. Capitula (1-)2-5(-12); peduncles with few stellate and simple eglandular hairs and numerous glandular hairs. Involucre 12-16 × 10-13 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, with few to numerous stellate hairs, simple eglandular hairs and glandular hairs. Ligules with short simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas discoloured. 2n = 27. •{\i  Sudeten Mts.; Carpathians; N.E. Alps.} Au Cz Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Included species:
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. nigritum } Uechtr.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  23}: 358 (1873). Au Cz Po.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 172. H. chlorocephalum} group ({\i H. alpinum} /{\i  prenanthoides }/ {\i vulgatum}). Stems (10-)20-30(-40) cm, with few to numerous stellate hairs at least above, few to numerous simple eglandular hairs, and few glandular hairs. Leaves entire to shallowly dentate, with few simple eglandular hairs mostly on the margin, and with few minute glandular hairs on the margin; basal 15-50 × 5-15 mm, often withered at anthesis, elliptical to oblong, obtuse to subacute, abruptly contracted or attenuate into a petiole; cauline 2-4(-6), oblong to lanceolate, acute, the lower petiolate, the upper semiamplexicaul. Capitula (1-)2-5(-12); peduncles with numerous stellate and few to numerous simple eglandular and glandular hairs. Involucre 10-12(-14·5) × 8-12 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, more or less acute, with few stellate and few to numerous simple eglandular and glandular hairs. Ligules usually with short simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas discoloured. •{\i  Sudeten Mts.; Carpathians; N.E. Alps}. Au Cz Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. chlorocephalum } Wimmer, {\i Jahresb. Schles. Ges. Vaterl. Kult.}{\b  22}: 60 (1846). Au Cz.
\par   {\b H. stygium } Uechtr.,{\i  Jahresb. Schles. Ges. Vaterl. Kult.}{\b  55}: 146 (1876). Cz Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 173. H. gombense} group ({\i H. atratum} /{\i  epimedium}). Stems 20-40 cm, with numerous simple eglandular hairs and few to numerous stellate and glandular hairs. Basal leaves absent or few; cauline (1-)2-4, ovate-oblong, ovate-lanceolate or more or less elliptical, semiamplexicaul, more or less acute, denticulate to dentate, with numerous simple eglandular hairs throughout and few to numerous minute glandular hairs on the margin. Capitula 2-12; peduncles long, with numerous stellate and simple eglandular hairs and few to numerous glandular hairs. Involucre 10-13 × 8-10 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, more or less obtuse, with more or less numerous stellate hairs, simple eglandular hairs and glandular hairs. Ligules with short simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas discoloured. •{\i  Alps; Sudeten Mts.} Au Cz Ga He.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Included species:
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. gombense } Lagger & Christener in Christener,{\i  Hier. Schweiz} 19 (1863). Ga He.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Other species and groups in (xviii):
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. amoenanthes } E. I. Nyárády & Zahn, {\i Bul. Grad. Bot. Cluj}{\b  8}: 63 (1928) ({\i H. caesium }/{\i  nigritum}). •{\i  S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 
\par 395}
\par