{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. corconticum } group ({\i H. nigrescens }/{\i  prenanthoides}). •{\i  Sudeten Mts.} Cz Po. (Including {\b H. corconticum }Knaf fil. ex Celak.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 33}: 79 (1883). Cz Po.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. grofae } Woloszczak,{\i  Spraw. Kom. Fizyogr. Krakow.}{\b  27}: 142 (1892) ({\i H. chlorocephalum} /{\i  umbellatum}). •{\i  E. Carpathians.} Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. palenicae } Rech. fil. & Zahn, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  31}: 356 (1933) ({\i H. chlorocephalum} / {\i dentatum}). •{\i  Czechoslovakia.} Cz.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. riphaeoides } Bornm. & Zahn in Ascherson & Graebner,{\i  Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  12}({\b 2}): 401 (1931) ({\i H. laevigatum} /{\i  riphaeum}). •{\i  Sudeten Mts.} Cz.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. riphaeum } group ({\i H. alpinum} / {\i prenanthoides}). •{\i  Sudeten Mts.} Cz Po. (Including {\b H. riphaeum} Uechtr.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 22}: 41 (1872). Cz Po.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. subserratosinuatum } Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  77}({\b IV. 280}): 837 (1921) ({\i H. chlorocephalum} / {\i epimedium}). •{\i  Tatra.} Cz.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (xix) Plants dark or glaucous-green, with glandular and simple eglandular hairs throughout. Basal leaves petiolate; cauline not amplexicaul. Inflorescence furcately branched, with few capitula. Involucre medium to large. Ligules usually glabrous. Receptacular pits subdenticulate, rarely fimbriate-dentate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 174. H. humile} group. Stems 10-30 cm, with more or less numerous rigid simple eglandular and short glandular hairs. Leaves with more or less numerous, short, rigid simple eglandular and short glandular hairs; basal 20-110 × 10 40 mm, obovate, elliptical, oblong to lanceolate, obtuse to acuminate, usually deeply sinuate- or incise-dentate (the teeth often more or less mammiform and extending down the petiole); cauline 0-4(-6), the lower like the basal, sessile and often bract-like. Capitula (1-)4-12; peduncles usually long, with numerous rigid simple eglandular and short glandular hairs, sometimes with a few stellate hairs. Involucre (9-)12-15 × 8-12 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse to more or less acute, with more or less dense subrigid simple eglandular and numerous short glandular hairs. Ligules glabrous. Stigmas yellow or discoloured. 2n = 27.{\i  Basic rocks,} 250-2500 {\i m. • S. & S.C. Europe, from the Vosges and S.C. Germany southwards to the Pyrenees, S. Appennini and Crna Gora.} Au Co Ga Ge He Hs It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. huetii } Timb.-Lagr. ex Rouy,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  9}: 439 (1905).{\i  E. Pyrenees.} Ga.
\par 
 {\b H. humile } Jacq.,{\i  Hort. Vindob. }{\b 3}: 2 (1776). Au Ga Ge He Hs It Ju.
\par 
 {\b H. lacerum } Reuter ex Fries, {\i Uppsala Univ. Årsskr.}{\b  1862} ({\i Math. Nat., Epicr. Hier}.): 86 (1862). Au Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 175. H. cottetii} group ({\i H. humile} /{\i  murorum}). Like {\b 174} but leaves cordate, truncate or abruptly contracted at base; glandular hairs less numerous; peduncles with numerous stellate hairs. •{\i  Alps.} Au Ga Ge He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. cottetii } Godet ex Gremli,{\i  Neue Beitr. Fl. Schweiz}{\b  1}: 94 (1880). Au Ga Ge He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 176. H. kerneri} group ({\i H. bifidum} /{\i  humile}). Like {\b 174} but with less dense glandular hairs throughout the plant; capitula smaller, with more or less dense stellate hairs on peduncles and involucral bracts. •{\i  Alps, mountains of N.W. Jugoslavia.} Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. balbisianum } Arvet-Touvet & Briq.,{\i  Annu. Cons. Jard. Bot. Genève}{\b  3}: 137 (1899). Au Ga He Ju.
\par 
 {\b H. kerneri } Ausserdorfer ex Zahn in Koch,{\i  Syn. Deutsch. Fl.} ed. 3, {\b 2}: 1837 (1901).{\i  E. Alps.} It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 177. H. valoddae} group ({\i H. humile} /{\i  incisum}). Like {\b 174} but simple hairs of whole plant denser and longer; leaves with only very sparse glandular hairs; peduncles and involucral bracts with few glandular and stellate hairs; involucre 9-12 mm. •{\i  Alps; S. Appennini.} Au Ga Ge He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. valoddae } (Zahn) Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  77}({\b IV.280}): 619 (1921). Ga Ge He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Other species in (xix):
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. axaticum } Arvet-Touvet & Gaut.,{\i  Hier. Gall. Hisp.} ({\i Exsicc}.) {\b 3}: no.159 (1898) ({\i H.cerinthoides }/{\i  humile}). •{\i  E. Pyrenees.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. corsentinum } Zahn in Ascherson & Graebner,{\i  Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  12}({\b 3}): 121 (1936) ({\i H. glaucinum} / {\i humile}).  •{\i W. Alps.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. kochianum } Jordan, {\i Cat. Jard. Grenoble}{\b  1849}: 19 (1849) ({\i H. humile} / {\i lanatum}). •{\i  S.W. Alps}. Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. serinense } Zahn in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich}{\b  77}({\b IV.280}): 614 (1921) ({\i H. humile} /{\i  schmidtii}). •{\i  S. Appennini.} It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. subsquarrosulum } Zahn,{\i  op. cit.} 621 (1921) ({\i H. amplexicaule} / {\i humile}). •{\i  S.W. & W.C. Alps.} Ga He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. toutonianum } Zahn in Koch, {\i Syn. Deutsch. Fl.} ed. 3, {\b 2}: 1834 (1901) ({\i H. humile} / {\i schmidtii}). •{\i  W.C. Alps; C. Appennini.} He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (xx) Whole plant with numerous viscid glandular hairs, and sometimes some simple eglandular hairs. Cauline leaves 3-6(-12), large, amplexicaul. Capitula 2-12(-25), on long, arcuate peduncles. Involucre 12-18 mm. Ligules with simple eglandular hairs at apex. Margins of receptacular pits shortly dentate, ciliate with simple eglandular hairs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 178. H. amplexicaule} group. Stems 10-50 cm, with stellate hairs, dense brownish, viscid glandular hairs and sometimes simple eglandular hairs. Leaves with dense, brownish, viscid glandular hairs and sometimes also simple eglandular hairs; basal numerous, 30-200 × 10-60 mm, yellowish- or glaucous-green, oblong, spathulate-obovate or lanceolate, usually obtuse and mucronate, denticulate to dentate (the teeth often more or less mammiform), attenuate into a winged petiole; cauline 3-6(-12), like the basal or more or less ovate, auriculate-amplexicaul and sometimes cordate. Capitula 2-12(-25); peduncles long, arcuate, with stellate hairs and dense, unequal, viscid glandular hairs. Involucre 12-18 × 9-16 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate, long-acute, with few to numerous stellate and dense viscid, unequal glandular hairs, sometimes with a few simple eglandular hairs. Ligules with dense simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas yellow or discoloured. 2n = 27, 36.{\i  Mountain rocks, mainly calcicole; often naturalized on old walls. C. & S. Europe.} Al Au Bl Co Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu [Be Br Ho Su].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. amplexicaule } L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 803 (1753). Au Bl Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Lu.
\par 
 {\b H. petraeum } Hoppe ex Bluff & Fingerh.,{\i  Comp. Fl. Germ.}{\b  2}: 296 (1825). Al Au Co Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju.
\par 
 {\b H. pseudoligusticum } Gremli,{\i  Excurs.-Fl. Schweiz }ed. 7, 277 (1883). •{\i  Alps; Appennini.} Ga He It.
\par 

\par 
396}
\par