{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 6 Lowermost leaves linear-lanceolate, bracts narrowly 
\par   lanceolate, free, similar to the bracteoles ................................ {\b 5. angustifolia}
\par 6 Lowermost leaves obovate-elliptical; bracts broadly 
\par   lanceolate, often connate at base, much wider than the
\par   linear bracteoles
\par 7 Corolla 3-4·5 mm, not exceeding bracts; bracts free ................. {\b 6. imbricata}
\par 7 Corolla 5-7·5 mm, somewhat exceeding bracts; bracts
\par   mostly connate at base ................................................................... {\b 7. latifolia}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. maritima} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 109 (1753). Procumbent to ascending woody perennial; stems 10-50 cm, whitish, glabrous, smooth. Leaves 4-10 × 1-4 mm, in whorls of 4, ovate-lanceolate, mucronate, coriaceous and white-margined, often densely imbricate, somewhat pungent. Spike 1-3 cm; bracts 6-10 × 3-7 mm, ovate, free; bracteoles shorter than bracts, plicate, more or less connate at base. Corolla 10-13 × 2-3 mm, 5-lobed, yellow, exceeding the bract. 2n = 22. {\i Maritime sands and rocks. W. Mediterranean region and Iberian peninsula.} Bl Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Variable in growth-form. Condensed plants from maritime rocks in Malta and Lampedusa have been called {\b C. rupestris} Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Prodr., Suppl.} 44 (1832), but their status is very doubtful.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. macrostachya} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 3}): 27 (1843). Annual. Stems up to 60 cm, slightly puberulent-scabrid to glabrous. Leaves 10-25(-35) × 1·5-3(-5) mm, in whorls of 6-8, the lower elliptical, the upper lanceolate to linear, with revolute margins. Spike 4-10 cm, somewhat distichous, rather lax; bracts 8-10 × 2·5-3·5 mm, lanceolate-acute, not revolute or indurate, free; flowers sessile, single. Corolla 7-9·5 × c. 1·5 mm, 5-lobed, yellow to greenish or reddish, exceeding the bract. {\i Kriti. }Cr. ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. bithynica} Boiss., {\i op. cit}. {\b 2}({\b 10}): 58 (1849). Annual. Stems 10-25 cm, more or less scabrid. Leaves 15-25 × 0·5-1·5 mm, in whorls of not more than 4, the lowermost linear-lanceolate, the upper linear with revolute margins. Spike 4-10 cm, somewhat tetrastichous, dense; bracts 5-8 × 1·5-2·5 mm, ovate-acuminate, carinate and slightly scabrid outside; margin flat, broadly hyaline, ciliolate; flowers usually in pairs. Corolla 6-8 mm, 5-lobed, yellowish, exceeding the bract. {\i N.E. Greece, Turkey-in-Europe}. Gr Tu. ({\i W. Anatolia.})
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. graeca} Boiss.,{\i  op. cit.}{\b  1}({\b 3}): 25 (1843). Like {\b 3} but leaves in whorls of 6-8, often shorter and wider; bracts less and more shortly ciliolate. 2n = 22.{\i   •S. half of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 3} and {\b 4} are vicarious species.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. angustifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 108 (1753). Annual. Stems up to 50 cm, glabrous. Leaves 5-15(-30) × 0·5-1(-2) mm, mostly in whorls of 6-8, the lowermost linear-lanceolate, the upper linear, with revolute margins, somewhat scabrid, bluish-green. Spike 2-8 cm; bracts 5-9 × 1·5-2 mm, lanceolate, acute or acuminate, free, with membranous margins; bracteoles like the bracts; flowers sessile, single. Corolla 3-5 × c. 0·6 mm, 4-lobed, pale yellow, not exceeding the bract. 2n = 22.{\i  S. Europe. }Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Variants based on slight differences in the relative lengths of bracts and bracteoles do not merit taxonomic recognition.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. imbricata} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 10}): 59 (1849). Annual. Stems 8-20 cm, slightly puberulent-scabrid. Leaves 10-25 × 1-4 mm, in whorls of 4-6, the lowermost obovate-elliptical, the upper lanceolate to linear, with revolute margins. Spike 2-8 cm × 2-3 mm, rather dense; internodes not more than 2-5 mm; bracts 5-8 × 2-3 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, loosely appressed, their base neither inflated nor with enlarged epidermal cells, free; bracteoles linear, much narrower and shorter than bracts; flowers sessile. Corolla 3-4·5 × c. 0·6 mm, 4-lobed, yellowish, scarcely exceeding the bract.{\i  Kriti.} Cr. ({\i Anatolia, Syria.})
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. latifolia} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 109 (1753). Like {\b 6} but stems up to 30 cm; spike 15(-25) cm × 1·5-2·5 mm, more lax; internodes (3-)4-4·5(-5) mm; bracts strongly appressed, their base somewhat inflated and with enlarged epidermal cells, more or less connate by a hyaline membrane; corolla 5-7·5 × c. 0·8 mm, somewhat exceeding the bract. 2n = 44.{\i  S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rs (K) Sa Si.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. patula} L.,{\i  Demonstr. Pl.} 4 (1753). Annual. Stems 15-25 cm, puberulent-scabrid. Leaves 7-10 × c. 1 mm, mostly in whorls of 6, linear, with revolute margins. Spike 1-2 cm; bracts 5-7 × 0·5-1 mm, linear-subulate; bracteoles like the bracts but slightly smaller; flowers shortly pedunculate. Corolla 2-2·5 mm, 5-lobed, pale yellow. {\i Spain.} Hs.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.             Asperula}             L.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By F. Ehrendorfer & F. Krendl.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Dwarf shrubs, perennial herbs or annuals. Stems more or less distinctly 4-angled and not retrorsely aculeolate. Leaves in whorls of 4-8(-11) or in pairs. Inflorescence of panicles or capitula; ultimate branches with bracts and often bracteoles. Flowers hermaphrodite, (3-)4(-5)-merous. Calyx absent or consisting of short teeth. Corolla usually hypocrateriform to infundibuliform, rarely rotate. Stigmas capitate or clavate. Ovary and fruit oblong to globose, never with hooked hairs; fruit dry.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 At least some leaves in whorls of more than 4
\par 2 Flowers 3-merous ....................................................................... {\b 55. tinctoria}
\par 2 Flowers 4(-5)-merous
\par 3 Annual; flowers bluish-violet (Sect.{\i  Asperula}) ...................... {\b 56. arvensis}
\par 3 Perennial; flowers not bluish-violet
\par 4 Ovary and fruit oblong; flowers not in capitula;
\par   corolla infundibuliform to rotate (Sect. {\i Thliphthisa})
\par 5 Stigma oblong-clavate
\par 6 Virgate dwarf shrub with caducous leaves, at least the
\par   upper linear; internodes mostly longer than leaves ......................... {\b 57. rigida}
\par 6 Shrub or dwarf shrub, not virgate, with persistent,
\par   linear-lanceolate or wider leaves; internodes as long
\par   as or shorter than leaves
\par 7 Leaves glaucous, obovate ...................................................... {\b 58. tournefortii}
\par 7 Leaves green, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate or elliptical
\par 8 Stems usually 10-16 cm; all leaves 9-12 mm, linear-
\par   lanceolate, not or obscurely scabrid ........................................... {\b 59. muscosa}
\par 8 Stems usually 2-4 cm; lower leaves elliptical, 
\par   distinctly scabrid, the upper 4-7 mm, broadly 
\par   lanceolate, weakly scabrid .......................................................... {\b 60. baenitzii}
\par 5 Stigma globose
\par 9 Corolla 2-3 mm, infundibuliform ........................................... {\b 61. chlorantha}
\par 9 Corolla 0·7-2 mm, cup-shaped to ± rotate
\par 10 Stems glabrous and smooth (rarely shortly hairy);
\par    corolla distinctly cup-shaped ................................................... {\b 62. scutellaris}
\par 10 Stems ± hairy; corolla weakly cup-shaped to ± rotate
\par 11 Fruit densely hairy ................................................................... {\b 63. baldaccii}
\par 11 Fruit glabrous (very rarely with short, stiff hairs)
\par 12 Leaves narrowly lanceolate to filiform; corolla-lobes 
\par    ± apiculate; stems up to 50 cm .................................................. {\b 66. purpurea}
\par 12 Leaves ovate or elliptical to broadly lanceolate;
\par    corolla-lobes not apiculate; stems not more than 20(-25) cm
\par 
\par 4}
\par