{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 stellate and simple eglandular hairs beneath; outer basal more or less obovate, subobtuse, contracted at base, the remainder elliptic-lanceolate to lanceolate, more or less acute, attenuate at base; cauline up to 3, lanceolate or narrower, denticulate. Capitula 2-15(-20); peduncles with stellate hairs, and few dark simple eglandular hairs, glandular hairs few to numerous or absent. Involucre 10-12 × 7-9 mm; bracts broad, obtuse to subacute, with stellate and dense glandular hairs, without or with few simple eglandular hairs. Stigmas discoloured. •{\i  Alps.} Au Ge It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b H. austriacum } Brittinger,{\i  Fl. Ober-Österr.} 67 (1862). Au Ge It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 207. H. dollineri} group ({\i H. bifidum }/{\i  glaucum}). Like {\b 206} but leaves often more dentate and sometimes spotted; peduncles with numerous glandular hairs; involucral bracts with more or less numerous simple eglandular hairs; stigmas yellow or discoloured. •{\i  E. Alps; W. Carpathians.} Au Cz Ge It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. dollineri } Schultz Bip. ex F.W. Schultz,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 33}: 212 (1850). Au Cz Ge It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 208. H. calcareum} group ({\i H. illyricum} Fries;{\i  H. laevigatum} / {\i porrifolium}). Stems 20-80 cm, glabrous or with a few stellate hairs above. Leaves glabrous or with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs beneath; basal 20-120 × 5-15 mm, narrowly to broadly lanceolate, acute to long-acuminate, denticulate to dentate; cauline 3-15, like the basal or narrower, gradually becoming smaller up the stem. Capitula 1-numerous; peduncles with numerous stellate hairs especially near apex. Involucre 10-13 × 9-11 mm; bracts acute, with numerous stellate hairs, sometimes with a few simple eglandular or glandular hairs, or with both. Stigmas discoloured. •{\i  Alps.} Au He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. calcareum } Bernh. ex Hornem.,{\i  Hort. Hafn.}{\b  2}: 762 (1815). It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 209. H. saxatile} group ({\i H. glaucum} /{\i  laevigatum}). Like {\b 208} but basal leaves sometimes absent at anthesis; leaves with few or numerous stellate hairs beneath; cauline leaves 8-25; involucral bracts more or less obtuse; stigmas yellow or discoloured. •{\i  Alps.} Au ?Cz He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  H. saxatile} Jacq.,{\i  Obs. Bot.}{\b  2}: 30 (1764). Au He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 210. H. naegelianum} group. Stems 10-25 cm, glabrous or with few stellate and glandular hairs above. Leaves glabrous or with few simple eglandular hairs mainly on the margin; basal 30-60 × 7-12 mm, spathulate or lanceolate to linear, obtuse to acute, entire, sometimes undulate, attenuate at base, subpetiolate; cauline 2-3, narrowly linear to subulate. Capitulum 1(-2). Involucre 9-10 × 7-9 mm; bracts narrow, acute, with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs and sometimes a few glandular hairs. Stigmas yellow.{\i  Balkan peninsula; C. & S. Appennini.} Al Bu Gr It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. naegelianum } Pancic,{\i  Elench. Pl. Vasc. Crna Gora} 57 (1875).
\par 
Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 211. H. silesiacum} group. Stems 10-80 cm, glabrous or with a few simple eglandular hairs, rarely with a few stellate and glandular hairs. Leaves often glabrous above, with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs beneath and on the margin and sometimes with a few minute glandular hairs on the margin; basal 60-120 × 12-22 mm, oblong-lanceolate to linear, obtuse to acute, entire to more or less denticulate, more or less narrowed into a winged petiole; cauline (1-)2-8(-numerous), lanceolate to linear, more or less acuminate, narrowed or rounded at base, sessile and often slightly amplexicaul. Capitula few to numerous; peduncles long, bracteate, with stellate, simple eglandular and glandular hairs. Involucre (8-)9-12(-14) × 8-11 mm; bracts usually obtuse, the outer often more or less squarrose, glabrous or with few to numerous simple eglandular and glandular hairs. Stigmas discoloured.{\i  Mountains of Balkan peninsula and of C. Europe westwards to} 11°{\i  E.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Ju Po Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. grisebachii } A. Kerner, {\i Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung. }{\b 1}: 63 (1881). • Au Bu.
\par 
 {\b H. silesiacum } Krause, {\i Jahresb. Schles. Ges. Vaterl. Kult.}{\b  28}: 101 (1851). • Cz Po.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Other species and groups in (xxiv):
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  H. annae-toutoniae} Zahn in Reichenb. fil., {\i Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  19}({\b 2}): 84 (1906) ({\i H. dollineri} / {\i schmidtii}). •{\i  E. Switzerland} ({\i Oberengadin}). He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. belogradcense } Georgiev & Kitanov,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Bulg.}{\b  8}: 77 (1939). •{\i  N.W. Bulgaria.} Bu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. breazense } E. I. Nyárády, {\i Bul. Grad. Bot. Cluj }{\b 13}: 66 (1936). •{\i  S. Carpathians and mountains of Transylvania.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. carinthiostiriacum } Vetter & Zahn in Ascherson & Graebner,{\i  Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  12}({\b 3}): 698 (1938). •{\i  S. Austria.} Au.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. crucimontis } group ({\i H. calcareum} / {\i laevigatum}). •{\i  S.E. Alps.} Au It Ju. (Including {\b H. crucimontis} (Zahn) Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich }{\b 76}({\b IV.280}): 76 (1921). Au Ju.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. excellens } J. Murr ex Zahn in Koch, {\i Syn. Deutsch. Fl.} ed. 3, {\b 2}: 1805 (1901) ({\i H. bupleuroides} /{\i  chondrillifolium}). •{\i  Tirol.} Au.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. fritschianum } Hayek & Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich} {\b 79}({\b IV.280}): 1032 (1922). ({\i H. glabratum} /{\i  naegelianum}). •{\i  N. Albania} ({\i Bjeshkët e Nemuna}). Al.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. geilingeri } Zahn,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Mus. Zürich}{\b  41}: 163 (1908) ({\i H. murorum} /{\i  porrifolium}). •{\i  N. Italy} ({\i N.E. of Lecco}). It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. grecescui } E. I. Nyárády & Zahn, {\i Bul. Grad. Bot. Univ. Cluj}{\b  8}: 75 (1928) ({\i H. bifidum} /{\i  rotundatum}). •{\i  S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. harzianum } group ({\i H. franconicum} /{\i  laevigatum}). •{\i  E.C. Germany.} Ge. (Including {\b H. harzianum }Zahn, {\i Allgem. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 13}: 37 (1907). Ge.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. hayekii } J. Murr,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 50}: 60 (1900) ({\i H. porrifolium} / {\i vulgatum}). •{\i  S.E. Alps.} Au It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. juratzkae } Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  76}({\b IV.280}): 76 (1921) ({\i H. austriacum} /{\i  saxatile}). •{\i  Near Wien.} Au.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. kaeseranum } group ({\i H. glaucum} (vel {\i bupleuroides}) /{\i  humile}). •{\i  Alps.} Ga He. (Including {\b H. kaeseranum} Zahn in Koch,{\i  Syn. Deutsch. Fl.} ed. 3,{\b  2}: 1832 (1901). Ga He.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. lingelsheimii } Pax,{\i  Grundz. Pflanzenverbr. Karp.}{\b  2}: 97 (1908) ({\i H. goemoerense} Borbás ex Zahn; {\i H. bupleuroides} /{\i  laevigatum}). •{\i  W. Carpathians.} Cz.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. longifoliosum } E. I. Nyárády in Savul., {\i Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  10}: 131 (1965) ({\i H. paltinae} /{\i  sparsum}). •{\i  S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. oligodon } Naegeli & Peter,{\i  Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  2}: 51 (1886) ({\i H. glabratum} /{\i  porrifolium}). •{\i  E. Alps.} Au ?It.
\par 

\par 
401}
\par