{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Europe, extending northwards to S.C. Russia. }Bu ?Cz Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. robustum } Fries,{\i  Nova Acta Reg. Soc. Sci. Upsal.}{\b  14}: 193 (1848). Bu ?Cz Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 243. H. inuloides} group ({\i H. laevigatum} /{\i  prenanthoides}). Like {\b 241} but whole plant more hairy; leaves usually more dentate; glandular hairs usually present on involucre. 2n = 27.{\i  N., W. & C. Europe.} Au Br Cz Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hs Is It No Po Rm Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. inuloides } Tausch,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 20} (Ergänz. 1): 71 (1837). • Au Cz Ge Po Rm.
\par 
 {\b H. latobrigorum } (Zahn) Roffey in F. J. Hanb.,{\i  London Cat. Brit. Pl.} ed. 11, 29 (1925). 2n = 27. • Br Ga Ge Hb It Rm.
\par 
 {\b H. reticulatum } (Lindeb.) Lindeb., {\i Hier. Scand. Exsicc.}{\b  3}: 147 (1878). • Br Fe No Su.
\par 
 {\b H. tridentatifolium } (Zahn) P. D. Sell & C. West,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 267 (1976) ({\i H. corymbosum} Fries, non Pers.,{\i  H. inuloides} subsp.{\i  tridentatifolium} Zahn). Cz Ga Ge He Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 244. H. crocatum} group ({\i H. prenanthoides} / {\i umbellatum}). Stems 50-100(-130) cm, with few to numerous simple eglandular and few stellate hairs. Leaves 25-100 × 6-20 mm, oblong or oblong-lanceolate to linear, acute, subentire to dentate, with few short simple eglandular hairs mainly on the margin, the upper sometimes with stellate hairs beneath, the lower subpetiolate, the remainder abruptly contracted at the base. Peduncles bracteate, with dense stellate and sometimes some simple eglandular and minute glandular hairs. Involucre 8-12 × 6-9 mm; bracts with numerous unequal glandular hairs, usually few to numerous simple eglandular hairs and sometimes a few stellate hairs. {\i N. & C. Europe; Pyrenees. }Au Br Cz Fe Ga Hs It Ju No Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. angustum } Lindeb.,{\i  Hier. Scand. Exsicc.}{\b  3}: no. 148 (1878). • No Su.
\par 
 {\b H. brachybrachion } (Zahn) P. D. Sell & C. West,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 263 (1976) ({\i H. aestivum} subsp.{\i  brachybrachion} Zahn). •{\i  Pyrenees. }Hs.
\par 
 {\b H. conicum } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Bull. Soc. Dauph. Éch. Pl.}{\b  4}: 188 (1877). Au Cz Ga Hs It Rm Rs (B, W).
\par 
 {\b H. crocatum } Fries, {\i Summa Veg. Scand.} 6 (1846). Fe No Rs (N, C) Su.
\par 
 {\b H. subumbellatiforme } (Zahn) Roffey in F. J. Hanb.,{\i  London Cat. Brit. Pl.} ed. 11, 29 (1925). •{\i  N. Scotland}. Br.
\par 
 {\b H. valdefrondosum } (K. Malý & Zahn). P. D. Sell & C. West, {\i Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  33}: 432 (1975) ({\i H. aestivum} subsp. {\i valdefrondosum} K. Malý & Zahn). {\i  Bosna.} Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Other species and groups in (xxxi):
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. bastreranum } group ({\i H. latifolium} / {\i symphytaceum}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga It. (Including {\b H. bastreranum} Zahn,{\i  Hier. Alpes Marit. }340 (1916). Ga It.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. melanothyrsum } K. Malý & Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  79} ({\b IV.280}): 934 (1922) ({\i H. latifolium} /{\i  prenanthoides}). •{\i  Bosna.} Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. worochtae } Woloszczak ex Zahn, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  10}: 166 (1911) ({\i H. pocuticum} /{\i  umbellatum}). •{\i  E. Carpathians.} Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (xxxii) Leaves coriaceous, all cauline, 12-20, the lower large and crowded, more or less amplexicaul, glabrous or with a few glandular hairs on the margin. Capitula 3-40, in a narrow, compact panicle. Involucre 11-15 mm; bracts broadly linear-lanceolate, obtuse, with few to dense yellowish glandular hairs. Ligules glabrous. Stigmas discoloured. Margin of receptacular pits dentate. Achenes pale brown.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 245. H. lucidum} Guss.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horto Boccad.}{\b  1825}: 6 (1825). Stems 10-30 cm, ascending, flexuous, with stellate and short glandular hairs particularly above. Leaves 12-20, 15-100 × 4-45 mm, coriaceous, glabrous or with a few glandular or simple eglandular hairs on the margin, the lower large, crowded, narrowed to a winged, semiamplexicaul petiole, the upper much smaller, broadly ovate, elliptical or lanceolate, acute or mucronate, often plicate, entire or remotely denticulate, sessile. Capitula 3-10(-40) in a narrow compact panicle; peduncles bracteate, with numerous stellate and slender, unequal glandular hairs. Involucre 11-15 × 8-11 mm; bracts pale green, with few stellate and few to dense yellowish, unequal, slender glandular hairs. Ligules glabrous. 2n = 18.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • N.W. Sicilia. }Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Other species in (xxxii):
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. symphytifolium } Froelich in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  7}: 232 (1838) ({\i H. siculum} Guss.;{\i  H. lucidum} / {\i racemosum}). 2n = 36. •{\i  Sicilia.} Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (xxxiii) Leaves usually all cauline, usually numerous, often crowded in a false rosette towards the base, at least the upper more or less amplexicaul, often with minute glandular hairs on the margin. Capitula few to numerous, in a large panicle. Involucre (9-)11-15 mm; bracts broadly linear-lanceolate, obtuse, with sparse to dense hairs. Ligules glabrous or with few simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas usually discoloured. Margins of receptacular pits dentate. Achenes grey, yellowish, pale brown or reddish-brown.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 246. H. racemosum} group. Stems 10-80(-100) cm, with few to numerous stellate hairs and few to numerous simple eglandular hairs up to 5(-10) mm. Leaves 20-160 × 3-40 mm, with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs, the lower much larger than the upper, ovate, ovate-lanceolate, or ovate-oblong, more or less acute, subentire to serrate-dentate, narrowed to a winged, semiamplexicaul petiole, the upper sessile. Capitula few to numerous peduncles bracteate, with few to numerous stellate, glandular and simple eglandular hairs. Involucre 10-14(-16) × 6-10 mm; bracts with few to numerous stellate hairs especially along the margin, few to numerous, usually pale glandular hairs and simple eglandular hairs absent or numerous. Ligules glabrous. 2n = 27. {\i S. & C. Europe.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. barbatum } Tausch, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 11} (Ergänz. 1): 72 (1828). • Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Rm.
\par 
 {\b H. crinitum } Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  2}: 134 (1813). 2n = 36. Al Bu Co Gr It Ju Rm Sa Si.
\par 
 {\b H. italicum } Fries, {\i Nova Acta Reg. Soc. Sci. Upsal. }{\b 14}: 124 (1848). • Bu Gr It Ju.
\par 
 {\b H. moesiacum } (A. Kerner & Uechtr. ex Zahn) P. D. Sell & C. West,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 265 (1976) ({\i H. racemosum} subsp.{\i  moesiacum }A. Kerner & Uechtr. ex Zahn). • Au Bu Cz Ga He Hu It Ju Tu.
\par 
 {\b H. racemosum } Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 1588 (1803). • Au Bu Cz Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Tu.
\par 
 {\b H. virgaurea } Cosson, {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3, {\b 7}: 209 (1847). • Co Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 247. H. pseuderiopus} group ({\i H. racemosum }/ {\i sparsum}). Like {\b 246} but with more numerous simple eglandular hairs throughout;
\par 

\par 
407}
\par