{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 with numerous stellate hairs, numerous or no glandular hairs and few to numerous simple eglandular hairs. Involucre 9-13 × 6-9 mm; bracts dark, with few to numerous stellate hairs, more or less numerous simple eglandular hairs and few to numerous glandular hairs. Ligules often with a few small simple eglandular hairs at apex. 2n = 27. •{\i  Alps; Carpathians and Sudeten Mts.; N.W. Europe.} Au Br Cz Da Fa Ga Ge He Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. arrostocephalum } Omang in Ostenf. & Gröntved, {\i Fl. Iceland Faeroes} 165 (1934). Is.
\par 
 {\b H. epimedium } Fries,{\i  Uppsala Univ. Årsskr. }{\b 1862 }({\i Math. Nat., Epicr. Hier.}): 103 (1862). {\i Alps.} Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par 
 {\b H. glaucellum } Lindeb. in Hartman, {\i Handb. Skand. Fl.} ed.10, 27 (1870). No Su.
\par 
 {\b H. hartzianum } Dahlst. in Warming et al.,{\i  Bot. Faeröes} 643 (1903). Fa.
\par 
 {\b H. wimmeri } Uechtr., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b 22}: 277 (1872). Cz Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 
 {\b H. zetlandicum } Beeby,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 29}: 243 (1891). 2n = 27. {\i Zetland.} Br.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 236. H. carpathicum} group ({\i H. caesium} /{\i  prenanthoides}). Like {\b 235} but cauline leaves 6-17; ligules with numerous simple eglandular hairs at apex. •{\i  W. Carpathians and Sudeten Mts.; Norway and Sweden; Scotland.} Br Cz No Po Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. carpathicum } Besser,{\i  Prim. Fl. Galic.}{\b  2}: 154 (1809). 2n = 36. Br Cz Po.
\par 
 {\b H. dewarii } Syme,{\i  Trans. Proc. Bot. Soc. Edinb. }{\b 13}: 23 (1876). {\i Scotland.} Br.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 237. H. dovrense} group. Stems 30-50 cm, with numerous simple eglandular hairs, sometimes a few stellate hairs and sometimes a very few small glandular hairs above. Leaves with few simple eglandular hairs mostly beneath and on the margin; basal absent or soon withering; cauline (3-)4-8(-10), 30-90(-100) × (5-)10-40 mm, narrowly to broadly elliptical, obtusely mucronate to acute, denticulate to irregularly dentate (the teeth often mammiform), the lower attenuate into a winged, semiamplexicaul petiole; median and upper leaves lanceolate, sessile. Capitula 3-9(-12), the first-flowering almost sessile; peduncles slender, with numerous stellate hairs and with few to numerous simple eglandular or glandular hairs, or with both. Involucre 9-11 × 6-11 mm; bracts with few stellate and numerous simple eglandular hairs. Ligules glabrous. •{\i  Iceland, N. Scotland, Fennoscandia.} Br Is No Rs (N) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. dovrense } Fries,{\i  Nova Acta Reg. Soc. Sci. Upsal.}{\b  14}: 128 (1848). 2n = 36. No.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 238. H. plicatum} group ({\i H. alpinum} / {\i carpathicum} /{\i  murorum}). Like {\b 237} but margin of leaves with minute glandular hairs; basal leaves usually present; cauline leaves 2-5(-10); involucre often with numerous simple eglandular hairs; ligules with more or less numerous simple eglandular hairs at apex.{\i  N.W. Fennoscandia; Iceland.} Is No Su. ({\i North America; Greenland}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. devians } Dahlst.,{\i  Ark. Bot.}{\b  3}({\b 10}): 57 (1904). • Is.
\par 
 {\b H. plicatum } Lindeb., {\i Hier. Scand. Exsicc. }{\b 2}: no. 86 (1872). No.
\par 
 {\b H. semidovrense } Elfstr.,{\i  Bihang Kongl. Svenska Vet.-Acad. Handl.}{\b  16}({\b 3}), {\b 7}: 64 (1890). • Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 239. H. truncatum} group. Like {\b 237} but leaves (10-)50-120 × 5-20(-40) mm, often narrowly elliptical or oblong-elliptical; cauline leaves (4-)9-20(-30). 2n = 27, 36. •{\i  N. & W. Fennoscandia; Iceland; Zetland.} Br Is No Rs (N) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. chrysostylum } (Lindeb.) Elfstr.,{\i  op. cit.} 76 (1890). No.
\par 
 {\b H. demissum } (Strömfelt) Dahlst.,{\i  Ark. Bot.}{\b  3}({\b 10}): 60 (1904). Is.
\par 
 {\b H. depilatum } Almq. ex Lindeb. in Hartman,{\i  Handb. Skand. Fl.} ed. 11, 41 (1879). No Su.
\par 
 {\b H. protractum } (Fries) Lindeb., {\i op. cit.} 51 (1879). No.
\par 
 {\b H. splendens } Elfstr., {\i Bihang Kongl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.}{\b  16}({\b 3}),{\b  7}: 70 (1890). No Su.
\par 
 {\b H. truncatum } Lindeb., {\i Hier. Scand. Exsicc.}{\b  1}: no. 45 (1868). No Su.
\par 
 {\b H. vinicaule } P. D. Sell & C. West, {\i Watsonia}{\b  3}: 236 (1955). 2n = 36. {\i Zetland.} Br.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (xxxi) Leaves all cauline, numerous, crowded, more or less amplexicaul, usually glaucous and distinctly reticulately veined beneath, with more or less thickened margin. Capitula usually numerous, in a large panicle. Involucral bracts broadly linear-lanceolate, mostly obtuse, the outer sometimes squarrose, hairs usually sparse. Ligules glabrous. Stigmas yellow or discoloured. Margins of receptacular pits sharply dentate or sometimes fimbriate-dentate. Achenes dark brown.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 240. H. latifolium} group ({\i H. brevifolium} Tausch; {\i H. racemosum} / {\i umbellatum}). Stems 40-100 cm, with simple eglandular hairs below. Leaves 25-50 × 10-20 mm, ovate, oblong-ovate or elliptical, obtuse to subacute, denticulate to remotely dentate, with short rigid and some long simple eglandular hairs particularly on the margin and few to numerous stellate hairs particularly beneath, the lower abruptly contracted at base, sometimes subpetiolate, the upper sessile. Capitula in an open, sometimes subumbellate panicle; peduncles with numerous stellate and sometimes a few minute glandular hairs. Involucre 10-13 × 8-11 mm; bracts with sparse stellate hairs, minute simple eglandular hairs and minute glandular hairs, or nearly glabrous. •{\i  C. & S. Europe.} Al Au ?Be Bu Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. brachyphyllum } Vuk.,{\i  Hier. Croat. }18 (1858). Au Cz Ga Gr Hu It Ju Rm.
\par 
 {\b H. halimifolium } Froelich ex Fries,{\i  Uppsala Univ. Årsskr.}{\b  1862} ({\i Math. Nat., Epicr. Hier}.): 136 (1862). Au ?Be Bu Ga He Hs Hu It Ju Rm.
\par 
 {\b H. latifolium } Froelich ex Link,{\i  Enum. Horti Berol. Alt.}{\b  2}: 287 (1822). Al Au Bu Cz Ga He Hu It Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 241. H. virosum} Pallas, {\i Reise}{\b  1}: 501 (1771). Stems 50-150 cm, glabrous, scabridulous or with short simple eglandular hairs. Leaves 30-110 × 10-35 mm, ovate, lanceolate or oblong, obtuse to acute, entire to remotely dentate, sessile, glabrous or with few rigid simple eglandular hairs, particularly on the margin. Upper part of panicle often subumbellate; peduncles bracteate, glabrous, or with a few stellate or simple eglandular hairs or with both. Involucre 8·5-10 × 7-8 mm; bracts appressed, glabrous, or with occasional stellate or simple eglandular hairs or with both, very rarely with very few minute glandular hairs. 2n = 36. {\i S.E. Europe, extending northwards to S.C. Russia.} Bu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 242. H. robustum} group ({\i H. virosum} /{\i  umbellatum}). Like {\b 241} but with numerous stellate hairs on leaves and inflorescence; outer involucral bracts squarrose or slightly recurved.{\i  S.E.}
\par 

\par 
406}
\par