{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 leaves 5-20, the lower oblong-lanceolate or lingulate. •{\i  W. Bulgaria, S. Jugoslavia.} Bu Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pseuderiopus } Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich }{\b 79}({\b IV.280}): 1073 (1922). Bu Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 248. H. compositum} group ({\i H. cordifolium }/{\i  racemosum}). Like {\b 246} but simple eglandular hairs denser throughout; basal leaves sometimes present; margin of leaves with few minute glandular hairs; glandular hairs on involucre obvious; ligules with short, simple eglandular hairs at apex; achenes darker. •{\i  Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. compositum } Lapeyr., {\i Hist. Abr. Pyr.} 476 (1813). Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 249. H. nobile} group ({\i H. pyrenaicum} Jordan, non L.;{\i  H. compositum} / {\i racemosum}). Like {\b 246} but villous with long simple eglandular hairs throughout; glandular hairs inconspicuous; leaves 6-20; ligules glabrous or with few simple eglandular hairs at apex; achenes sometimes darker. •{\i  N. Spain, S.W. France.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. nobile } Gren. & Godron,{\i  Fl. Fr. }{\b 2}: 376 (1851). Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 250. H. rectum} group ({\i H. cordatum} /{\i  racemosum}). Stems 4-100 cm, with dense simple eglandular and numerous stellate hairs. Leaves 20-120 × 5-40 mm, crowded, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, acute, dentate, with numerous simple eglandular hairs throughout, with few to numerous stellate hairs beneath and minute glandular hairs usually present on the margin, the lower leaves attenuate at the base, the remainder rounded at the base. Capitula numerous, in an elongate panicle; peduncles with dense stellate and few to numerous glandular and simple eglandular hairs. Involucre 9-13 × 10-14 mm; bracts with numerous stellate hairs and dense unequal, yellow glandular hairs, without or with few simple eglandular hairs. Ligules with numerous simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas sometimes yellow. •{\i  Pyrenees and adjacent hill-country.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. dipsacifolium } Arvet-Touvet, {\i Spicil. Rar. Nov. Hier., Suppl. }{\b 2}: 49 (1886). Ga Hs.
\par 
 {\b H. rectum } Griseb., {\i Comment. Hier.} 27 (1852). Although this name has always been applied to this group of species in the aggregate sense, it has never been typified and it is uncertain to which of the segregates the name applies.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 251. H. symphytaceum} group ({\i H. prenanthoides} /{\i  racemosum}). Stems 10-100(-120) cm, with dense simple eglandular and few minute glandular hairs throughout and some stellate hairs above. Leaves glaucous, prominently veined beneath, with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs, the upper sometimes with stellate hairs beneath, the lower broadly ovate, ovate-oblong or ovate-lanceolate, more or less acute, subentire to dentate, narrowed into a winged, semiamplexicaul petiole, the median similar but sometimes panduriform, the upper smaller. Capitula few to numerous; peduncles bracteate or with small leaves, with numerous stellate and glandular hairs, sometimes with few simple eglandular hairs. Involucre (7-)9-10(-12) mm; bracts with numerous to dense stellate and dense glandular hairs, without or with few simple eglandular hairs. Ligules glabrous or with a few simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas sometimes yellow. •{\i  S.W. Alps; C. Appennini; Corse; W. Jugoslavia.} Co Ga He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. polyadenium } Arvet-Touvet in Burnat & Gremli,{\i  Cat. Hier. Alpes Marit.} 79 (1883).{\i  W. Alps.} Ga He It.
\par 
 {\b H. symphytaceum } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Bull. Soc. Dauph. Éch. Pl.}{\b  3}: 75 (1876).{\i  S.W. Alps; C. Appennini.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 252. H. insuetum} group ({\i H. laevigatum }/ {\i racemosum}). Stems 5-110 cm, with simple eglandular hairs dense below, and few to numerous stellate hairs above. Leaves 15-70 × 5-25 mm, ovate, lanceolate or elliptical, acute, dentate, usually with simple eglandular hairs but sometimes nearly glabrous above, often with stellate hairs on the upper leaves and minute glandular hairs sometimes present on the margin, the lower attenuate into a winged, semiamplexicaul petiole, the upper rounded at the base, sessile. Capitula (2-)5-40; peduncles bracteate, with dense stellate and a few simple eglandular and glandular hairs. Involucre 9-11 × 8-10 mm; bracts with few to dense stellate hairs, numerous simple eglandular hairs and few minute glandular hairs. Ligules glabrous. •{\i  From the E. Pyrenees and N. Italy to the S. Carpathians.} Ga Hu It Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. insuetum } Jordan ex Boreau,{\i  Fl. Centre Fr.} ed. 3, 2: 396 (1857). Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Other species and groups in (xxxiii):
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. bernardii } Rouy,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  9}: 434 (1905) ({\i H. amplexicaule} / {\i racemosum}). •{\i  Corse.} Co.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. chalasinense } Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  79}({\b IV.280}): 1073 (1922) ({\i H. naegelianum} /{\i  racemosum}). • {\i Taïyetos.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. chamaeadenium } Oborny & Zahn,{\i  Verh. Naturf. Ver. Brünn }{\b 44} ({\i Abh.}): 68 (1905). •{\i  S.C. Czechoslovakia} ({\i Znojmo}). Cz.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. grovesianum } group ({\i H. murorum }/{\i  racemosum}). •{\i  S.W. Alps. }Ga It. (Including{\b  H. grovesianum} Arvet-Touvet ex Belli{\i  Mem. Accad. Sci. Torino,} ser. 2, {\b 47}: 491 (1897). It.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. haussknechtianum } Zahn,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  16}: 299 (1919) ({\i H. racemosum} /{\i  umbrosum}). • {\i Pindhos Oros.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. marchesettianum } group ({\i H. racemosum} / {\i vulgatum}). •{\i  C. Europe.} Au Cz Ga Hu It Ju. (Including{\b  H. marchesettianum} Zahn, {\i Hier. Alpes Marit.} 173 (1916). Ju.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. psaridianum } Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  79}({\b IV.280}): 1073 (1922) ({\i H. naegelianum} /{\i  racemosum}). •{\i  Taïyetos.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. sermenikense } group ({\i H. bracteolatum} /{\i  racemosum}) . •{\i  Greece.} Gr. (Including{\b  H. sermenikense} Freyn & Sint.,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b 5}: 790 (1897). Gr.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (xxxiv) Like (xxxiii) but almost glabrous above; leaves often lobed; bracts on peduncles numerous; involucre (7-)8-9(-11) mm; involucral bracts glabrous or with few hairs; stigmas often yellow; achenes yellowish.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 253. H. bracteolatum} group. Stems (30-)60-90 cm, with simple eglandular hairs and few short glandular hairs in the upper part. Leaves up to 25, all cauline, glaucous, with short, subrigid simple eglandular hairs throughout and very few minute glandular hairs on the margin, the lower often aggregated in a false rosette, oblong-lanceolate, ovate-lanceolate or oblong, obtuse to acute, deeply sinuate with irregular patent lobes, sparsely dentate, attenuate into a broadly winged petiole, the upper rounded and sessile at the base. Capitula numerous in a large panicle; peduncles with numerous bracts, sometimes with a few stellate hairs. Involucre (7-)8-9(-11) × 6-8 mm; bracts
\par 

\par 
408}
\par