{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 glabrous or with a few glandular, simple eglandular or stellate hairs. Ligules glabrous.{\i  Greece, just extending to S. Jugoslavia.} Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b H. bracteolatum } Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  2}: 135 (1813). • Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (xxxv) Usually hairy. Leaves all cauline, usually numerous, often aggregated below; margin not or only slightly thickened; upper leaves rounded or cordate at base, sometimes semiamplexicaul. Capitula usually numerous, in a large, often elongate panicle. Involucral bracts usually broadly linear-lanceolate, more or less obtuse, glabrous or hairy, the outer sometimes slightly recurved. Ligules usually glabrous. Stigmas usually discoloured. Margins of receptacular pits usually distinctly fimbriate-dentate. Achenes dark brown or blackish.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 254. H. sabaudum} group. Stems (30-)50-100(-180) cm, with few to numerous stellate hairs and usually numerous (especially below) simple eglandular hairs, without glandular hairs. Leaves 20-180 × 10-40 mm, ovate-elliptical, lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, more or less acute, denticulate to dentate, with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs, sometimes with a few stellate hairs beneath, the lower often attenuate and subpetiolate, the upper sessile, rounded or cordate at the base. Peduncles bracteate, with numerous stellate and usually few to numerous simple eglandular hairs. Involucre 10-12 × 7-10 mm; bracts nearly glabrous or with few to numerous simple eglandular, glandular and minute glandular hairs in various proportions, usually without stellate hairs. Stigmas usually discoloured, rarely yellow. 2n = 18, 27.{\i  Europe except for most of the north and some islands.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K) Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. auratum } Fries,{\i  Nova Acta Reg. Soc. Sci. Upsal.}{\b  14}: 181 (1848). Au Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hu Ju Rm Rs (K).
\par 
 {\b H. dumosum } Jordan, {\i Cat. Jard. Grenoble }{\b 1849}: 18 (1849). Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm.
\par 
 {\b H. obliquum } Jordan,{\i  Cat. Jard. Dijon} 23 (1848). • Au Be Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hu It Ju Rm.
\par 
 {\b H. platyphyllum } (Arvet-Touvet) Arvet-Touvet, {\i Annu. Cons. Jard. Bot. Genève}{\b  1}: 87 (1897). • Au Cz Ga Ge Hu It Ju Rm.
\par 
 {\b H. sabaudum } L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 804 (1753). 2n = 27. Au Br Ga Ge Gr Hb He It Ju Rm Tu.
\par 
 {\b H. vagum } Jordan, {\i Cat. Jard. Grenoble}{\b  1849}: 21 (1849). 2n = 18, 27. Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K) Tu.
\par 
 {\b H. virgultorum } Jordan, {\i Cat. Jard. Dijon }24 (1848). Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Ho Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 255. H. flagelliferum} group ({\i H. sabaudum} /{\i  vulgatum}). Like {\b 254} but cauline leaves 6-25; peduncles with few to numerous glandular hairs; involucral bracts narrower and usually with numerous stellate hairs. •{\i  C. Europe, extending westwards to W. France.} Au Cz Ga Ge.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. flagelliferum } Ravaud,{\i  Bull. Soc. Dauph. Éch. Pl.}{\b  4}: 117 (1887). Au Ga Ge He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 256. H. lycopsifolium} group ({\i H. prenanthoides} / {\i sabaudum}). Stems up to 100 cm, with numerous simple eglandular and stellate hairs and sometimes small glandular hairs at least above. Leaves 15-30, 5-100 × 5-30 mm, oblong, oblong-lanceolate, ovate-lanceolate or elliptical, more or less acute, dentate, with few to numerous sometimes rigid simple eglandular hairs, the upper with few to numerous stellate hairs beneath, the lowest attenuate, subpetiolate, the remainder cordate-amplexicaul. Peduncles bracteate, with dense stellate hairs, few to numerous glandular hairs and usually some simple eglandular hairs. Involucre 9-10 × 5-8 mm; bracts with few to numerous stellate and glandular hairs and often a few simple eglandular hairs. Achenes sometimes pale brown. •{\i  Alps.} Au Ga Ge He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. deltophyllum } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Hier. Alpes Fr.} 120 (1888). Au Ga He.
\par 
  {\b H. lycopsifolium } Froelich in DC., {\i Prodr. }{\b 7}: 224 (1838). Although this name has always been used for this group of plants in the aggregate sense, it has never been typified and it is uncertain to which of the segregates the name applies.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Other species and groups in (xxxv):
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. borealiforme } P. D. Sell & C. West, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 262 (1976) ({\i H. pseudoboreale} (Naegeli & Peter) Zahn, non Grec.;{\i  H. porrifolium} / {\i sabaudum}). •{\i  S.E. Alps.} It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. favratii } Murat ex Gremli,{\i  Excurs.-Fl. Schweiz} ed. 2, 273 (1874) ({\i H. flagelliferum} / {\i prenanthoides}). 149{\i  W. Switzerland}. He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. hirsutum } Bernh. ex Froelich in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  7}: 213 (1838) ({\i H. nobile} / {\i sabaudum}). •{\i  Pyrenees, S.C. France. }Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. pojoritense } Woloszczak,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  3}: 21 (1904) ({\i H. sabaudum }/ {\i sparsum}). •{\i  E. Carpathians.} Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. pseudoboreale } Grec.,{\i  Consp. Fl. Roman. }375 (1898) ({\i H. pseudolaurinum} Prodan). •{\i  Romania.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. pseudocorymbosum } group ({\i H. lycopsifolium} / {\i umbellatum}). •{\i  S.W. Alps, Vosges.} Ga He. (Including {\b H. pseudocorymbosum} Gremli,{\i  Neue Beitr. Fl. Schweiz }{\b 3}: 20 (1883). Ga He.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. subhirsutissimum } Juxip,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 19}: 470 (1959). • Rs (B).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   (xxxvi) Leaves all cauline,15-50(-numerous), not amplexicaul; margin revolute. Capitula 1-25(-numerous), in large, sometimes elongate panicles, the upper part often more or less umbellate. Involucral bracts broadly linear-lanceolate, obtuse, usually glabrous, the outer squarrose with recurved apices. Ligules glabrous. Stigmas usually yellow. Margin of receptacular pits dentate or fimbriate-dentate. Achenes usually blackish.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 257. H. umbellatum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }804 (1753). Stems 10-100(-150) cm, with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs and few stellate hairs above, without glandular hairs, sometimes glabrescent. Leaves 15-150 × (1-)3-10(-20) mm, crowded, linear, lanceolate, or oblong-lanceolate, acute to acuminate, attenuate or cuneate at base, subentire to dentate, the teeth usually remote and sometimes long and cusped, with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs and stellate hairs beneath, often glabrescent above. Peduncles bracteate, with few to numerous stellate hairs and sometimes a few simple eglandular or glandular hairs. Involucre (8-)9-11 (-13) × 9-10 mm; bracts glabrous or rarely with a few small simple eglandular or minute glandular hairs. 2n = 18, 27. {\i Most of Europe.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, ?K, E) Su Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   This widespread and very variable taxon contains both sexual and apomictic variants, and cannot be satisfactorily divided into microspecies.
\par 

\par 
409}
\par