{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 numerous stellate and glandular hairs, usually without simple eglandular hairs. Involucre 8-10 × 8-10 mm; bracts more or less obtuse, with few to numerous stellate and numerous unequal glandular hairs, usually without simple eglandular hairs. Ligules often with a few short simple eglandular hairs at apex. •{\i  From the E. Alps to the Pyrenees.} Au Ga Ge He Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. rapunculoides } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Suppl. Monogr. Hier.} 17 (1876). Au Ga Ge He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 225. H. pedatifolium} group ({\i H. haematopodum} Zahn;{\i  H. umbrosum} / {\i vulgatum}). Like {\b 224} but cauline leaves 2-5(-7), mostly narrowed into a winged petiole; involucre usually with fewer glandular hairs and often with some simple eglandular hairs. •{\i  Alps; W. Carpathians; Norway.} Au Ga Cz He It No.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. haematopodum } Zahn in Schinz & R. Keller,{\i  Fl. Schweiz} ed. 3,{\b  2}: 489 (1914). Au He.
\par 
 {\b H. pedatifolium } Omang, {\i Nyt Mag. Naturvid. }({\i Christiania}) {\b 48}: 209 (1910). No.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Other species and groups in (xxvii):
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. cavillieri } group ({\i H. bifidum }/{\i  prenanthoides}). •{\i  Alps;} ?{\i C. Appennini.} Au Ga Ge It. (Including {\b H. cavillieri} Zahn,{\i  Hier. Alpes Marit.} 305 (1916). It.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. elegantidens } Zahn,{\i  op. cit.} 316 (1916) ({\i H. pseudoprasinops} / {\i umbrosum}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. isolanum } Zahn, {\i op. cit.} 313 (1916) ({\i H. adusticeps} /{\i  umbrosum}). •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. rapunculoidiforme } Woloszczak & Zahn,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  10}: 158 (1911) ({\i H. pocuticum} /{\i  vulgatum}). •{\i  Borders of N. Romania and S.W. Ukraine.} Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. ukierniae } Woloszczak & Zahn,{\i  op. cit.} 159 (1911) ({\i H. pocuticum} / {\i vulgatum}). •{\i  E. Carpathians.} Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (xxvii) Leaves all cauline, (3-)5-30(-50), often panduriform, more or less amplexicaul. Inflorescence usually of numerous capitula in a large panicle. Involucral bracts linear-lanceolate, more or less obtuse, with numerous glandular and usually few or no simple eglandular hairs. Ligules usually with short simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas discoloured. Margins of receptacular pits dentate. Achenes grey or pale brown.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 226. H. prenanthoides} group. Stems 30-120 cm, with few to numerous stellate hairs, few to numerous glandular hairs and few to numerous simple eglandular hairs. Leaves 10-30(-50), 30-140 × 8-35 mm, with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs 0·5-1(-2) mm, the lowermost leaves withering early, the remainder gradually decreasing in size upwards, lanceolate to ovate or oblong-lanceolate, often more or less panduriform, more or less acute or acuminate, subentire to more or less dentate; lower cauline attenuate into a short petiole, the upper often cordate-auriculate and sometimes with stellate hairs beneath. Inflorescence-branches leafy; peduncles rather short, arcuate, with more or less dense stellate hairs, numerous glandular hairs and sometimes a few simple eglandular hairs. Involucre (7-)8-12(-13) × 6-8 mm; bracts with few (rarely numerous) stellate hairs, numerous glandular hairs and few or no simple eglandular hairs. 2n = 27, 36.{\i  Throughout Europe, except the south.} Au Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, C, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. bupleurifolium } Tausch, {\i Flora }({\i Regensb}.) {\b 11} (Ergänz. 1): 74 (1828).{\i  N., C. & E. Europe}. Au Bu Cz Da Fe Ga He It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W) Su.
\par 
  {\b H. hoegeri } (Zahn) P. D. Sell & C. West,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 263 (1976) ({\i H. prenanthoides} subsp.{\i  hoegeri} Zahn). Au Cz Ge He Rm.
\par 
  {\b H. lanceolatum } Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  3}: 126 (1788). Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs Ju Po Rm.
\par 
  {\b H. perfoliatum } Froelich in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  7}: 211 (1838).{\i  Alps; Appennini; Carpathians.} Au Cz Ga He It Ju Rm.
\par 
  {\b H. prenanthoides } Vill., {\i Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 35 (1779).{\i  S.W. Alps; Britain, N.E. Ireland}. Br Ga Hb It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 227. H. juranum} group ({\i H. murorum} /{\i  prenanthoides}). Like {\b 226} but often with 5-15(-18) leaves, the lower often petiolate; involucre 7-8·5 mm, with dense glandular hairs, usually without simple eglandular hairs.{\i  From Iceland southwards to the Pyrenees and S. Carpathians. }Au Br Cz Ga Ge He Hs Is It Ju No Rm Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. atrichocephalum } (Dahlst.) Dahlst.,{\i  Ark. Bot.}{\b  3}({\b 10}): 58 (1904). • Is.
\par 
  {\b H. hemiplecum } Arvet-Touvet, {\i Bull. Soc. Dauph. Ech. Pl.}{\b  4}: 105 (1877). •{\i  Alps.} Au Ga Ge He.
\par 
  {\b H. juranum } Fries,{\i  Nova Acta Reg. Soc. Sci. Upsal.}{\b  14}: 129 (1848). Au Ga Ge He It Ju Rm.
\par 
  {\b H. leiophyton } Dahlst. in Lindman,{\i  Svensk Fanerogamfl.} 627 (1918). • No Su.
\par 
  {\b H. pseudojuranum } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Suppl. Monogr. Hier.} 24 (1876).{\i  Alps.} Au Ga He It.
\par 
  {\b H. subperfoliatum } Arvet-Touvet, {\i Not. Pl. Alpes }12 (1883). Au Ga Ge He It Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 228. H. juraniforme} group ({\i H. bifidum} /{\i  prenanthoides}). Like {\b 226} but cauline leaves (3-)4-10; inflorescence laxer; involucre with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs, numerous stellate hairs and less obvious glandular hairs. •{\i  Alps.} Au Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. juraniforme } Zahn in Schinz & R. Keller,{\i  Fl. Schweiz} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 332 (1905). Au He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 229. H. pocuticum} group ({\i H. prenanthoides} /{\i  rotundatum}). Like {\b 226} but leaves and stems with more or less dense soft simple hairs; cauline leaves 8-16(-20). •{\i  E. & S. Carpathians; S.W. Jugoslavia.} ?.Al Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. pocuticum } Woloszczak, {\i Spraw. Kom. Fizyogr. Krakow. }{\b 21}: 129 (1887). Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Other species and groups in (xxviii):
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. dacicum } Uechtr., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  25}: 214 (1875) ({\i H. prenanthoides} / {\i sparsum}). •{\i  S. Carpathians.} ?Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. djimilense } group ({\i H. prenanthoides }/{\i  sparsum}).{\i  Bulgaria, Jugoslavia, Romania.} Bu Ju Rm. (Including{\b  H. velenovskyi} Freyn in Velen.,{\i  Fl. Bulg.} 346 (1891). • Bu Ju. {\b H. djimilense} Boiss. & Balansa in Boiss., {\i Fl. Or. }{\b 3}: 877 (1875) is confined to Anatolia.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. isatidifolium } group ({\i H. bupleuroides } /{\i  prenanthoides}). •{\i  Alps.} Au Ga He It. (Including {\b H. isatidifolium} Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Monogr. Hier.} 43 (1873). Ga He It.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. subtilissimum } group ({\i H. prenanthoides} / {\i schmidtii}). 1600-2300{\i  m. •  S.W. Alps; Pyrenees.} Ga He It. (Including{\b  H.subtilissi-}
\par 

\par 
404}
\par