{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. perfoliosum } E. I. Nyárády in Savul.,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  10}: 731 (1965) ({\i H. paltinae} / {\i sparsum}). •{\i  S. Carpathians}. Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pisaturense } E. I. Nyárády,{\i  Bul. Grad. Bot. Univ. Cluj}{\b  8}: 149 (1928) ({\i H. atratiforme} /{\i  retyezatense}). •{\i  S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pizense } Zahn,{\i  Hier. Alpes Marit. }155 (1916) ({\i H. glaucum} /{\i  lanatum}). •{\i  Alpi Marittime.} It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. predilense } group ({\i H. glaucum} /{\i  porrifolium}). •{\i  S.E. Alps.} Au It Ju. (Including {\b H. predilense} (Naegeli & Peter) Zahn in Koch,{\i  Syn. Deutsch. Fl.} ed. 3, {\b 2}: 1187 (1901). Au It Ju.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. riumarense } E. I. Nyárády in Savul.,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  10}: 732 (1965). •{\i  S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. sanctoides } P. D. Sell & C. West,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 266 (1976) ({\i H. sanctum} Naegeli & Peter, non L.; {\i H. glaucum} /{\i  pospichalii}). •{\i  S.E. Alps.} It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. telekianum } Boros & Lengyel,{\i  Scripta Bot. Mus. Transs.}{\b  1}: 8 (1942). •{\i  S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. velebiticum } Degen & Zahn,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  5}: 82 (1906) ({\i H. bupleuroides} /{\i  sparsum}). •{\i  Velebit.}  Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. wichurae } Zahn in Ascherson & Graebner, {\i Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  12}({\b 2}): 205 (1935). •{\i  S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (xxv) Leaves rather glaucous, glabrous or nearly so; basal withered at anthesis; cauline 1-4; entire or denticulate, glabrous or with sparse hairs on the margin. Capitula 2-12, with few florets, nodding in bud, on long, slender peduncles. Outer involucral bracts squarrose. Ligules pale yellow, glabrous. Stigmas discoloured. Margins of receptacular pits dentate. Achenes pale brown.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 212. H. sparsum} Friv., {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 19}: 436 (1836). Stems 10-20(-25) cm, glabrous or nearly so. Leaves rather glaucous, glabrous or with sparse simple eglandular hairs on the margin; basal soon withering, linear-lanceolate or lanceolate, acute, entire or denticulate, slightly narrowed at base to an indistinct petiole; cauline 1-4, similar to basal, sessile, or bract-like. Capitula 2-12, with few florets, nodding in bud; peduncles slender, long, glabrous. Involucre 8-10 × 7-9 mm; bracts obtuse to acute, the outer squarrose, glabrous or nearly so. Stigmas discoloured. 2n = 18.{\i  S.E. Europe.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  This very distinct species is quite unlike a {\i Hieracium} in general appearance, but it is connected to other species by taxa here placed in (xxiv).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (xxvi) Leaves glaucous; basal few or absent; cauline 3-30 (-numerous), entire to shallowly dentate, often glabrous above, often with long rigid hairs on margin. Capitula 3-numerous. Ligules glabrous. Stigmas yellow or discoloured. Margins of receptacular pits dentate. Achenes stramineous to brown.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 213. H. heterogynum} group ({\i H. stuppeum }Griseb., {\i Crepis heterogyna} Froelich). Stems 30-70 cm, with numerous stellate hairs and few to dense rigid, flexuous simple eglandular hairs up to 18 mm below. Leaves usually glabrous above, with few simple eglandular hairs beneath, and few to numerous rigid simple eglandular hairs up to 15 mm on the margin, sometimes with a few minute glandular hairs; basal 20-90 × 5-20 mm, lanceolate, oblanceolate or lanceolate-oblong, obtuse to acute, undulate, often plicate, rarely denticulate, narrowed into a long petiole; cauline 3-several, lanceolate to linear, often small. Capitula 3-40; peduncles usually long, slender, with dense stellate hairs, and occasionally with simple eglandular or minute glandular hairs or with both. Involucre 9-12 × 5-8 mm; bracts more or less acute, with numerous stellate hairs and minute glandular hairs, occasionally with a few simple eglandular hairs. Achenes stramineous. •{\i  W. & C. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. heterogynum } (Froelich) Guterm.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  122}: 262 (1973). Al Bu Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 214. H. macrodon} group ({\i H. bifidum} / {\i heterogynum}). Like {\b 213} but leaves sometimes with stellate hairs beneath; involucre with numerous simple eglandular hairs. •{\i  W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. macrodon } Naegeli & Peter,{\i  Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  2}: 84 (1886). Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 215. H. macrodontoides} group ({\i H. heterogynum} /{\i  tommasinii}). Like {\b 213} but basal leaves few or absent; simple eglandular hairs of stem and leaves up to 8 mm; achenes darker. •{\i  S.W. Jugoslavia.} ?.Al Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. macrodontoides } (Zahn) Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich }{\b 79}({\b IV.280}): 967 (1922). ?.Al Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 216. H. tommasinii} group ({\i H. heterogynum} / {\i racemosum}). Like {\b 213} but without basal leaves; cauline numerous, large, often remotely dentate; stigmas discoloured; achenes darker. •{\i  N. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. tommasinii } Reichenb. fil., {\i Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  19}({\b 1}): 100 (1859). Al Bu Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 217. H. olympicum} group ({\i H. heterogynum} / {\i racemosum}). Stems 40-80 cm, with few to numerous stellate hairs and dense patent, rigid simple eglandular hairs 8-25 mm. Leaves 12-20(-30), 20-200 mm, glaucous, with rigid, patent, bulbous-based simple eglandular hairs 3-6 mm, with a few minute glandular hairs on the margin, the lower leaves oblong or oblong-lanceolate, more or less acute, denticulate to shallowly dentate, long-attenuate into a winged petiole, the upper ovate-lanceolate to linear, smaller. Capitula 4-8(-15); peduncles bracteate, with numerous stellate hairs, dense rigid simple eglandular hairs and few glandular hairs. Involucre (9-)12-15(-17) × 8-11 mm; bracts wide, obtuse to acute, with few to dense rigid simple eglandular hairs up to 18 mm, dense stellate hairs and few minute glandular hairs. Achenes pale brown.{\i  Mountains of Bulgaria and N.E. Greece.} Bu Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. argyrotrichum } Freyn in Velen.,{\i  Fl. Bulg.} 349 (1891). Bu ?Gr.
\par 
 {\b H. olympicum } Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 4}): 30 (1844) is confined to Anatolia.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 218. H. leiocephalum} group ({\i H. porrifolium} /{\i  umbellatum}). Stems 90-125 cm, glabrous or with simple eglandular hairs at the base. Leaves numerous, glaucous, linear to narrowly lanceolate, entire to dentate, glabrous or with few stellate and simple eglandular hairs beneath. Capitula numerous; peduncles with numerous bracts and dense stellate hairs in the upper part. Involucre (8-)10-11(-18) mm; bracts narrow to wide, usually acute, with stellate hairs especially at the base, sometimes with a few simple eglandular or minute glandular hairs, or with both. Stigmas usually discoloured. Achenes pale brown. •{\i  S.E. Alps.} It Ju.
\par 

\par 
402}
\par