{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. leiocephalum } Bartl. ex Griseb., {\i Comment. Hier.} 72 (1852). It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 219. H. virgicaule} group ({\i H. bupleuroides} /{\i  umbellatum}). Stems up to 80 cm, glabrous or with a few simple eglandular hairs below. Leaves numerous, gradually becoming smaller up the stem, lanceolate, acute, more or less serrate-dentate, often with a few stellate hairs beneath, and with a few simple eglandular hairs in the axil with the stem. Capitula numerous, often forming umbels; peduncles with numerous bracts, glabrous or nearly so. Involucre 11-13 × 10-12 mm; bracts wide, obtuse to subacute, the outer often more or less patent, with few stellate hairs and sometimes a few simple eglandular or simple glandular hairs, or with both. Stigmas discoloured. Achenes dark. •{\i  Carpathians and mountains of N. Hungary.} Cz Hu Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 
 
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b H. virgicaule } Naegeli & Peter, {\i Hier.-Mittel-Eur.}{\b  2}: 72 (1886). Cz Hu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 220. H. pseudobupleuroides} group ({\i H. bupleuroides} /{\i  sabaudum}). Stems 60-120 cm, nearly glabrous. Leaves more or less lanceolate, denticulate to coarsely serrate, glabrous or with simple eglandular hairs on the margin and beneath. Capitula 6-many; peduncles with stellate hairs. Involucre 12-15 × 10-12 mm; bracts wide, acute to obtuse, with few stellate and simple eglandular hairs and rarely a few minute glandular hairs. Achenes dark brown. •{\i  N.E. Alps; from the W. Carpathians to Sloveniia.} Au Cz Ju ?Po.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pseudobupleuroides } Naegeli & Peter,{\i  Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  2}: 74 (1886). Au.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Other species and groups in (xxvii):
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. bjeluschae } group ({\i H. murorum} /{\i  tommasinii}). •{\i  Bosna.} Ju. (Including {\b H. bieluschae} K. Malý & Zahn,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  8}: 307(1909).Ju.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. dragicola } group ({\i H. latifolium} /{\i  porrifolium}). •{\i  N.W. Jugoslavia.} (Including {\b H. dragicola} (Naegeli & Peter) Zahn in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich}{\b  76}({\b IV.280}): 81 (1921). Ju.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. leucopelmatum} group ({\i H. heterogynum} / {\i waldsteinii}). •{\i  W. Jugoslavia.} Ju. (Including{\b  H. leucopelmatum }Naegeli & Peter,{\i  Hier. Mittel-Eur.}{\b  2}: 80 (1886). Ju.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. obrovacense } Degen & Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich }{\b 79}({\b IV.280}): 966 (1922) ({\i H. heterogynum} /{\i  latisolium}). {\i Velebit.} Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pospichalii } group ({\i H. porrifolium }/{\i  racemosum}). •{\i  S.E. Alps.} It Ju. (Including{\b  H. pospichalii} Zahn, {\i Neue Denkschr. Schweiz. Ges. Naturw. }{\b 40}: 705 (1906). It Ju.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pseudostupposum } Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  79}({\b IV.280}): 922 (1922) ({\i H. heterogynum} /{\i  waldsteinii}). •{\i  S.W. Jugoslavia, N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. pseudotommasinii } group ({\i H. heterogynum }/ {\i tommasinii}). •{\i  W. & C. Jugoslavia.} Ju. (Including{\b  H. pseudotommasinii} Rohlena & Zahn,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  6}: 237 (1909). Ju.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (E) Leaves usually without glandular or plumose hairs; basal usually absent or withered at anthesis; cauline usually numerous. Capitula usually numerous, in a large panicle. Margins of receptacular pits dentate or fimbriate-dentate. Late-flowering (mainly July-September).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   (xxvii) Basal leaves usually present at anthesis; cauline 2-12(-25), at least the upper more or less amplexicaul, often slightly panduriform. Inflorescence usually of numerous capitula in a large panicle. Involucral bracts linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, with numerous glandular and usually few or no simple eglandular hairs. Ligules glabrous or with few simple eglandular hairs at the apex. Stigmas usually discoloured. Margins of receptacular pits dentate. Achenes dark brown.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 221. H. umbrosum} group ({\i H. murorum} /{\i  prenanthoides}). Stems 30-70 cm, with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs throughout and few stellate and glandular hairs above. Leaves with more or less numerous simple eglandular hairs, sometimes glabrous above; basal 30-140 × 10-60 mm, few, elliptical or elliptic-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, denticulate to dentate, rounded or narrowed into a long petiole; cauline 2-5(-10), remote, like the basal but often ovate, the lower more or less petiolate. Peduncles with dense stellate and numerous glandular hairs, usually without simple eglandular hairs. Ligules glabrous or with few simple eglandular hairs at apex. •{\i  From arctic Russia to the Pyrenees, C. Italy and Greece; only on mountains in the south.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. eugraptum } Omang,{\i  Nyt Mag. Naturvid.} ({\i Christiania}){\b  48}: 214 (1910). No.
\par 
  {\b H. pseudofastigiatum } Degen & Zahn, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  5}: 68 (1906). Al Bu Ju Rm.
\par 
  {\b H. umbrosum } Jordan, {\i Cat. Jard. Dijon} 24 (1848). Au Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju No Po Rs (W).
\par 
  {\b H. vipetinum } Huter ex Freyn,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  37}: 394 (1887).{\i  Alps; W. Carpathians.} Au Cz Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 222. H. viride} group ({\i H. schmidtii} /{\i  umbrosum}). Like {\b 221} but leaves more or less glaucous, with rigid simple eglandular hairs above and on margin and sometimes with a few minute glandular hairs on the margin; sometimes with simple eglandular hairs on involucral bracts. 1800 2300{\i  m. • W. Alps; Pyrenees. }?Co Ga He Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. brumale } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Hier. Alpes Fr.} 71 (1888).{\i  S.W. Alps; Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 
  {\b H. submacilentum } (Rouy) P. D. Sell & C. West,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 267 (1976) ({\i H. subalpinum }subsp.{\i  submacilentum} Rouy). {\i  S.W. Alps; Pyrenees.} ?Co Ga.
\par 
  {\b H. viride } Arvet-Touvet, {\i Essai Pl. Dauph. }69 (1871). Ga ?Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 223. H. pinicola} group ({\i H. cerinthoides} / {\i murorum} /{\i  prenanthoides}). Like {\b 221} but with more or less numerous simple eglandular hairs on the involucral bracts. •{\i  Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. pinicola } Arvet-Touvet & Gaut.,{\i  Hier. Gall. Hisp.} ({\i Exsicc.}) {\b 20}: no. 416 et 417 (1908). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 224. H. rapunculoides} group ({\i H. prenanthoides} / {\i vulgatum}). Stems 40 120 cm, with few simple eglandular and stellate hairs and sometimes a few small glandular hairs above. Leaves 20-140 × 5-40 mm, with more or less numerous simple eglandular hairs or glabrous above, the upper sometimes with stellate hairs beneath; basal few or none; cauline 6-12(-25), elliptical to lanceolate, obtuse to acute, denticulate to dentate, the lower attenuate into a petiole, the remainder sessile, cordate. Capitula in an elongated panicle; peduncles with numerous bracts, and
\par 

\par 
403}
\par