{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i extending north-eastwards to} 52°30' {\i in S.C. Russia; Öland.} Au Bu Cz Hu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. cornuti} Gouan, {\i Obs. Bot.} 6 (1773). Perennial with one rosette. Leaves (7-)15-30(-35) × (2-)4-8(-13) cm; lamina elliptical or ovate-elliptical, entire, 5- to 7-veined, glabrous or sparsely appressed-hairy, gradually narrowed into a petiole half as long to as long as lamina. Scapes about twice as long as leaves, striate, glabrous or sparsely appressed-hairy; spikes usually somewhat shorter than rest of scape, lax or dense, interrupted at base. Bracts c. 1·5 mm, ovate-orbicular, glabrous, or with hairs on keel and ciliate above. Sepals 3-4 mm, subequal, glabrous, blackish, with narrow scarious margins. Corolla-tube 3-4 mm, glabrous; lobes c. 1·5 mm, ovate-orbicular, shortly acuminate, glabrous. Stamens exserted c. 4 mm. Capsule c. 4 mm; seeds 4, 2-3 mm, oblong-elliptical, plano-convex. 2n = 12. {\i Damp, often saline habitats. S. half of U.S.S.R., extending to coasts of Romania and Bulgaria; locally on coasts of W. & C. Mediterranean region}. Bu Ga Hs It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 4-10}). {\b P. coronopus} group. Annuals, biennials or perennials with one to many rosettes. Leaves linear to lanceolate, entire to pinnatifid, somewhat contracted at the base. Scapes terete. Bracts ovate-lanceolate, with variably prominent keel and scarious, ciliate margin. Sepals unequal, free, keeled to the apex, with membranous margins. Corolla-tube pubescent. Capsule 2-(to 3-)locular; seeds 1-4(-6), ellipsoid, plano-convex, smooth.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   In this group hybridization occurs between species having the same basic chromosome number, especially when they are at the same level of polyploidy, and this can often make the determination of material difficult, particularly since there can be considerable variation within taxa in relation to distribution and ecological conditions.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves regularly and distinctly toothed to pinnatifid
\par 
2 Leaves serrate; ovules 2-3 .............................................................. {\b 6. serraria}
\par 
2 Leaves 1- to 2-pinnatifid or dentate; ovules 3-5
\par 
3 Annual, biennial or perennial; stock not or scarcely
\par 
  branched; capsule 3-locular; corolla-lobes c. 1 mm ................... {\b 4. coronopus}
\par 
3 Perennial; stock usually distinctly branched; capsule
\par 
  2-locular; corolla-lobes 1·6-2·2 mm .......................................... {\b 5. macrorhiza}
\par 
1 Leaves entire or with a few, small, irregular teeth
\par 
4 Stock unbranched, with a solitary rosette; capsule 
\par 
  3-locular ..................................................................................... {\b 4. coronopus}
\par 
4 Stock branched, with several rosettes; capsule 2-locular
\par 
5 Leaves c. 1 mm wide, rigid, trigonous at least at apex;
\par 
  stock densely branched .................................................................. {\b 9. subulata}
\par 
5 Leaves more than 1 mm wide, not rigid, flat or semicircular
\par 
  in section; stock laxly branched
\par 
6 Posterior sepals with wing about half as wide as rest
\par 
  of sepal ....................................................................................... {\b 7. crassifolia}
\par 
6 Posterior sepals with very narrow wing
\par 
7 Leaves ± thick and rigid, not dimorphic ..................................... {\b 8. maritima}
\par 
7 Leaves thin and flaccid, dimorphic: those subtending 
\par 
  the scapes broadly triangular, the rest linear .................................. {\b 10. alpina}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. coronopus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 115 (1753). Annual, biennial or perennial with one or few rosettes. Leaves 3-20 × 0·5-2 cm, linear to lanceolate, dentate to 1- to 2-pinnatifid, rarely entire, glabrous or shortly hairy on both surfaces; lobes entire or dentate, more or less distant. Scapes usually numerous, shorter than or exceeding the leaves, decumbent or ascending. Bracts ovate and subacute, or abruptly attenuate into a long apex, shorter than or equalling calyx. Posterior sepals with weakly ciliate wing. Capsule 3-locular; seeds 3-6, c. 1 mm. {\i Coasts of Europe, eastwards to Poland and Krym, and northwards to the Faeroer and S. Sweden; inland in much of W. Europe and the Mediterranean region; casual elsewhere in N. & C. Europe.} Al Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Da Fa Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bracts abruptly attenuate into a long apex ................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b coronopus}
\par 
1 Bracts ovate, ± acute
\par 
2 Spikes c. 0·3 cm wide, lax ............................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b cupanii}
\par 
2 Spikes c. 0·5 cm wide, dense
\par 
3 Leaves usually pinnatifid ......................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b commutata}
\par 
3 Leaves dentate ...................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b purpurascens}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b coronopus}: Annual, biennial or perennial. Leaves usually 1- to 2-pinnatifid, shortly hairy. Scapes numerous, exceeding the leaves, arcuate-ascending, slender. Spikes (1-)1·5-4(-7) × 0·3-0·4 cm. Bracts abruptly attenuate, with a broad base and long, narrow apex; keel narrow. 2n = 10+0-1B.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b commutata} (Guss.) Pilger,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  28}: 287 (1930): Annual. Leaves usually pinnatifid, subglabrous or shortly hairy. Scapes numerous, shorter than or equalling the leaves, arcuate-ascending. Spikes 2-5 × 0·5 cm, dense. Bracts ovate, subacute, or slightly acuminate; keel wide, thickened. 2n = 20. {\i C. & E. parts of Mediterranean region}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b cupanii} (Guss.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 617 (1881): Biennial or perennial. Leaves usually 2-pinnatifid, shortly hairy. Scapes numerous, exceeding the leaves, arcuate-ascending or decumbent. Spikes (1-)2-4 × 0·3 cm, lax. Bracts ovate, subobtuse; keel wide.{\i  Mountains of Sicilia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b purpurascens} Pilger,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  28}: 303 (1930): Perennial. Leaves dentate, glabrous or shortly hairy. Scapes few, about equalling the leaves, decumbent. Spikes 1·5-3 × 0·5 cm, dense, reddish. Bracts ovate, subacute; keel wide.{\i  • Islas Baleares }({\i Mallorca}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. macrorhiza} Poiret, {\i Voy. Barb.}{\b  2}: 114 (1789). Perennial with several rosettes. Leaves 4-10(-15) × 0·4-1(-1·5) cm, fleshy, rigid, linear-lanceolate to broadly oblanceolate-spathulate, dentate or pinnatifid, subglabrous or shortly hairy. Scapes few, exceeding the leaves, arcuate-ascending. Spikes 2-7 × 0·6-0·8 cm, dense. Bracts ovate, long-acuminate, equalling or exceeding calyx; keel prominent, thickened. Anterior sepals with the membranous margins of equal width; posterior sepals with a narrow, long-ciliate wing on the keel. Capsule 2-locular; seeds 2-4, 1-1·5 mm. 2n = 10. {\i Coastal habitats. Mediterranean region from Corse to S.E. Italy; one station in S.W. Spain}. Co Hs It ?Lu Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. serraria} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 896 (1759). Perennial with one or few rosettes. Leaves (4-)8-15(-30) × 0·4-4 cm, lanceolate, acute, regularly serrate or incise-serrate, glabrous or pubescent. Scapes numerous, equalling or exceeding the leaves, arcuate-ascending. Spikes (5-)6-10 × 0·3-0·5 cm, dense. Bracts ovate, obtuse or subacute, much shorter than calyx, broadly scarious. Anterior sepals with the membranous margins of unequal width; posterior sepals with very wide, ciliate wing on the keel. Capsule 2-locular; seeds 2-4, 1-1·5 mm. 2n = 10+0-3B, 20+2B.{\i  Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} ?Bl Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   P. peloritana} Lojac.,{\i  Fl. Sic.}{\b  2}({\b 2}): 35 (1907), from Sicilia, is a dwarf plant with irregularly dentate leaves and the posterior sepals very narrowly winged; it is probably a variant of {\b 6}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. crassifolia} Forskål, {\i Fl. Aegypt.} 31 (1775). Perennial with few rosettes. Leaves 5-20 × 0·3-0·5 cm, linear, usually sparsely dentate, fleshy, not rigid, glabrous or slightly hairy. Scapes numerous, exceeding the leaves, stout. Spikes 2-5 × 0·3-0·4 cm, dense. Bracts ovate, subacute, much shorter than the calyx,
\par 

\par 
40}
\par