{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  mum} Zahn in Koch, {\i Syn. Deutsch. Fl.} ed. 3,{\b  2}: 1876 (1901). Ga He It.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (xxix) Like (xxviii) but with more numerous simple eglandular hairs throughout; involucral bracts often more or less acute; capitula less numerous; stigmas sometimes yellow; achenes darker brown.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 230. H. cydonifolium} group ({\i H. prenanthoides} / {\i villosum}). Stems 30-80 cm, with stellate hairs, more or less numerous simple eglandular hairs, sometimes with a few glandular hairs above. Leaves 8-12(-16), 25-100 × 10-35 mm, all cauline, more or less glaucous, more or less acute, denticulate to shallowly dentate, with more or less numerous simple eglandular hairs on both surfaces and the margin, the lowest withering early, the lower oblong-ovate, ovate or lanceolate, sometimes panduriform, narrowed to a semiamplexicaul base, the upper lanceolate or ovate, rounded, amplexicaul or sometimes auriculate at base. Capitula 5-12(-25); peduncles usually rather short, with few to numerous stellate hairs, simple eglandular hairs and glandular hairs. Involucre 9-12(-15) × 8-11 mm; bracts more or less acute, with few to numerous stellate hairs, simple eglandular hairs and glandular hairs. •{\i  Alps; C. Jugoslavia.} Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. cottianum } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Bull. Soc. Sci. Dauph.}{\b  13}: 557 (1886). {\i Alps.} Au Ga He It Ju.
\par 
 {\b H. cydonifolium } Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 34 (1719). Although this name has always been used for this group of plants in the aggregate sense, it has never been typified and it is uncertain to which segregate the name applies.
\par 
 {\b H. mespilifolium } Arvet-Touvet, {\i Suppl. Monogr. Hier.} 12 (1876). Alps. Au Ga He It.
\par 
 {\b H. parcepilosum } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Hier. Alpes Fr.} 103 (1888).{\i  Alps; C. Jugoslavia.} Au Ga He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 231. H. doronicifolium} group ({\i H. juranum} / {\i valdepilosum}). Like {\b 230} but basal leaves present; cauline leaves 3-8(-12). •{\i  S.W. Alps. }Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. doronicifolium } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Bull. Soc. Dauph. Éch. Pl. }{\b 2}: 45 (1875). Ga He It.
\par 
 {\b H. salevense } (Rapin ex Fries) Zahn,{\i  Neue Denkschr. Schweiz. Ges. Naturw.}{\b  40}: 526 (1906). Ga He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 232. H. cantalicum} group ({\i H. cerinthoides} /{\i  prenanthoides}). Stems 30-70 cm, with more or less numerous simple eglandular hairs and few stellate and glandular hairs above. Leaves 10-15(-20), 40-100 × 15-40 mm, all cauline or a few basal, glaucous, denticulate to serrate-dentate, more or less amplexicaul, with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs; lower elliptical to ovate-elliptic, sometimes panduriform, often petiolate, the upper ovate to lanceolate, sessile. Capitula 5-15, in a lax panicle; peduncles often long, with numerous stellate and few to numerous glandular and simple eglandular hairs. Involucre 9-14 × 7-12 mm; bracts subacute to obtuse, with scattered stellate hairs, numerous glandular hairs and few simple eglandular hairs. •{\i  Pyrenees; S.C. France}. Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Included species:
\par 

\par 
 {\b H. cantalicum } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Addit. Monogr. Hier.} 15 (1879).{\i  S.C. France.} Ga.
\par 
 {\b H. subpanduratum } Arvet-Touvet & Gaut.,{\i  Hier. Gall. Hisp}.({\i Exsicc.}) {\b 5}: no. 306 (1898).{\i  Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 233. H. turritifolium} group ({\i H. cerinthoides} / {\i murorum} / {\i prenanthoides}). Like {\b 232} but with basal leaves present though sometimes withered at anthesis; cauline leaves up to 10. •{\i  Pyrenees; S.C. France.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. turritifolium } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  41}: 363 (1894). Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 234. H. segureum} group ({\i H. bifidum} /{\i  juranum}). Stems 20-50 cm, with short, soft simple eglandular hairs. Leaves subentire to dentate, with numerous simple eglandular hairs, the upper cauline sometimes with a few stellate hairs beneath; basal obovate or oblong-lanceolate, sometimes withered at anthesis; cauline 2-5(-6), elliptic-lanceolate or lanceolate, the lower narrowed into a more or less winged petiole, the median and upper sometimes panduriform, more or less amplexicaul. Capitula 2-10(-15), in a lax panicle; peduncles with few stellate and more or less numerous simple eglandular and glandular hairs. Involucre 8-9·5 × 6-8 mm; bracts narrow, obtuse to acute, with few stellate and more or less numerous simple eglandular and glandular hairs. Stigmas sometimes yellow. •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. segureum } Arvet-Touvet,{\i  Bull. Soc. Dauph. Éch . Pl.}{\b  13}: 560 (1886). Ga He.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Other species and groups in (xxix):
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. austroslavicum } K. Malý & Zahn, {\i Glasn. Muz. Bosni Herceg.}{\b  38}: 108 (1926). •{\i  Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. beckianum } Gremli,{\i  Neue Beitr. Fl. Schweiz}{\b  5}: 60 (1890) ({\i H. isatidifolium} /{\i  villosum}). •{\i  E. Austria} ({\i Schneeberg}). Au.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. medschedsense } group ({\i H. djimilense} /{\i  murorum}). •{\i  W. Bulgaria} ({\i Vitosa}). Bu. ({\i S.W. Asia.}) (Including {\b H. juranomorphum} Zahn, {\i Maygar Bot. Lapok.}{\b  10}: 174 (1911). Bu.{\b  H. medschedsense} Zahn, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  4}: 323 (1907) is confined to the Caucasus.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. staui } Belli in Fiori & Paol.,{\i  Fl. Anal. Ital.}{\b  3}: 472 (1904) ({\i H. caesioides} /{\i  epimedium}). •{\i  Alpi Marittime.} It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. strafforelloanum } Zahn in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich}{\b  77}({\b IV.280}): 828 (1921) ({\i H. caesioides} /{\i  cydonifolium}). •{\i  Alpi Marittime.} It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (xxx) Basal leaves usually absent or withered at anthesis; cauline 2-20(-40), at least the upper rounded at base and semiamplexicaul. Inflorescence usually of few capitula in a more or less compact cyme. Involucral bracts broadly linear-lanceolate, more or less obtuse, with glandular and simple eglandular hairs in various proportions. Ligules usually glabrous, sometimes with simple eglandular hairs at apex. Stigmas usually discoloured. Margins of receptacular pits sharply dentate. Achenes dark brown.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (xxx) is very close to (xxviii) but it differs in its dark achenes and less glandular indumentum. Most species grow in exposed situations, and some when cultivated are not distinguishable from (xxxii) to which they are probably most closely allied.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 235. H. epimedium} group ({\i H. bifidum }/{\i  juranum}). Stems 18-50 cm, with few stellate hairs, few to numerous simple eglandular hairs and sometimes a few glandular hairs above. Leaves dark green or slightly glaucous, subentire to shallowly mammiform-dentate, with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs; basal 3-6, 25-80 × 12-30 mm, usually elliptical, obtuse-mucronate, truncate or abruptly contracted at base; cauline (1-)2-6(-7), remote, subpetiolate or sessile. Capitula 2-6(-10); peduncles often long,
\par 

\par 
405}
\par