{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 scarcely keeled. Anterior sepals with the narrow membranous margins of equal width; posterior sepals with a broad wing on the narrow keel. Capsule 2-locular; seeds 2-4, c. 2 mm. 2n = 20. {\i Maritime and other saline habitats. Mediterranean region; one station on W. coast of France.} Al Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. P. maritima} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 114 (1753). Perennial with several or many rosettes; stock laxly branched, leafy only at the apex. Leaves (2-)3-25 × 0·2-1·5 cm, linear, usually entire, usually long-attenuate at the apex, slightly fleshy and coriaceous, not rigid, more or less canaliculate, glabrous or subglabrous except for sericeous hairs at the base. Scapes numerous, usually exceeding the leaves, stout. Spikes (1-)3-7(-10) × 0·3-0·4 cm, lax. Bracts ovate-lanceolate, acute, strongly keeled, narrowly scarious at margin, about equalling the calyx. Anterior sepals with the membranous margins of unequal width; posterior sepals with keel unwinged. Capsule 2-locular; seeds 2-4, 2-2·5 mm. 2n = 12, 18, 24.{\i  Maritime habitats, and on saline or base-rich soils inland. Most of Europe, but rare in the extreme south}. All except Az Bl Bu Cr Gr Sb Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Various attempts have been made to subdivide this rather variable species, but the taxa proposed have proved difficult to define morphologically. Plants from Arctic Europe have been assigned to subsp.{\b  juncoides} (Lam.) Hultén,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet. Akad. Handl.} ser. 4, {\b 8}: 15 (1958), which is considered to differ from the widespread subsp.{\b  maritima} in having wide bracts, more ovoid to globose capsule, the scapes not exceeding the leaves and more numerous seeds per capsule, but these criteria have not proved very satisfactory.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp. {\b serpentina} (All.) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} 499 (1882) ({\i P. serpentina} All.), with long-acuminate bracts and the posterior sepal with the keel often narrowly winged, occurs in S. Europe, especially on mountains above 2000 m; it is probably only an ecological variant.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. P. subulata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 115 (1753). Like {\b 8} but stock densely branched; leaves 0·1-0·2 cm wide, rigid, trigonous throughout most of their length, often apiculate at apex, sometimes distinctly hairy; scapes erect, usually not exceeding the leaves; spikes (1-)2-5 × 0·2-0·3 cm; bracts acuminate. 2n = 12.{\i  S. & S.C. Europe.} Al *Au Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  P. holosteum} Scop.{\i  Fl. Carn.} ed. 2, {\b 1}: 108 (1771) ({\i P. acanthophylla} Decne,{\i  P. carinata }Schrader ex Mert. & Koch, non Moench), with the stock leafy only at the apex and scapes often greatly exceeding the leaves, is probably a variant of {\b 9}. It has 2n = 12.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp. {\b insularis} (Gren. & Godron) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 618 (1881) ({\i P. insularis} Gren. & Godron, {\i P. humilis} Guss.), from high altitudes in Corse, Sardegna and Sicilia, is only a dwarf variant of {\b 9}; it has 2n = 24.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. P. alpina} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 114 (1753). Perennial with several or many rosettes; stock laxly branched. Leaves dimorphic; those subtending the scapes broadly triangular, the others 3-10 × 0·2-0·5 cm, linear, abruptly attenuate at the apex, not coriaceous, flat, glabrous or slightly hairy. Scapes numerous, exceeding the leaves, erect, stout. Spikes 1-3 × 0·3 cm, dense. Bracts broadly ovate, subacute, about equalling the sepals, with narrow keel and broadly scarious margins. Anterior sepals with the margins of equal width; posterior sepals with unwinged keel. Capsule 2-locular; seeds 2-4, 1·5-2 mm. 2n = 12, 24.{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe, eastwards to }12° 30'{\i  E}. Au Ga Ge He Hs It [Rs (W)].
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. P. schwarzenbergiana} Schur, {\i Ver. Mitt. Siebenb. Ver. Naturw.}{\b  6}: 3 (1855). Perennial usually with several rosettes. Leaves 3-15(-25) × 0·5-2·5 cm, in a basal rosette; lamina lanceolate to narrowly elliptical, entire or remotely dentate, 3-veined, glabrous or very sparsely hairy, gradually narrowed into a petiole as long to as long as lamina. Scapes exceeding leaves, weakly sulcate above, glabrous or sparsely hairy; spikes usually c. 1/3 as long as rest of scape, dense but sometimes interrupted at base. Bracts 1·5-2·5 mm, ovate-elliptical, glabrous. Sepals unequal, almost free, glabrous, the anterior c. 2·5 mm, keeled, with wide scarious margins, the posterior c. 1·5 mm, not keeled. Corolla-tube c. 2·5 mm, glabrous; lobes c. 1·5 mm, ovate, subacute. Stamens exserted c. 3 mm, whitish. Capsule 3·5-4·5 mm; seeds 4-5, c. 1·25 mm, oblong-elliptical, plano-convex. 2n = 12. {\i Saline soils. • Hungary and Romania; one station in S. Ukraine.} Hu Rm Rs (W).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. P. media} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 113 (1753). Perennial with one or few rosettes. Leaves (2-)5-15(-30) × (1·5-)2·5-8 cm, not blackening on drying; lamina elliptical to ovate-elliptical, entire or remotely crenate or dentate, (5- to)7- to 9-veined, more or less densely crispate-hairy, gradually narrowed into a petiole usually less than half as long as lamina. Scapes greatly exceeding leaves, striate, with subappressed or ascending hairs; spikes (1-)2-6(-10) cm, up to 15 cm in fruit, dense. Bracts 2-3 mm, ovate or ovate-lanceolate, glabrous or shortly hairy. Sepals c. 2 mm, subequal, almost free, glabrous, green or purplish with scarious margins. Corolla-tube c. 2 mm, glabrous; lobes 1·5-2 mm, ovate-lanceolate, subacute. Stamens exserted 8-13 mm; filaments lilac; anthers lilac or white. Capsule 3-4 mm; seeds 2-4(-6), c. 2 mm, oblong-elliptical, plano-convex. 2n = 12, 24.{\i  Dry grassland. Europe, except most of the islands, but doubtfully native in parts of the north.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga, Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (*N, B, C, W, K, E) Su ?Tu [Hb].
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Dwarf plants, often with subvillous, narrow leaves, from serpentine areas above 1500 m in the Balkan peninsula have been described as var.{\i  pindica} Hausskn. (subsp. {\i pindica} (Hausskn.) Rech. fil.), while similar plants from S. Spain (Sierra Nevada) have been called var.{\i  nevadensis} Willk., and narrow-leaved plants from C. & E. Europe have been called var.{\i  urvilleana} Rapin ({\i P. stepposa} Kuprian.); all are probably best considered as ecotypes.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. P. maxim}.a Juss. ex Jacq.,{\i  Collect. Bot.}{\b  1}: 82 (1787). Perennial usually with several rosettes. Leaves 25-50 × 5-15 cm, blackening on drying; lamina broadly ovate to ovate-elliptical, entire or remotely denticulate, 9- to 11-veined, more or less sparsely hairy, more or less abruptly narrowed into a petiole longer than the lamina. Scapes somewhat exceeding leaves, striate, subglabrous or appressed-hairy above; spikes 5-20 cm, dense. Bracts 2·5-3·5 mm, ovate-elliptical, glabrous. Sepals 2·5-3 mm, subequal, almost free, glabrous, dark brown with scarious margins. Corolla-tube 2-2·5 mm, glabrous; lobes c. 2 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acute. Stamens 10-12 mm. Capsule c. 3 mm; seeds 4, c. 2 mm, oblong-ellipsoid, plano-convex.{\i  Damp meadows. S.E. part of U.S.S.R., westwards to} 35°{\i  E. and northwards to} 57° {\i N.; isolated stations in Romania and Hungary}. Hu Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. P. reniformis} G. Beck, {\i Ann. Naturh. Mus. }({\i Wien}){\b  2}: 149 (1887). Perennial with usually one rosette. Leaves 5-17(-30) × 2·5-10 cm; lamina ovate-cordate or suborbicular and truncate at the base, irregularly undulate-crenate to dentate or almost digitate at the base, more or less crispate-hairy; petiole 1/2-2 times as long as lamina. Scapes exceeding leaves, striate, subglabrous below, more or less densely appressed-hairy above; spikes 2-6
\par 
\par 41}
\par