{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  Some variants with broad leaves, particularly in W. Europe, strongly approach members of (xxxv) (e.g.{\b  H. laurinum} Arvet Touvet,{\i  Addit. Monogr. Hier.} 18 (1879) ({\i H. vasconicum} Jordan ex Zahn);{\i  H. umbellatum} subsp.{\i  bichlorophyllum }(Druce & Zahn) P. D. Sell & C. West,{\i  Watsonia}{\b  6}: 313 (1967), 2n = 18), but they are connected by intermediates, sometimes in the same colony, to narrow-leaved plants.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (xxxvii) Basal leaves usually absent; cauline (4-)8-25(-numerous), not amplexicaul, the lower often petiolate. Capitula (4-)10-50(-numerous), usually in a large panicle. Involucral bracts linear-lanceolate, more or less obtuse, variously hairy. Ligules glabrous. Stigmas yellow or discoloured. Margin of receptacular pits dentate. Achenes dark brown or blackish.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 258. H. laevigatum} group. Stems 30-100(-120) cm, with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs throughout and usually stellate and sometimes a few small glandular hairs above. Leaves with few to numerous simple eglandular hairs which are sometimes rigid, sometimes with stellate hairs especially beneath; basal usually absent, or withering early; cauline (4-)4-25(-numerous), 30-200 × 10-40 mm, ovate-lanceolate to linear-lanceolate or lanceolate-oblong, denticulate to deeply dentate, more or less acute, attenuate or contracted at base, the lower sometimes petiolate, the remainder sessile, never amplexicaul. Peduncles and branches often bracteate, with few to numerous stellate hairs, usually some simple eglandular hairs and sometimes some small glandular hairs. Involucre (8-)9-12(-15) × 6-12 mm; bracts glabrous or with various amounts of stellate, glandular and simple eglandular hairs, the glandular hairs usually small. 2n = 27.{\i  Europe southwards to the Pyrenees, N. Italy and Bulgaria.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. friesii } Hartman,{\i  Handb. Skand. Fl.} ed. 3, 187 (1838). • Au Cz Ge He Su.
\par 
 {\b H. gothicum } Fries, {\i Nova Acta Reg. Soc. Sci. Upsal.}{\b  14}: 121 (1848). • Au Cz Ga Ge He Po Rs (W) Su.
\par 
 {\b H. knafii } (Celak.) Juxip in Schischkin & Bobrov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  30}: 113 (1960). Au Be Bu Cz Ge He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W).
\par 
 {\b H. laevigatum } Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 1590 (1803). Au Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W).
\par 
 {\b H. lapponicum } Fries, {\i Nova Acta Reg. Soc. Sci. Upsal.}{\b  14}: 170 (1848). Fe No Rs (N) Su.
\par 
 {\b H. lissolepium } (Zahn) Roffey in F. J. Hanb.,{\i  London Cat. Brit. Pl.} ed. 11, 29 (1925). Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He No Su.
\par 
 {\b H. mixopolium } (Dahlst.) Norrlin in Cajander,{\i  Suomen Kasvio} 735 (1906). Cz Fe Ga Ge Ho Po Rm Rs (W) Su.
\par 
 {\b H. norvegicum } Fries,{\i  Nova Acta Reg. Soc. Sci. Upsal.}{\b  14}: 169 (1848). No Su.
\par 
 {\b H. rigidum } Hartman, {\i Handb. Skand. Fl.} 300 (1820). Au Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rs (?B, C, W) Su.
\par 
 {\b H. sparsifolium } Lindeb.,{\i  Hier. Scand. Exsicc.}{\b  1}: no. 48 (1868). • Br Fa Hb Is No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. subgracilipes } (Zahn) P. D. Sell & C. West,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 267 (1976) ({\i H. laevigatum} subsp.{\i  subgracilipes} Zahn). • Au Ga He Ho.
\par 
  {\b H. tridentatum } Fries, {\i Nov. Fl. Suec.} 77 (1819). 2n = 27. • Au Cz Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (?B, C, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Other species and groups in (xxxvii):
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. calocymum } group ({\i H. laevigatum} /{\i  onosmoides}). {\i W.C. Europe and N.W. Italy.} Ga Ge He It. (Including {\b H. calocymum} Zahn in Schinz & R. Keller,{\i  Fl Schweiz} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 342 (1905). Ga Ge He It.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. muricellum } group ({\i H. laevigatum} /{\i  sparsum}).{\i  W. Rodopi.} Bu. ({\i S.W. Asia.}) (Including{\b  H. pseudosparsum} (Uechtr.) Zahn in Vandas,{\i  Reliq. Formánek.} 365 (1909). • Bu. {\b H. muricellum} Fries,{\i  Uppsala Univ. Årsskr. }{\b 1862} ({\i Math. Nat., Epicr. Hier.}): 117 (1862) does not occur in Europe.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. pelagae } group ({\i H. sparsum} /{\i  umbellatum}). {\i S. Carpathians.} Rm. ({\i Caucasus.}) (Including{\b  H. pelagae} Degen & Zahn,{\i  Ann. Hist.-Nat. Mus. Hung.}{\b  8}: 100 (1910). • Rm.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. subfarinaceum } group ({\i H. farinosum} (Lindeb.) Omang, non Lam.;{\i  H. laevigatum} /{\i  onosmoides}). •{\i  Norway}. No. (Including {\b H. subfarinaceum } Zahn in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  76}({\b IV.280}): 276 (1921). No.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   (xxxviii) At least the lower part of the plant villous, the hairs up to 6 mm, simple and eglandular. Leaves all cauline, numerous, semiamplexicaul. Capitula few to numerous, the upper part of panicle often subumbellate. Involucral bracts linear-lanceolate, more or less acute, hairy, the outer often squarrose. Ligules glabrous. Stigmas yellow. Achenes pale brown. Margin of receptacular pits dentate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 259. H. eriophorum} St-Amans,{\i  Bull. Soc. Philom. Paris}{\b  3}: 26 (1801). Stems 30-90 cm, villous with undulate simple eglandular hairs up to 6 mm, and with numerous stellate hairs at least above. Leaves 10-70 × 7-25 mm, crowded, lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, subentire to dentate, sessile, villous with undulate simple eglandular hairs up to 6 mm and sometimes with some stellate hairs. Peduncles with numerous stellate hairs and villous with undulate, simple eglandular hairs up to 4 mm. Involucre 10-12 × 8-11 mm; bracts with numerous stellate hairs and villous with undulate, simple eglandular hairs up to 4 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Maritime sands. • S.W. France.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 260. H. prostratum} group ({\i H. eriophorum} / {\i latifolium}). Like {\b 259} but particularly the upper half of the plant without or with less dense hairs not more than 2·5 mm. {\i Maritime sands. • S.W. France.} Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Included species:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. prostratum } DC. in Lam. & DC., {\i Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 5}: 413 (1815). Ga.
\par 

\par 
410}
\par