{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 cm, dense, sometimes lax at base. Bracts 2-2·5 mm, ovate-lanceolate, usually pubescent. Sepals 2-2·5 mm, subequal, almost free, subglabrous, greenish-brown or purplish with wide scarious margins. Corolla-tube c. 2 mm, glabrous; lobes 1-1·5 mm, ovate or ovate-lanceolate, acute or obtuse. Stamens exserted 4-8 mm. Capsule c. 3 mm; seeds 2, c. 2 mm, oblong-ellipsoid, planoconvex. 2n = 12.{\i  Grassy places, }1500-2300 {\i m. S.W. Jugoslavia and N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 15-17}).{\b  P. atrata} group. Perennials with several or many rosettes. Leaves in a basal rosette, linear-lanceolate, entire, slightly contracted at the base. Scapes terete. Bracts orbicular to suborbicular, with prominent keel and wide, membranous margin, with long hairs at apex. Sepals equal, free, almost entirely membranous, keeled to halfway or less. Corolla-tube glabrous; lobes at least 2 mm. Capsule 2-locular; seeds (1-)2-4, rugose, canaliculate on inner face.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   The species of this group all occur at high altitudes (1200-3000 m). Artificial hybrids are readily made between species with the same chromosome number but with great difficulty between diploids and polyploids.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves acute, mucronate ............................................................... {\b 17. nivalis}
\par 
1 Leaves long-acuminate
\par 
2 Leaves glabrous or sparsely pubescent, green; bracts
\par 
  with glabrous or sparsely pubescent keel ........................................ {\b 15. atrata}
\par 
2 Leaves sericeous with dense, long, white hairs on both
\par 
  surfaces bracts with ± densely pubescent keel ..................... {\b 16. monosperma}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. P. atrata} Hoppe,{\i  Bot. Taschenb.}{\b  1799}: 85 (1799) ({\i P. montana }sensu Lam., non Hudson,{\i  P. fuscescens} Jordan). Leaves 5-20 × 0·5-1·5 cm, flat or slightly canaliculate, long-acuminate, green, glabrous or sparsely pubescent. Scapes as long as or longer than leaves, erect or ascending, sparsely hairy. Spike 1·5-3 cm, oblong-ovoid. Bracts entire, long-ciliate, with glabrous or sparsely pubescent keel and brown or colourless margins. Sepals long-ciliate, with brownish margin. Anthers yellowish or violet. Capsule conical; seeds 3-5 mm. 2n = 12, 24 + 0-2B, 36. {\i Mountains of C. & S. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   A rather variable species, including interfertile variants which have been recognized as subspecies or species but which intergrade morphologically.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. P. monosperma} Pourret,{\i  Mém. Acad. Sci. Toulouse}{\b  3}: 325 (1788). Like {\b 15} but leaves 5-10 × 0·5-1 cm, sericeous with dense, long, white hairs on both surfaces; scapes scarcely longer than leaves, pubescent; spike 1-2 cm; bracts slightly emarginate, with long, white hairs on the keel and colourless margins; sepals with colourless margin; anthers white; seeds (1-)2, c. 3 mm. 2n = 12.{\i  C. & E. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. P. nivalis} Boiss.,{\i  Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 533 (1841). Leaves 3-7 × 0·5-1 cm, flat, acute, mucronate, whitish-sericeous on both surfaces. Scapes shorter than to as long as leaves, sericeous. Spike less than 1 cm, globose. Bracts somewhat 2-lobed, long-ciliate, with long, white hairs on the keel and brownish margin. Sepals with brown margins, glabrous. Anthers yellow. Capsule subglobose; seeds 2, c. 2 mm. 2n = 12. •{\i  S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. P. gentianoides} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 101 (1806). Perennial usually with one rosette. Leaves 2-6(-10) × 1-3·5 cm; lamina ovate to elliptical, subentire or weakly dentate, 3- to 5-(to 7-)veined, glabrous or sparsely (rarely densely) hairy, gradually or abruptly narrowed into a petiole usually c. ½ as long as lamina, rarely sessile. Scapes much longer than leaves, striate; spikes 1-3·5 cm, up to 4 cm in fruit, dense. Bracts c. 2 mm, ovate-orbicular, glabrous, sometimes minutely ciliate. Sepals c. 2 mm, subequal, almost free, glabrous or minutely ciliate, not keeled, usually purplish-brown, with scarious margin. Corolla-tube c. 2 mm, glabrous; lobes 1-1·5 mm, ovate, obtuse. Stamens exserted 3-5 mm; filaments whitish; anthers yellowish. Capsule c. 3 mm; seeds 2-4(-7), 2-2·5 mm, cymbiform. 2n = 12.{\i  Damp places in the mountains. C. part of Balkan peninsula; S. & E. Carpathians.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. P. amplexicaulis} Cav., {\i Icon. Descr.}{\b  2}: 22 (1793). Annual; stems up to 5(-15) cm. Leaves 3-15 × 0·3-1·5 cm, alternate, linear-lanceolate, entire or remotely denticulate, 3- to 5-veined, with sparse or dense long, patent hairs. Scapes mostly exceeding the leaves, striate above, with usually sparse, long, patent hairs or glabrescent; spikes 1-2·5 cm, dense. Bracts 5-6 mm, orbicular or wider than long, glabrous. Sepals unequal, almost free, the anterior 3·5-4 mm, with prominent greenish- or purplish-brown, strongly hairy keel, the posterior 3-3·5 mm, obscurely keeled. Corolla-tube c. 4 mm, glabrous; lobes c. 3·5 mm, ovate, subacute. Stamens exserted c. 2 mm. Capsule 5-6·5 mm; seeds 2, 4-5 mm, cymbiform. 2n = 10.{\i  Dry places. S. Spain; S. Italy; S. part of Aegean region.} Cr Gr Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. P. lanceolata} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }113 (1753). Perennial with several rosettes; roots up to 0·75 mm thick. Leaves 2-30 × 0·5-3·5 cm, usually linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, entire or remotely and shallowly dentate, 3- to 5-(to 7-)veined, subglabrous, appressed-pubescent or villous, sessile or with a petiole up to as long as the lamina. Scapes about twice as long as leaves, strongly 5-sulcate, more or less appressed-hairy; spikes 0·5-5(-8) cm, very dense. Bracts 2·5-3·5 mm, ovate, glabrous or shortly hairy. Sepals 2·5-3 mm, the anterior connate for most of their length but their midribs separate, often shortly hairy, usually ciliate above. Corolla-tube 2-3 mm, glabrous; lobes 1·5-2·5 mm, lanceolate to ovate, acute or acuminate, glabrous. Stamens exserted 3-5 mm; anthers yellowish. Capsule 3-4 mm; seeds 2, c. 2 mm, cymbiform. 2n = 12+0-1B.{\i  Europe, except the extreme north.} All except Sb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Extremely variable; much of the variation reflects differences in habitat and some is of a clinal nature. Plants with tomentose-lanate leaves, shortly hairy bracts, often decumbent scapes and globose spikes (var.{\i  sphaerostachya} Mert. & Koch) are common in dry habitats; although the hairiness appears to show some clinal variation, decumbent scapes and globose spikes are not associated with it in other populations, and formal recognition of this and any of the numerous other variants as subspecies seems impractical.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. P. altissima} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 164 (1762). Like {\b 20} but larger in all its parts and with one or few rosettes; roots 1-2 mm thick, fleshy; leaves subglabrous; scapes 6- to 12-sulcate; spikes 3-5 cm; bracts 4·5-6 mm; sepals 3·5-4·5 mm, always somewhat hairy and ciliate above; seeds c. 3·5 mm. 2n = 72.{\i  Damp meadows or sandy places. E.C. Europe and Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Bu Cr Cz Gr Hu ?It Ju Rm ?Rs (W, E) [Ga Ge He].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. P. argentea} Chaix in Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph. }{\b 1}: 376 (1786). Like {\b 20} but with one or few rosettes; roots up to 1·5 mm thick; leaves (4-)10-30 × 0·5-1·5(-2) cm, linear-lanceolate, entire, shortly appressed-hairy, or sometimes sericeous especially beneath; scapes striate; spikes 0·5-2 cm; bracts up to 4 mm, shortly hairy; at least the anterior sepals more or less shortly appressed-hairy, the midribs often united; anthers white; seeds c. 3 mm. 2n = 12, 12+2B. {\i Dry places; usually calcicole. • S}.
\par 

\par 
42}
\par