{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i & S.C. Europe, from the E. Pyrenees to N. Greece and Romania.} ?Bl Bu Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. P. lagopus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }114 (1753) (incl.{\i  P. lusitanica} L.). Like {\b 20} but sometimes annual with one rosette, sometimes with a stem up to 10(-20) cm and alternate leaves; leaves usually remotely dentate; scapes striate; bracts ovate-lanceolate, together with the sepals densely villous in apical half with long hairs so that whole spike appears villous; corolla-lobes long-acuminate, usually sparsely hairy; capsule c. 2·5 mm; seeds c. 1·5 mm. 2n = 12+0-1B.{\i  Dry, stony and sandy ground. S.Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. P. albicans} L., {\i Sp.Pl.} 114(1753). Subcaespitose perennial; stock with branches 1-7 cm, covered with leaf-bases and with terminal rosettes. Leaves (2-)5-15(-20) × (0·2-)0·5-0·8 cm, linear-lanceolate to almost linear, entire, often undulate, obscurely 3-veined, sericeous-lanate. Scapes about twice as long as leaves, terete, tomentose; spikes (1-)3-10 cm, dense above, usually lax or interrupted below. Bracts 3·5-4·5 mm, ovate, shortly villous. Sepals 3-4 mm, subequal, almost free, weakly keeled to the apex, with wide scarious margins, villous at least towards apex. Corolla-tube 3-4 mm, glabrous; lobes 2·5-3·5 mm, ovate, abruptly acuminate, glabrous. Stamens exserted 4-7 mm; anthers white. Capsule c. 4 mm; seeds 2, 2·5-3 mm, cymbiform. 2n = 20, ?30. {\i Dry places. Iberian peninsula and Mediterranean region.} Bl Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. P. ovata} Forskål, {\i Fl. Aegypt.} 31 (1775). Perennial with one or few rosettes. Leaves 2·5-12 × 0·1-0·8 cm, linear to linear-lanceolate, entire or remotely denticulate, sparsely to densely villous-lanate. Scapes only slightly exceeding leaves, terete, shortly villous; spikes 0·5-3·5 cm, dense. Bracts c. 3 mm, suborbicular to ovate, sometimes shortly hairy. Sepals c. 2·5 mm, subequal, almost free, keeled to the apex, with wide scarious margins, at least the anterior usually shortly hairy. Corolla-tube 1·5-2 mm, glabrous; lobes c. 2·5 mm, ovate-orbicular, subobtuse or very shortly acuminate. Stamens exserted up to 1 mm. Capsule c. 3 mm; seeds 2, 2-2·5 mm, cymbiform. 2n = 8.{\i  Dry places. S.E. Spain. }Hs. ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. P. minuta} Pallas, {\i Reise}{\b  3}: 716 (1776). Like {\b 25} but probably always annual; scapes often shorter than leaves; spikes up to 2 cm; bracts c. 2·5 mm; sepals c. 3 mm; corolla-tube 2·5-3 mm, the lobes 1-1·5 mm, elliptical or ovate-elliptical, acute; stamens usually included; capsule 4-5 mm; seeds 3-3·5 mm. {\i Saline or damp habitats. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. P. loeflingii} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }115 (1753). Annual with one or several rosettes. Leaves 2-7(-10) × 0·1-0·7 cm, linear to linear-lanceolate, entire or remotely dentate, 3-veined, with sparse to dense, patent, rather stiff hairs. Scapes mostly shorter than the leaves, terete, appressed-pubescent; spikes 0·5-2·5 cm, dense. Bracts 2·5-3 mm, wider than long, glabrous. Sepals 1·5-2 mm, equal, almost free, suborbicular, scarious, veined only in lower ¼, glabrous. Corolla-tube c. 1·5 mm, glabrous; lobes c. 1 mm, ovate-lanceolate, subacute. Stamens exserted 0·5-1 mm. Capsule c. 3 mm; seeds 2, 2-2·5 mm, very narrowly cymbiform.{\i  Waste places or sandy ground. C. & S. parts of Iberian peninsula.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. P. notata} Lag.,{\i  Gen. Sp. Nov.} 7 (1816). Like {\b 27} but bracts villous on keel and prominently long-ciliate at apex; sepals ovate-elliptical, long-ciliate at apex; corolla-lobes ovate-orbicular, obtuse.{\i  Dry places. S.E. Spain }({\i W. of Aguiles, Almeria Prov.}). Hs. ({\i S.W. Asia, N. Africa}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Other records for Spain appear to be referable to {\b 25} or {\b 27}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. P. bellardii} All., {\i Fl. Pedem.}{\b  1}: 82 (1785). Annual with one or few rosettes. Leaves 2-7(-10) × 0·1-0·5 cm, linear-lanceolate, entire or remotely denticulate, 3-veined, laxly to densely villous with more or less patent hairs. Scapes usually 1-7, terete, densely hairy with both long and short patent hairs; spikes 1-2(-4) cm, dense. Bracts 3-6 mm, the lower up to 8 mm, oblong-lanceolate, villous. Sepals unequal, almost free, the anterior 4-5 mm, with very narrow scarious margins, the posterior 3-4 mm, with wide scarious margins. Corolla-tube c. 3·5 mm, glabrous; lobes c. 2 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Stamens exserted c. 2 mm. Capsule c. 2·5 mm; seeds 2, c. 1·75 mm, narrowly cymbiform. {\i Dry, sandy ground and waste places. S. Europe}. Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b bellardii}: Scapes 3-10(-15) cm, equalling or exceeding leaves, remaining erect or ascending in fruit. 2n = 10.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b deflexa} (Pilger) Rech. fil.,{\i  Fl. Iran. }{\b 15}: 19 (1965): Scapes 1-5 cm, shorter than leaves, becoming arcuate-recurved in fruit. 2n = 10.{\i  Balkan peninsula and Aegean region}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. P. cretica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 114 (1753). Like {\b 29} but scapes often more than 10, up to 2·5 cm, much shorter than leaves, with denser and longer hairs, becoming arcuate-recurved and thickened in fruit so that whole plant becomes a wind-dispersed ball; spikes up to 1 cm; sepals up to 3·5 mm; corolla-lobes orbicular-ovate, shortly acuminate; stamens exserted c. 5 mm. 2n = 10.{\i  Dry, sandy and stony places. S. part of Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    Subgen. {\i Psyllium} (Miller) Harms. Leaves opposite on branched stems.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. P. squarrosa} Murray, {\i Comment. Gotting.}{\b  4} (Cl. Phys.): 38 (1782). Annual; stems 2-25 cm, decumbent or ascending, usually with patent, flexuous branches as long as the main stem, more or less scabrid-puberulent with deflexed hairs, eglandular. Leaves 0·5-2 × 0·1-0·2 cm, linear, fleshy. Peduncles 1-5 cm; spikes 0·5-1·5 cm. Lowest 2 bracts 7-12 mm, herbaceous or with very narrow scarious margins, lanceolate-caudate, recurved, with divergent lateral veins at base; upper bracts 3-4 mm, obovate-oblong. Sepals unequal, the anterior like the upper bracts, the posterior 2·5-3 mm, ovate. Corolla-tube 3·5-4 mm; lobes c. 2 mm, ovate, acute. Capsule 2-2·5 mm; seeds c. 1·75 mm, cymbiform, ovate-elliptical in outline. {\i Dry, usually sandy places. Aegean region}. Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. P. arenaria} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  1}: 51 (1801 ({\i P. ramosa} Ascherson,{\i  P. psyllium} L., nom. ambig.,{\i  P. indica} L. nom. illegit.). Annual; stems up to 50(-80) cm, erect, usually with ascending, straight branches, pubescent with patent or ascending hairs, more or less minutely glandular above. Leaves 3-8 × 0·1-0·3(-0·4) cm, linear or linear-lanceolate, not fleshy. Peduncles 1-6 cm; spikes 0·5-1·5 cm. Lowest 2 bracts 6-10 mm, with herbaceous midrib and wide scarious margins, ovate-orbicula with linear-subulate apex, straight and suberect, with divergent lateral veins at base; upper bracts 3·5-4·5 mm, ovate-orbicula: or wider than long. Sepals unequal, the anterior 3·5-4 mm obovate-spathulate, the posterior 3-3·5 mm, ovate-lanceolate Corolla-tube 3·5-4 mm; lobes c. 2 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acute Capsule c. 2 mm; seeds c. 2·5 mm, cymbiform, oblong-elliptica in outline. 2n = 12.{\i  Dry places. S., C. & E. Europe; a frequent casual in N. Europe and locally naturalized.} Al Au Bu Co Cr Cz: Ga Ge Gr Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Tu [Be He Ho Rs (B)].
\par 

\par 
43}
\par