{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min54}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min55}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords955}{\nofchars5444}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 33. P. afra}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  ed. 2, 168 (1762) (}{\i\fs28 P. psyllium}{\fs28  L. 1762, non L. 1753). Like }{\b\fs28 32}{\fs28  but usually strongly glandular-pubescent at least above; bracts 3\'b75-8 mm, all similar in shape, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, acute or acuminate, with wide scarious margin below, without lateral veins; sepals 3-4\'b75 mm, equal, oblanceolate; seeds narrowly oblong in outline. 2n = 12. }{\i\fs28 Dry places. S. Europe}{\fs28 . Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 34. P. sempervirens}{\fs28  Crantz,}{\i\fs28  Inst. Rei Herb.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 331 (1766) (}{\i\fs28 P. cynops }{\fs28 L. 1762, non L. 1753,}{\i\fs28  P. suffruticosa}{\fs28  Lam.). Dwarf shrub up to 40 cm with usually much-branched, shortly pubescent stems. Leaves 1-6 \'d7 c. 0\'b71 cm, linear or linear-subulate, entire or remotely denticulate, scabrid-puberulent. Peduncles 2-10 cm; spikes 0\'b75-1\'b75 cm, with (3-)5-12 flowers. Lower bracts 5-10 mm,ovate to ovate-orbicular with wide membranous margin, abruptly contracted into a linear apex or acute; upper bracts ovate to lanceolate. Sepals unequal. Corolla-tube 4-5 mm; lobes 2\'b75-3\'b75 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Capsule 4-5 mm; seeds 3-4 mm, cymbiform, ovate to oblong-lanceolate in outline. 2n = 12. }{\i\fs28 Dry places. S.W. Europe, extending to C. Italy; locally naturalized in C. Europe.}{\fs28  Co Ga Hs It [Au ?Cz He].
\par 
\par     }{\b\fs28 35. P. asperrima}{\fs28  (Gand.) Hervier,}{\i\fs28  Bull. Acad. Int. G\'e9ogr. Bot.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Le Mans}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 15}{\fs28 : 160 (1905). Like }{\b\fs28 34}{\fs28  but very intricately branched; leaves 1-2 \'d7 0\'b72-0\'b75 cm, linear-lanceolate, strongly dentate or almost pinnatifid, scabrid-puberulent and more or less villous-asperous; spikes c. 0\'b75 cm, with 3-5 flowers; lower bracts c. 5 mm, ovate, acute or acuminate. }{\i\fs28 Dry places; calcicole. \bullet  C., E. & S. Spain; very local.}{\fs28  Hs.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 2.            Littorella}{\fs28                Bergius
\par }{\fs24 By D.M. Moore.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Monoecious, perennial aquatic herbs. Leaves in a basal rosette, simple, sheathing at base. Male flowers 3- to 4-merous, solitary on a slender scape having 2-8, 2- to 4-merous, subsessile, female flowers at base. Corolla-tube short. Ovary 1-locular; ovules 1(-2). Fruit indehiscent, hard, 1-seeded.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. L. uniflora}{\fs28  (L.) Ascherson,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Brandenb.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 544 (1864) (}{\i\fs28 L. lacustris}{\fs28  L.). Stolons slender, with roots and leaf-rosettes at the nodes. Leaves 1\'b75-10(-25) cm, linear-subulate, semicircular in section, sometimes flat and wider. Scape shorter than, rarely as long as, the leaves. Male flowers 5-6 mm; female flowers 4-5 mm. Stamens 1-2 cm. Style c. 1 cm. 2n = 24. }{\i\fs28 Shores of lakes and ponds from just above to c. 4 m below water-line. W. & C. Europe, extending to N. Italy, much of Fennoscandia and N. W. part of U.S.S.R.; isolated stations in S. Romania.}{\fs28  Au Az Be Br ?Co Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Is It Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C) Sa Su.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs36 DIPSACALES
\par }
\pard \ {\fs36  
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 164.           CAPRIFOLIACEAE}{\fs28 
\par         }{\fs24 Edit.S.M. Walters.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Woody perennials (rarely herbaceous) with opposite, usually exstipulate leaves. Flowers (3-)5-merous, hermaphrodite, epigynous, usually actinomorphic. Calyx small; corolla-tube variously developed. Stamens (4-)5, epipetalous, alternating with corolla-lobes; anthers longitudinally dehiscent. Ovary 1- to 5-locular; style 1 or absent; stigmas free or connate. Ovules 1 to numerous, pendent, anatropous. Fruit a drupe, berry or nutlet. Seeds endospermic, with a small, straight embryo.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Leaves pinnate ........................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. Sambucus}{\fs28 
\par 1 Leaves simple (sometimes lobed)
\par 2 Dwarf shrub with slender, procumbent stems ............................... }{\b\fs28 4. Linnaea}{\fs28 
\par 2 Erect shrub or woody climber
\par 3 Inflorescence corymbose ........................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. Viburnum}{\fs28 
\par 3 Inflorescence not corymbose (flowers sometimes solitary)
\par 4 Bracts 15-35 mm, leaf-like, purplish ....................................... }{\b\fs28 5. Leycesteria}{\fs28 
\par 4 Bracts less than 15 mm, inconspicuous
\par 5 Fruit a white drupe with 2 pyrenes .................................. }{\b\fs28 3. Symphoricarpos}{\fs28 
\par 5 Fruit a red, black or blue, few-seeded berry (sometimes
\par   connate in pairs) ............................................................................ }{\b\fs28 6. Lonicera}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.               Sambucus}{\fs28                L.
\par       }{\fs24 By I. K. Ferguson.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Small trees, shrubs or herbs. Stems with large pith. Leaves pinnate, deciduous, stipulate or exstipulate. Flowers (3-)5-merous, small, actinomorphic, in cymose corymbs or panicles. Calyx 5-lobed. Corolla rotate. Stamens 5. Stigma  sessile, 3- to 5-lobed. Ovary 3- to 5-locular. Fruit a drupe with 3-5 compressed, cartilaginous pyrenes.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Herb; stipules conspicuous .............................................................. }{\b\fs28 1. ebulus}{\fs28 
\par 1 Shrub or small tree; stipules absent or very small
\par 2 Inflorescence corymbose; fruit usually black; pith whitish ............... }{\b\fs28 2. nigra}{\fs28 
\par 2 Inflorescence paniculate; fruit red; pith reddish-brown .............. }{\b\fs28 3. racemosa}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. S. ebulus}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  269 (1753). Perennial herb 0\'b76-2 m, with a creeping rhizome. Stems stout, erect, usually simple. Leaflets 5-13, 5-16 \'d7 1-4\'b75 cm, oblong to oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, acutely serrate. Stipules conspicuous, more or less ovate. Inflorescence 5-16 cm in diameter, corymbose, with 3(-4) primary rays. Corolla white, rarely pink outside. Anthers purple. Fruit globose, black.}{\i\fs28  Most of Europe from the Netherlands and N. Ukraine southwards; formerly cultivated as a medicinal plant and naturalized elsewhere.}{\fs28  Al Au Be Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K) Sa Si Tu [*Br Da Hb Rs (B) Su].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. S. nigra}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  269 (1753). Shrub or small tree up to 10 m, with brownish-grey, sulcate, corky bark and whitish pith. Stems often with vigorous, erect shoots from base; branches often arching. Leaflets 5-7(-9), 4\'b75-12(-18) \'d7 2-6(-10) cm, ovate, ovate-lanceolate or ovate-elliptical, acuminate, serrate, sparsely pubescent beneath. Stipules absent or very small, subulate. Inflorescence 10-24 cm in diameter, corymbose, with (4-)5 primary rays. Corolla white. Anthers yellowish-white. Fruit globose, black (very rarely red). 2n = 36. }{\i\fs28 Most of Europe except the extreme north.}{\fs28  All except Bl Cr Fa Is Rs (N) Sb, but only naturalized in Fe No Su.
\par 
\par  Although undoubtedly native in damp woods over a large part of Europe, this species has been widely cultivated for its fruits and in some districts is seen only near houses. Its precise limits as a native are difficult to establish.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. S. racemosa}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  270 (1753). Shrub up to 4 m. Stems often arching; bark grey; pith reddish-brown. Leaflets 3-7, 4-12(-15) \'d7 1\'b75-4(-6) cm, ovate, ovate-lanceolate or elliptical, acuminate, serrate, glabrous or sparsely pubescent when young. Stipules represented by paired glands 2-3 mm. Inflorescence a
\par 
\par 44}
\par }