{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 dense, ovoid panicle 2·5-6 cm in diameter. Corolla yellowish- to greenish-white. Anthers yellowish-white. Fruit globose, red. 2n = 36.{\i  Woods, mainly in the mountains. From Belgium and Lithuania southwards to the Pyrenees and S. Bulgaria; cultivated for ornament in N. & E. Europe and naturalized}. Al Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (*B, C, W) [Br Da Fe No Su].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   S. sibirica} Nakai,{\i  Bot. Mag.} ({\i Tokyo}) {\b 40}: 478 (1926), from Siberia and N.E. Asia, and extending westwards to the E.C. part of European Russia, appears to differ only in its roughly hairy rhachis, petiole, petiolules and main veins on lower surface of the leaves; it does not seem to warrant specific rank.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.                Viburnum}               L.
\par       

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By I.K. Ferguson
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs or small trees. Leaves simple, deciduous or evergreen, stipulate or exstipulate. Flowers in cymose corymbs, actinomorphic, but sometimes the marginal flowers of the inflorescence enlarged, somewhat zygomorphic and sterile. Calyx 5-lobed. Corolla 5-lobed, rotate to campanulate. Stamens 5. Style short; stigma 3-lobed. Ovary 3-locular, with one fertile loculus with a single ovule and 2 sterile loculi. Fruit a drupe with a single, globose pyrene.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves lobed; outer flowers sterile, much larger than inner ............ {\b 1. opulus}
\par 
1 Leaves entire or serrulate; flowers uniform
\par 
2 Leaves deciduous, not coriaceous, serrulate; twigs with
\par 
  dense, greyish, stellate pubescence ................................................. {\b 2. lantana}
\par 
2 Leaves coriaceous, evergreen, entire; twigs glabrous or
\par 
  sparsely pubescent ............................................................................... {\b 3. tinus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. V. opulus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 268 (1753). Deciduous shrub up to 4 m. Twigs greyish, glabrous, angled; buds with scales. Leaves 3-8(-12·5) × 4·5-9(-13) cm, with 3(-5) irregularly dentate lobes, acuminate, glabrous above, pubescent or glabrescent beneath; petioles 1-2·5(-3·5) cm, with discoid glands; stipules filiform, sometimes laciniate and glandular. Inflorescence 4·5-10·5 cm in diameter; peduncle 1-4 cm. Flowers white, the inner 4-7 mm in diameter, fertile, the outer (9-)15-20(-25) mm in diameter, sterile. Fruit c. 8 mm, subglobose, red. 2n = 18.{\i  Europe, except for parts of the north and most of the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. V. lantana} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }268 (1753). Deciduous shrub up to 6 m. Twigs with dense, greyish, stellate pubescence, terete; buds naked. Leaves 4-14 × 3·5-9 cm, ovate-lanceolate, ovate or obovate, usually acute, serrulate, rugose and sparingly stellate pubescent above, densely stellate-tomentose beneath; petioles 1-3·5 cm; stipules absent. Inflorescence 6-10 cm in diameter; peduncle 1-2·5 cm. Flowers 5-9 mm in diameter, uniform, fertile, creamy-white. Fruit c. 8 mm, compressed-ovoid, red at first, later black. 2n = 18.{\i  C. & S. Europe, extending to C. Ukraine, and westwards to N. Spain and England.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, K) [No Su].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. V. tinus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 267 (1753). Evergreen shrub up to 7 m. Twigs glabrous or sparsely pubescent, weakly angled. Leaves 3-10 × 1·5-7 cm, ovate-orbicular to ovate-lanceolate, entire, obtuse or acute, glabrous, shining, dark green above, sparsely pubescent or glabrescent beneath; petioles 0·5-1·5(-2) cm; stipules absent. Inflorescence 4-9 cm in diameter; peduncle 0·5-2·5 cm. Flowers 5-9 mm in diameter, uniform, fertile, pinkish outside, white inside. Fruit c. 8 mm, subglobose, dark blue.{\i  S. Europe.} Al Az Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si [Br].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tinus}: Leaves oblong-ovate, ovate-lanceolate, lanceolate or elliptical, acute or subacute, very shortly tapered into petiole.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except Açores}.
\par 
   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b subcordatum} (Trelease) P. Silva in Palhinha, {\i Cat. Pl. Vasc. Açores} 115 (1966): Leaves ovate or ovate-orbicular, obtuse, subcordate.{\i  Açores.} 
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.            Symphoricarpos }       Duh.
\par    

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By I.K. Ferguson.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs. Leaves simple, deciduous, exstipulate. Flowers actinomorphic, in terminal, spike-like racemes or clusters, subtended by bracts and paired bracteoles. Calyx (4-)5-lobed. Corolla (4-)5-lobed, campanulate. Stamens (4-)5. Style slender; stigma capitate. Ovary 4-locular with 2 fertile loculi, each with a single ovule, and 2 sterile loculi. Fruit a drupe with 2 more or less compressed pyrenes.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. albus} (L.) S.F. Blake,{\i  Rhodora}{\b  16}: 118 (1914) ({\i S. racemosus} Michx). Shrub 1-3 m. Stems erect, slender; twigs yellowish-brown, glabrous. Leaves (2-)2·5-8(-9) × 1·5-6(-7·5) cm, ovate-orbicular or ovate, obtuse, entire or rarely sinuately lobed, glabrous or sparsely hairy beneath; petiole 2-5(-7) mm. Flowers 3-9 in terminal, spike-like racemes 1-2·5 cm; bracts and bracteoles 1-1·5 mm, ovate, acuminate, glabrous. Corolla 5 mm, campanulate, pink, hairy inside the throat. Style glabrous. Fruit 1-1·5 cm, globose, white. {\i Cultivated for ornament and for hedges throughout a large part of Europe and widely naturalized.} [Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hu Ju No Su.] ({\i North America.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   This description applies to var.{\i  laevigatus} (Fernald) S. F. Blake, which appears to be the variety naturalized in Europe. It differs from the typical variety in its glabrous twigs and leaves and larger fruit.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.           Linnaea}               L.
\par    

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By I.K. Ferguson.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Procumbent dwarf shrubs. Leaves evergreen, exstipulate. Flowers in pairs on long peduncles which are terminal on short lateral branches. Calyx with 5 narrowly lanceolate lobes. Corolla 5-lobed, campanulate. Stamens 4, 2 shorter, inserted towards the base of the tube. Style filiform; stigma capitate. Ovary 3-locular with 1 fertile loculus with a single ovule and 2 sterile loculi. Fruit a nutlet enclosed by persistent bracteoles.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. borealis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 631 (1753). Stems slender, trailing. Leaves 5-16 × 4-10 mm, broadly ovate to orbicular, subobtuse, crenate-dentate in the upper half, tapered below into a petiole 2-3 mm. Peduncles 4·5-8 cm, glandular-pubescent; bracts 2, 1·5-2 mm, lanceolate, membranous. Pedicels 10-20 mm, glandular-pubescent; bracteoles 2, c. 1 mm, lanceolate, membranous. Corolla 5-9 mm, pinkish-white, often marked with pinkish-purple, hairy inside. Fruit c. 3 mm, densely glandular-pubescent. 2n = 32. Woods, heaths and mossy tundra. N. Europe, extending locally southwards, mainly in the mountains, to the Alps, E. Carpathians and S. Ural. Au Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.         Leycesteria}              Wall.
\par    

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By I.K. Ferguson.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs. Leaves simple, deciduous, stipulate or exstipulate. Flowers verticillate in the axils of large bracts in pendent, terminal inflorescences. Calyx unequally 5-lobed. Corolla infundibuliform, regularly 5-lobed. Stamens 5. Style slender; stigma capitate. Ovary 5(-8)-locular. Fruit a many-seeded berry.
\par 

\par 
45}
\par