{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. formosa} Wall. in Roxb.,{\i  Fl. Indica}{\b  2}: 182 (1824). Stems up to 2 m, hollow, glabrous and pruinose when young. Leaves 5-15(-18) × 2·5-7·3 cm, broadly ovate to ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, entire or serrate; petiole 5-15 mm. Flowers sessile; bracts 15-35 mm, purplish. Corolla 15-20 mm, white or lilac. Fruit c. 10 mm in diameter, subglobose, glandular-pubescent, reddish-purple.{\i  Cultivated in W. Europe and locally naturalized.} [Az Br Ga Hb.] ({\i India, S.W. China.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 6.                Lonicera}               L.
\par         

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By K. Browicz.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous (rarely evergreen) shrubs or woody climbers. Leaves entire, exstipulate. Flowers in axillary pairs, terminal heads or whorls. Bracts usually present. Bracteoles free or connate, rarely absent. Calyx 5-lobed. Corolla 5-lobed, actinomorphic or 2-lipped with a 4-lobed upper lip; tube sometimes gibbous. Stamens 5. Stigma capitate. Ovary 2- to 3 (to 5)-locular, the walls of the ovaries of paired flowers sometimes united. Fruit a few-seeded berry.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Some species and hybrids are widely cultivated for ornament.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: A. Rehder, {\i Ann. Rep. Missouri Bot. Gard. }{\b 14}: 27-232 (1903).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Woody climbers
\par 
2 Flowers in axillary pairs
\par 
3 Mature leaves densely pubescent beneath; corolla-tube
\par 
  longer than limb .............................................................................. {\b 11. biflora}
\par 
3 Mature leaves glabrous or slightly pubescent beneath;
\par 
  corolla-tube not longer than limb ................................................ {\b 12. japonica}
\par 
2 Flowers in heads or whorls
\par 
4 Leaves below the inflorescence free ................................. {\b 17. periclymenum}
\par 
4 At least the first pair of leaves below the inflorescence connate
\par 
5 Flower-heads pedunculate ............................................................ {\b 16. etrusca} 
\par 
5 Heads or whorls of flowers sessile
\par 
6 Leaves elliptical, deciduous ................................................... {\b 15. caprifolium}
\par 
6 Leaves ovate to oblong, evergreen
\par 
7 Corolla-tube 3-4 times as long as limb; style ± sericeous ........... {\b 13. implexa}
\par 
7 Corolla-tube about twice as long as limb; style 
\par 
  glabrous ..................................................................................... {\b 14. splendida}
\par 
1 Erect shrubs
\par 
8 Corolla actinomorphic or nearly so
\par 
9 More or less hairy; bracteoles connate ......................................... {\b 1. caerulea}
\par 
9 Glabrous; bracteoles free ............................................................ {\b 2. pyrenaica}
\par 
8 Corolla 2-lipped
\par 
10 Bracts shorter than ovary; berries bluish-black ................................ {\b 6. nigra}
\par 
10 Bracts at least as long as ovary; berries red or yellowish
\par 
11 Twigs and leaves glabrous or subglabrous
\par 
12 Leaves cuneate or rounded at base; twigs with solid pith .......... {\b 3. alpigena}
\par 
12 Leaves truncate or cordate at base; twigs with hollow pith ......... {\b 7. tatarica}
\par 
11 Twigs and leaves pubescent at least on lower surface
\par 
13 Peduncles very short or absent
\par 
14 Bracts longer than ovary; corolla-tube slightly gibbous .............. {\b 9. arborea}
\par 
14 Bracts shorter than ovary; corolla-tube not gibbous .... {\b 10. nummulariifolia}
\par 
13 Peduncles 10-20 mm
\par 
15 Peduncles puberulent, eglandular ............................................ {\b 8. xylosteum}
\par 
15 Peduncles densely glandular-hairy
\par 
16 Leaves glandular-pubescent on both surfaces; ovaries
\par 
   and berries of paired flowers connate .......................................... {\b 4. glutinosa}
\par 
16 Leaves subglabrous above, eglandular-velutinous beneath;
\par 
   ovaries and berries of paired flowers free or almost so ............... {\b 5. hellenica}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. LONICERA. Erect deciduous shrubs. Flowers in axillary pairs. Corolla actinomorphic or 2-lipped; tube short.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. caerulea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 174 (1753). Up to 2 m, glabrous or more or less hairy. Twigs with solid pith. Bark on the older branches yellowish-brown to reddish, flaking. Leaves 2·5-7 × 1·2-3 cm, usually elliptical, sometimes obovate, ovate or oblong, acute or subacute. Peduncle 7-11 mm. Corolla 12-16 mm, yellowish-white, infundibuliform, with a gibbous, pubescent tube. Bracts linear, longer than the bracteoles; bracteoles connate in a tubular cupule enclosing the ovaries, later developing and forming, with the paired ovaries, a succulent, dark blue, compound fruit.{\i  N.E. Europe; also from the Pyrenees to Bulgaria & S.W. Czechoslovakia, mainly in the mountains.} Al Au Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su [No].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in hairiness of twigs, leaves and corolla.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b caerulea}: Twigs glabrous or sparsely hairy. Leaves glabrous or slightly hairy beneath, mostly along midrib. Corolla-tube wide, about twice as long as the limb. 2n = 18. {\i Throughout the range of the species, but rare in the northeast.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pallasii} (Ledeb.) Browicz,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  68}: 278 (1974) ({\i L. pallasii} Ledeb., {\i L. baltica} Pojark.): Twigs with a more or less dense, short tomentum, and with scattered long hairs up to 2 mm. Leaves more or less hairy on both surfaces, glabrescent above. Corolla-tube narrow, 2-3 times as long as limb.{\i  N.E. Europe; a few stations in the Alps}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b L. altaica} Pallas,{\i  Fl. Ross.}{\b  1}({\b 1}): 58 (1784), recorded from N. & E. Russia, is probably only a variant of subsp. ({\b a}), differing in the narrower and longer corolla-tube and ellipsoid fruits.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. pyrenaica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }174 (1753). Up to 1 m, glabrous. Twigs with solid pith. Leaves 1·5-4 × 0·8-2 cm, somewhat coriaceous, narrowly obovate or oblanceolate, acute or acuminate, decurrent, bluish-green. Peduncle 10-20 mm. Bracts lanceolate, longer than ovary. Bracteoles ovate, free, much shorter than ovary. Corolla 12-20 mm, white, often tinged with red, infundibuliform-campanulate; tube scarcely gibbous, much longer than the limb, glabrous. Berries free, almost globose, red.{\i  Limestone rocks. Pyrenees, mountains of N.E. Spain, Islas Baleares.} Bl Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pyrenaica}: Leaves less than 3·5 × 1·5 cm. Corolla less than 15 mm.{\i  Pyrenees and mountains of N.E. Spain.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b majoricensis} (Gand.) Browicz,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  68}: 279 (1974) ({\i L. majoricensis} Gand.): Leaves 3·5-4 × 1·5-2 cm. Corolla 15-20 mm. •{\i  Islas Baleares}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. alpigena} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 174 (1753). Up to 3 m, usually glabrous. Twigs with solid pith. Leaves 4-11 × 2-5·5 cm, oblong-obovate to elliptical, acute to long-acuminate, ciliate when young. Peduncle (20-)25-35(-50) mm. Bracts linear, usually longer than ovary. Bracteoles ovate, very small. Corolla 1·2-2 cm, 2-lipped, yellowish or greenish-yellow, tinged with reddish-brown; tube strongly gibbous, shorter than limb, glabrous or slightly glandular. Berries c. 10 mm, globose to ovoid, scarlet.{\i  Usually calcicole. • Mountains of S. & S.C. Europe. }Al Au Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alpigena}: Ovaries and berries connate. 2n = 18. {\i Throughout the range of the species except the S. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b formanekiana} (Halácsy) Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 480 (1930): Ovaries and berries free or only slightly connate at the base.{\i  Balkan peninsula}.
\par 

\par 
46}
\par