{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min55}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min55}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1005}{\nofchars5732}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 4. L. glutinosa}{\fs28  Vis.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Dalm. }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 : 18 (1852). Up to 2 m. Young twigs glandular-pubescent or glandular-puberulent; pith solid. Leaves 2\'b75-5\'b75 \'d7 1\'b75-3\'b75 cm, elliptical to ovate, acute to acuminate, glandular-pubescent. Peduncle 12-16 mm. Bracts linear, longer than ovary. Bracteoles ovate, very small. Corolla 1-1\'b75 cm, 2-lipped, yellowish tinged with red; tube very short. Berries red, connate. }{\i\fs28 Rocky places. \bullet  Mountains of W. Jugoslavia.}{\fs28  Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. L. hellenica}{\fs28  Orph. ex Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 108 (1856). Like }{\b\fs28 4 }{\fs28 but twigs and lower surface of leaves velutinous; upper surface of leaves almost glabrous; ovaries and berries free or almost free. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S. Greece and Aegean region.}{\fs28  Gr ?Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. L. nigra}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  173 (1753). Up to 2 m. Young twigs glabrous or puberulent; pith solid. Leaves 2-7 \'d7 1-3 cm, narrowly elliptical to oblong-obovate, acute or subacute, bright green above, bluish-green and glabrous or villous along the veins beneath. Peduncle 15-40 mm. Bracts ovate-lanceolate, shorter than the ovary. Bracteoles connate, shorter than the ovary. Corolla 0\'b76-1 cm, 2-lipped, pale pink; tube distinctly gibbous, pubescent, equalling or a little longer than limb. Ovaries connate only at base. Berries black, bluish-pruinose. 2n = 18. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Mountains of S. & C. Europe, from the Pyrenees to the Carpathians and Bulgaria.}{\fs28  Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 7. L. tatarica}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  173 (1753). Up to 3 m, glabrous. Twigs with hollow pith. Leaves 2\'b75-8 \'d7 1\'b77-4\'b75 cm, ovate or ovate-lanceolate, acute or subacute (sometimes acuminate), truncate or cordate at base, usually glabrous, but sometimes with scattered hairs along the midrib beneath. Peduncle 15-30 mm. Bracts longer than ovary. Bracteoles 1/3-1/2 as long as ovary, ovate-elliptical. Corolla 1\'b75-2 cm, 2-lipped, white to red. Ovaries free. Berries globose, red, orange or yellow.}{\i\fs28  S.C. Russia, from}{\fs28  c. 42\'b0}{\i\fs28  E. eastwards}{\fs28 . Rs (C, E) [Au Cz Ga Ge Ho Hs Hu Rm Rs (W, K)]. (}{\i\fs28 W. & C. Asia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 8. L. xylosteum}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl. }{\fs28 174 (1753). Up to 3 m. Young twigs grey-pubescent or almost glabrous; pith hollow. Leaves 3-7 \'d7 (1\'b75-)2\'b75 cm, broadly elliptic-ovate to suborbicular, sometimes narrowly elliptical or obovate, acute or subacute, sparingly pubescent above, usually distinctly pubescent beneath. Petiole 4-10 mm. peduncle 12-20 mm. Bracts lanceolate, about as long as ovary. Bracteoles ovate, shorter than ovary. Corolla 0\'b78-1\'b72 cm, 2-lipped, yellowish-white; tube equalling or shorter than the limb, pubescent. Ovaries free, glandular. Berries globose, red. 2n = 18. }{\i\fs28 Woods. Europe except the extreme north, parts of the extreme south and the islands}{\fs28 . Al Au Be *Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Si Su.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 9. L. arborea}{\fs28  Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  Biblioth. Univ. Gen\'e8ve}{\fs28  ser. 2, }{\b\fs28 13}{\fs28 : 409 (1838). Erect shrub or small tree up to 9 m. Young twigs reddish-violet, puberulent, the older whitish, with fibrous bark; pith hollow. Leaves (2-)2\'b75-4 \'d7 1\'b72-2\'b75 cm, ovate or broadly ovate, rarely elliptical, obtuse or acute and shortly mucronulate, glabrous above, grey-pubescent beneath. Petiole 2-3 mm. Peduncle almost absent. Bracts subulate, longer than ovary. Bracteoles ovate, 1/3-1/2 as long as ovary. Corolla 1-2 cm, 2-lipped, pink; tube slightly gibbous, strigose, half as long as limb. Berries yellowish. }{\i\fs28 S. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs. (}{\i\fs28 N.W. Africa}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 10. L. nummulariifolia}{\fs28  Jaub. & Spach,}{\i\fs28  Ill. Pl. Or.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 133 (1843). Like }{\b\fs28 9}{\fs28 but leaves ovate to suborbicular, often pubescent or puberulent above; bracts shorter than ovary; corolla-tube not gibbous.}{\i\fs28  Rocky places in the mountains. S. Greece, Kriti.}{\fs28  Cr Gr. (}{\i\fs28 S.W. Asia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par   Sect. NINTOOA (Spach) Maxim. Woody climbers. Flowers in axillary pairs. Corolla 2-lipped; tube long.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 11. L. biflora}{\fs28  Desf.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Atl.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 184 (1798) (}{\i\fs28 L. canescens}{\fs28  Schousboe). Deciduous. Twigs whitish-velutinous. Leaves 2\'b75-5(-6) \'d7 1\'b78-3\'b75(-4\'b75) cm, ovate to ovate-elliptical, subobtuse, dark green and glabrous above, greyish-green and densely pubescent beneath. Peduncle 5-10 mm. Flowers in axillary pairs, crowded at ends of twigs. Bracts and bracteoles ovate, much shorter than ovary. Corolla 3-4 cm, yellowish; tube narrow, much longer than limb, grey-puberulent. Berries black.}{\i\fs28  S.E. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs [Si]. (}{\i\fs28 N.W. Africa}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 12. L. japonica}{\fs28  Thunb.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Jap.}{\fs28  89 (1784). Semi-evergreen. Twigs hirsute. Leaves 4-8 \'d7 2-4 cm, ovate to oblong-ovate, acute, rounded or subcordate at base, pubescent when young, later glabrous, ciliate. Peduncle 5-10 mm. Bracts leaf-like. Bracteoles very small. Corolla 3-5 cm, white tinged with purple; tube narrow, almost as long as limb, glandular-pubescent. Berries black. 2n = 18. }{\i\fs28 Cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized}{\fs28 . [Az Br Ga Ge He Hs It.] (}{\i\fs28 E. Asia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par   Sect. CAPRIFOLIUM (Miller) DC. Woody climbers. Flowers in terminal heads or whorls. Corolla 2-lipped; tube long.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 13. L. implexa}{\fs28  Aiton,}{\i\fs28  Hort. Kew.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 231 (1789). Evergreen, much branched. Twigs glabrous, glaucous. Leaves 2-8 \'d7 (0\'b75-)2-4 cm, ovate to oblong, obtuse or subacute and mucronulate at apex, usually auriculate at base, sessile or connate on the upper part of the twigs, dark green and shining above, glaucous beneath, usually glabrous. Inflorescence sessile, with 2-6(-9) flowers. Corolla (1\'b78-)2\'b75-4\'b75 cm, whitish-yellow often tinged with red; tube 3-4 times as long as limb, glandular-puberulent outside and usually pubescent within. Style more or less sericeous. Berries red. }{\i\fs28 Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.}{\fs28  Al Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par 
\par   Very variable in the shape and degree of fusion of the upper leaves.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 14. L. splendida}{\fs28  Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  Elenchus}{\fs28  54 (1838). Like }{\b\fs28 13}{\fs28  but corolla more glandular; tube about twice as long as limb; style glabrous; inflorescence with up to 30 flowers. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Mountains of S. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 15. L. caprifolium}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  173 (1753). Deciduous. Leaves and twigs subglabrous. Leaves 3-10 \'d7 2-5 cm, elliptical to broadly elliptical, obtuse, rarely acute, dark green above, glaucous beneath, sessile or shortly petiolate, those of the upper pairs below the sessile inflorescence connate to form elliptical or orbicular discs. Corolla 3-5 cm, white or yellowish, sometimes tinged with purple; tube about 1\'bd times as long as limb, glabrous or sparsely hairy. Berries red or orange-red. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  E.C. & S. Europe westwards to Italy; widely naturalized from gardens elsewhere}{\fs28 . Al Au Cz ?Gr Hu It Ju Rm Tu [Be Br Ga Ge He Hs No Po Rs (K) Su].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 16. L. etrusca}{\fs28  G. Santi,}{\i\fs28  Viaggio Montam.}{\fs28  113 (1795). Deciduous. Leaves 3-8 \'d7 1\'b75-5 cm, broadly elliptical or obovate, obtuse or subacute at apex, glaucous or whitish-green and usually puberulent beneath, those of the upper pair connate, of the next sessile or shortly petiolate. Inflorescences solitary or 2-3 together at ends of branches. Peduncle (10-)30-50(-55) mm. Corolla 3\'b75-4\'b75 cm, yellowish-white, often tinged with purple; tube c. 1\'bd times as long as limb, narrow. Berries red.}{\i\fs28  S. Europe.}{\fs28  Al Bu Co Cr Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Rs (K)].
\par 
\par 47}
\par }