{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b L. stabiana} Guss. ex C. A. Pasquale,{\i  Rendic. Reale Accad. Sci. }({\i Napoli}) {\b 14}: 142 (1875), described from S. Italy, differs in its evergreen leaves, shortly pedunculate inflorescences and yellow berries. It has been treated as a variety of both {\b 15} and {\b 16} but may be a hybrid of one of these species with {\b 14}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. L. periclymenum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 173 (1753). Deciduous. Glabrous or somewhat pubescent or glandular-pubescent. Leaves 3-9 × 1·5-5 cm, oblong to elliptical, acute or obtuse, dark green above, glaucous-green beneath, sometimes sinuate-dentate, never connate. Inflorescence a terminal head. Peduncles 25-40(-90) mm. Corolla 3·5-5·5 cm, creamy-white to yellow, often tinged with red; tube longer than limb, usually glandular-pubescent. Berries red. {\i W., C. & S. Europe, extending north-eastwards to S. Sweden.} Al Au Be Br Co Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu No Po Su [Cz].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b periclymenum}: Leaves usually subacute, glabrous or slightly pubescent beneath, the upper pair usually sessile. 2n = 18, 36, 54.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except S. Spain and S. Portugal}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b hispanica} (Boiss. & Reuter) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 322 (1879) ({\i L. hispanica} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i L. periclymenum} var. {\i glaucohirta} G. Kunze): Leaves acute, more glaucous beneath, pubescent on both surfaces especially when young, the upper pair petiolate. {\i C. & S. Spain, S. Portugal.} ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 165.       ADOXACEAE}
\par          

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit.S.M. Walters.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs. Inflorescence capitate, with one terminal and four lateral flowers. Calyx and corolla lobed; stamens epipetalous, inserted outside a nectariferous disk, and with filaments divided to the base, each half bearing a monothecous anther. Ovary 2- to 5-celled, semi-inferior; styles 4 or 5; ovules solitary in each loculus, anatropous. Fruit a small drupe; seed endospermic.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 A monotypic family.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                Adoxa}               L.
\par         

\pard\f0\fs24\qc S.M. Walters.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizomatous perennials with ternate, exstipulate leaves. Calyx and corolla pale green.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. moschatellina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 367 (1753). Delicate, glabrous plant with scaly, somewhat swollen rhizome, long slender stolons and simple, erect flowering stems 5-10 cm. Basal leaves usually 2-ternate with more or less lobed segments; cauline leaves 2, opposite, shortly petiolate, ternate, with a 3-lobed terminal leaflet. Inflorescence 6-8 mm in diameter; terminal flower with 2-lobed calyx and 4 stamens; lateral flowers with 3-lobed calyx and 5 stamens. Fruit c. 5 mm, globose, greenish. 2n = 36. {\i Woods and shady places. Most of Europe, southwards to S. France, S. Italy and Bulgaria; only on mountains in the south.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge *Hb He Ho ?Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 166.                VALERIANACEAE}
\par       

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit.S.M. Walters.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs, sometimes woody at the base. Leaves opposite, whorled or basal, exstipulate. Flowers in bracteate, often dense cymes, hermaphrodite or unisexual, usually zygomorphic. Calyx variously developed, usually toothed. Corolla infundibuliform, the tube sometimes saccate or spurred below, the limb with (3-)5 more or less unequal lobes. Stamens 1-4, usually inserted near base of corolla-tube, alternating with the corolla-lobes. Ovary inferior, 3-locular, one loculus with 1 pendent ovule, the other two sterile, sometimes very small. Fruit dry, indehiscent, usually with a persistent, often accrescent calyx; seed endospermic, with straight embryo.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  In descriptions, the term 'partial inflorescences' denotes the ultimate discrete portions of the whole inflorescence.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla-tube spurred near the base or prominently 
\par 
  gibbous near the middle; stamen 1 ........................................... {\b 5. Centranthus}
\par 
1 Corolla-tube not spurred, not or obscurely gibbous; stamens 2-4 
\par 
2 Dichotomously branched annual
\par 
3 Stamens 3, free; corolla-tube not more than twice as 
\par 
  long as limb .............................................................................. {\b 2. Valerianella}
\par 
3 Stamens 2, or 3 of which 2 are connate; corolla-tube 
\par 
  more than twice as long as limb ......................................................... {\b 3. Fedia}
\par 
2 Perennial, not dichotomously branched
\par 
4 Calyx-teeth plumose in fruit; stamens 3 ..................................... {\b 4. Valeriana}
\par 
4 Calyx-teeth not plumose in fruit; stamens 4 .................................. {\b 1. Patrinia}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.              Patrinia}             Juss.
\par       

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.O. Chater.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizomatous perennial herbs with erect, usually unbranched flowering stems. Flowers hermaphrodite, in corymbs or capitula in a terminal, dichasial inflorescence. Calyx very small, not accrescent, with ovate, obtuse teeth. Corolla with 5 subequal lobes; tube infundibuliform, obscurely gibbous near the base. Stamens 4. Stigma subentire. Sterile loculi of fruit much reduced.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. sibirica} (L.) Juss.,{\i  Ann. Mus. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Paris}) {\b 10}: 312 (1807). Stems 10-35 cm, simple, with 2 lines of hairs, without or with one pair of cauline leaves. Basal leaves 3-10 cm, oblong-obovate to -lanceolate, subentire to pinnatisect with linear-lanceolate lobes, petiolate; cauline pinnatifid to pinnatisect. Inflorescence subcorymbose. Calyx-teeth c. 1 mm. Corolla c. 6 mm, yellow. Fruit 3-4 mm, with a persistent, accrescent, reddish, ovate bracteole 6-7 mm.{\i  Rocks and bare mountain slopes. S. Ural from }52° 30' {\i to }54° 45' {\i N.} Rs (C). ({\i Temperate Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.             Valerianella}              Miller
\par    

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D. Ernet  & I.B.K. Richardson.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Erect, dichotomously branched annuals. Flowers hermaphrodite, in terminal partial inflorescences (clusters) and sometimes also solitary in the dichotomies of the inflorescence. Calyx variously developed, with up to 6(-30) teeth, sometimes absent. Corolla small, with 5 slightly unequal lobes, bluish or pinkish; tube infundibuliform, not more than twice as long as limb,
\par 

\par 
48}
\par