{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 slightly gibbous. Stamens 3. Stigma 3-fid. Sterile loculi of fruit variously developed.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Measurements and characters of fruits exclude the calyx. Most species are rather similar vegetatively and the dimensions of the vegetative parts vary very much according to habitat.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  All species grow on disturbed ground or in other dry, open habitats, many of them principally as weeds of cultivated ground. It is impossible to determine the northern limit of native distribution of many species, and no attempt has been made here to distinguish native from naturalized status. Several species are becoming rarer than formerly in N. & N.C. Europe.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: M. J. E. Coode, {\i Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  27}: 219-256 (1967). T.O.B.N. Krok, {\i Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} nov. ser.,{\b  5}({\b 1}): 1-105 (1864). F. Weberling in G. Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mittel.} ed. 2, {\b 6}({\b 2}): 111-131. München. 1970. (Coode and Weberling both have useful illustrations of fruits.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 All bracts broadly lanceolate, ovate or cordate, acute or acuminate,
\par   with wide scarious margins, mostly with long, dense cilia
\par 2 Calyx inflated, depressed-ovoid, contracted at mouth ................. {\b 9. vesicaria}
\par 2 Calyx not inflated, not contracted at mouth 
\par 3 Calyx with long, filiform, ciliate teeth .................................... {\b 5. hirsutissima} 
\par 3 Calyx not with long, filiform, ciliate teeth
\par 4 Fruit hemispherical, obtusely 3-angled; fertile loculus c. 1/2 
\par   as wide as the combined width of the sterile loculi ......................... {\b 4. pumila}
\par 4 Fruit not hemispherical, obtusely 4-angled; fertile 
\par   loculus about as wide as or wider than the combined 
\par   width of the sterile loculi
\par 5 Fruit oblong-ovoid, 11/2-2 times as long as wide; sterile
\par    loculi not more than half as large as the fertile .......... ({\b 1-3}). {\b coronata} group
\par 5 Fruit not oblong-ovoid, about as long as wide; sterile 
\par   loculi about as large as the fertile
\par 6 Calyx c. 1/2 as long as fruit; base of fruit obtuse ........................... {\b 6. kotschyi}
\par 6 Calyx at least as long as fruit; base of fruit more or
\par   less acute
\par 7 Calyx about twice as long as fruit, each tooth usually
\par   with 3 uncinate spines ................................................................ {\b 8. obtusiloba}
\par 7 Calyx about as long as fruit, each tooth with only 1
\par   uncinate spine ............................................................................... {\b 7. discoidea}
\par 1 At least the lower bracts oblong to linear-spathulate,
\par   obtuse to subacute, with scarious margins narrow or 
\par   absent, without or with usually short, sparse cilia.
\par 8 Calyx absent or reduced to minute teeth or a narrow rim;
\par   fruit sometimes with horns at apex 
\par 9 Fruit with 1-3 stout horns at apex
\par 10 Fruit with a single horn above the fertile loculus;
\par    internodes not or scarcely inflated in fruit ................................... {\b 11. martinii}
\par 10 Fruit with 3 horns, or with a single horn above one of
\par    the sterile loculi; internodes ± strongly inflated in fruit ............. {\b 15. echinata}
\par 9 Fruit without horns .
\par 11 Fertile loculus with a thickened, spongy outer wall as
\par    thick as the cavity of the loculus
\par 12 Pericarp with ± large, pellucid papillae, usually with
\par    prominent ribs on the sterile loculi ............................................... {\b 14. costata}
\par 12 Pericarp smooth or transversely rugose, usually 
\par    without prominent ribs .................................................................. {\b 10. locusta}
\par 11 Fertile loculus without a thickened, spongy outer wall
\par 13 Sterile loculi reduced to slender ribs ................... ({\b 18-19}). {\b eriocarpa} group
\par 13 Sterile loculi well-developed, often at least as large
\par    as the fertile
\par 14 Fruit longer than wide, with an oblong groove between 
\par    the sterile loculi ........................................................................... {\b 12. carinata}
\par 14 Fruit as wide as long, with an ovate-orbicular flat 
\par    area between the sterile loculi ...................................................... {\b 13. turgida}
\par 8  Calyx well-developed
\par 15 Calyx divided almost to the base into rigid, narrowly
\par    triangular, recurved uncinate teeth ............................................. {\b 22. uncinata}
\par 15 Calyx entire or with short, straight teeth
\par 16 Sterile loculi reduced to slender ribs, separated by 
\par    an ovate flat area
\par 17 Calyx more than 2/3 as long as, and as wide as fruit
\par    ................................................................................ ({\b 18-19}). {\b eriocarpa} group
\par 17 Calyx less than 2/3 as long as, and much narrower than
\par    fruit ............................................................................................... {\b 16. dentata}
\par 16 Sterile loculi well-developed, ± contiguous
\par 18 Calyx obliquely truncate, entire or obscurely dentate; sterile
\par     loculi larger or only slightly smaller than the fertile ................... {\b 17. rimosa}
\par 18 Calyx shortly 2-lipped; sterile loculi not more than 
\par    half as large as the fertile
\par 19 Fruit oblong-ovoid, 4-angled ...................................................... {\b 21. pontica}
\par 19 Fruit ovoid-globose, 3-angled .................................................. {\b 20. puberula}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 1-3}). {\b V. coronata} group. Up to 30(-40) cm. Lower cauline leaves narrowly spathulate to ovate, obtuse, entire to sinuate-dentate; middle cauline spathulate-lanceolate, coarsely toothed; upper cauline linear-lanceolate, pinnatisect at base. Bracts ovate, scarious, setose. Fruits narrowly ovoid to oblong, 4-angled, more or less densely villous; sterile loculi smaller than the fertile, extending to base of fruit, separated by an ovate, flat area; calyx campanulate or coroniform, reticulately veined, glabrous, with distinct teeth, or reduced to an irregularly toothed rim.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  A polymorphic group in which at least 3 species seem to be separable, but further investigation is required.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Sterile loculi reduced to slender ribs .......................................... {\b 3. lasiocarpa}
\par 1 Sterile loculi well-developed
\par  2 Fruit c. 2·5 mm; calyx-teeth with an uncinate arista ................... {\b 1. coronata} 
\par 2 Fruit c.1·5 mm; calyx-teeth with a ± uncinate mucro ................ {\b 2. divaricata}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. V. coronata} (L.) DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 4}: 241 (1805). Fruits c. 2·5 mm, all in dense, globose, terminal clusters which fall as a whole; sterile loculi well developed. Calyx campanulate, at least as long as fruit, divided to less than halfway into 6 triangular-acuminate teeth, each with an uncinate arista at the apex. 2n = 14.{\i  Europe, southwards from C. France, S.E. Czechoslovakia and N. Ukraine; an occasional casual elsewhere.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. V. divaricata} Lange,{\i  Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kjøbenhavn }{\b 1861}: 61( 1861). Fruits c. 1·5 mm, all in more or less dense, hemispherical, terminal clusters but falling separately; sterile loculi well developed. Calyx coroniform, shorter than the fruit, divided to about the middle into 6 shortly triangular teeth, each with a more or less uncinate mucro at the apex. •{\i  S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Variants with the calyx divided to more than halfway into triangular-acuminate teeth, each with an uncinate arista at the apex (var.{\i  hispanica} Krok), are of uncertain status.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. V. lasiocarpa} (Steven) Betcke,{\i  Animadv. Bot. Valer.} 26 (1826). Like {\b 2} but fruits c. 1·7 mm, sometimes also solitary in the uppermost dichotomies; sterile loculi reduced to more or less slender ribs. Calyx usually reduced to an irregularly 3- to 5-toothed rim, or sometimes coroniform and more or less regularly divided to about the middle into 6 triangular-acuminate teeth.{\i  Romania and S.W. part of U.S.S.R.} ?Bu Rm Rs (W, K).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. V. pumila} (L.) DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 4}: 242 (1805) ({\i V. tridentata} (Steven) Betcke). Up to 40 cm. Lower
\par 
\par 49}
\par