{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 13 Corolla-lobes glabrous; bracts small, shorter than the pedicels
\par 
   and peduncles; inflorescence long and narrowly pyramidal ...... {\b 64. saxicola}
\par 
13 Corolla-lobes more or less shortly hairy; bracts leaf-like,
\par 
   exceeding the pedicels and peduncles; inflorescence
\par 
   broadly ovoid .............................................................................. {\b 65. boryana}
\par 
4  Ovary and fruit ovoid; flowers usually in capitula;
\par 
   corolla hypocrateriform to infundibuliform (Sect. {\i Hexaphylla})
\par 
14 Stem stout, branched, more or less woody at base;
\par 
   internodes mostly more than 12, the upper distinctly longer
\par 
15 Flowers and fruit more or less hairy
\par 
16 Corolla-tube 4·5-8 mm; flowers reddish ..................................... {\b 41. incana}
\par 
16 Corolla-tube 2·5-4·5 mm; flowers whitish ............................... {\b 42. taygetea}
\par 
15 Flowers and fruit glabrous
\par 
17 Leaves (1-)2-3 mm wide, thickish, ± black when dry ............. {\b 43. rupestris}
\par 
17 Leaves 0·5-1·2 mm wide, thin, green when dry ......................... {\b 44. hirsuta}
\par 
14 Stem slender and often scarcely branched, usually herbaceous
\par 
    to the base; internodes mostly less than 12,
\par 
   the upper scarcely longer.
\par 
18 Pedicels mostly 2-5 mm; style shorter than corolla-tube ............ {\b 45. taurica}
\par 
18 Pedicels scarcely more than 2 mm, or flowers sessile;
\par 
   style usually exceeding corolla-tube 
\par 
19 Corolla-tube more than 8 mm; leaves ± lanceolate,
\par 
   densely grey-hairy ................................................................. {\b 46. arcadiensis}
\par 
19 Corolla-tube less than 6 mm; leaves narrowly lanceolate
\par 
   to linear, glabrous or only sparsely hairy 
\par 
20 Middle cauline leaves hairy 
\par 
21 Peduncles of capitula usually only half as long as the
\par 
   subtending cauline leaves; longest leaves not more 
\par 
   than 8 mm .................................................................................. {\b 47. doerfleri} 
\par 
21 peduncles of capitula (1-)2-3 times as long as the 
\par 
   subtending cauline leaves
\par 
22 Longest leaves mostly more than 15 mm; fruit c. 1·5 mm . {\b 49. hercegovina}
\par 
22 Longest leaves mostly less than 15 mm; fruit 2-2·5 mm ............... {\b 48. hirta}
\par 
20 Middle cauline leaves glabrous
\par 
23 Pedicels mostly 0·5-1·5 mm; corolla-tube 5-6 mm .............. {\b 51. hexaphylla} 
\par 
23 Flowers ± sessile; corolla-tube 3-4 mm
\par 
24 Lower part of corolla narrowly tubular; leaves usually
\par 
   more than 1·5 mm wide, narrowly lanceolate ...................... {\b 49. hercegovina}
\par 
24 Lower part of corolla broadly infundibuliform; leaves
\par 
   not more than 1·5 mm wide, linear-lanceolate ............................ {\b 50. capitata}
\par 
1  Leaves never in whorls of more than 4
\par 
25 Leaves with a short cartilaginous point or muticous;
\par 
   flowers white or pale yellowish; ovary and fruit 
\par 
   smooth (Sect. {\i Glabella} pro parte)
\par 
26 Flowers in dense capitula, surrounded by an involucre
\par 
   of leaves and long-ciliate bracts; foliage-leaves 
\par 
   10-25 mm wide ............................................................................. {\b 52. taurina}
\par 
26 Flowers in more or less lax cymes or in stalked 
\par 
   capitula with shortly ciliate or eciliate bracts;
\par 
   foliage-leaves 3·5-10 mm wide
\par 
27 Partial inflorescences capitate; corolla 4-6 mm ................... {\b 53. involucrata}
\par 
27 Partial inflorescences laxly cymose, the flowers 
\par 
   scarcely glomerate; corolla 1·3-2 mm ....................................... {\b 54. laevigata}
\par 
25 Leaves with a hyaline apex or awn; flowers purplish,
\par 
   reddish or yellowish; ovary and fruit papillose to
\par 
   tuberculate (Sect. {\i Cynanchicae})
\par 
28 Fruit (1·7-)3-4·5 mm, with squamiform tubercles or hispidulous
\par 
   (rarely glabrescent); inflorescence-branches squarrosely
\par 
    divaricate after anthesis ..................................... ({\b 33-40}). {\b graveolens} group
\par 
28 Fruit 1·5-2(-4) mm, usually more or less distinctly papillose,
\par 
   sometimes shortly hairy; inflorescence-branches not or
\par 
   scarcely squarrosely divaricate after anthesis
\par 
29 Corolla-tube 1-2 times as long as lobes
\par 
30 Alpine or montane plants, usually up to c. 15 cm;
\par 
   basal leaves ovate to obovate, densely crowded ,, ({\b 20-24}).{\b  pyrenaica} group
\par 
30 Plants of lower altitudes, usually more than 15 cm;
\par 
   basal leaves ± lanceolate, usually not densely crowded
\par 
31 Densely caespitose, distinctly woody at the base;
\par 
   cauline leaves rigid, usually linear to acicular or
\par 
   subulate ................................................................... ({\b 25-29}). {\b cretacea} group
\par 
31 Laxly caespitose or not caespitose, usually scarcely woody at
\par 
   the base; cauline leaves relatively soft, lanceolate to linear
\par 
32 Stock creeping, with underground, rooting, orange 
\par 
   stolons ................................................................................... {\b 30. occidentalis}
\par 
32 Stock ascending to erect, without rooting stolons
\par 
33 Laxly caespitose, with non-flowering shoots at anthesis;
\par 
   stems usually not more than 35 cm; inflorescence corymbose;
\par 
   corolla usually 2·5-3·5 mm .................................................... {\b 31. cynanchica}
\par 
33 Not caespitose, without non-flowering shoots at anthesis;
\par 
   stems robust, often more than 35 cm; inflorescence ovoid;
\par 
   corolla usually 2-2·5 mm ........................................................... {\b 32. rumelica}
\par 
29 Corolla-tube 2-5 times as long as lobes
\par 
34 Cauline leaves with hyaline awn 0·3-1 mm
\par 
35 Inflorescence elongate, greatly exceeding the non-flowering shoots,
\par 
   with flowers in 3 to many ± capitate clusters
\par 
36 Stems procumbent to ascending, ± herbaceous; leaves 
\par 
   (0·6-)0·8-1·8 mm wide, lanceolate to linear .................................. {\b 14. oetaea}
\par 
36 Stems ± erect, usually woody at base; leaves 0·3-
\par 
   0·7 mm wide, linear to acicular ....................................................... {\b 16. lutea}
\par 
35 Inflorescence compact, often scarcely exceeding the pulvinate
\par 
   non-flowering shoots, with flowers mostly in 1-2 ± capitate clusters
\par 
37 Non-flowering shoots glaucous-pruinose, especially 
\par 
   when young, ± glabrous ............................................................. {\b 19. boissieri}
\par 
37 Non-flowering shoots green, usually ± shortly hairy
\par 
38 Non-flowering shoots conspicuously falcate-incurved ................ {\b 15. nitida}
\par 
38 Non-flowering shoots ± straight
\par 
39 Corolla and fruit glabrous ..................................................... {\b 17. abbreviata}
\par 
39 Corolla and fruit usually with dense, patent hairs ................. {\b 18. pulvinaris}
\par 
34 Cauline leaves with hyaline apex not more than 0·3 mm
\par 
40 Inflorescence with a solitary main axis (sometimes 
\par 
   with a few lateral branches), with 1 terminal or a 
\par 
   few laxly spicate, ± capitate partial inflorescences
\par 
41 Stems more than 15 cm; inflorescence mostly with 4 or
\par 
   more ± capitate flower-clusters
\par 
42 Shoots green; leaves flaccid, the midrib comprising 
\par 
   less than ¾ of the width of the leaf ......................................... {\b 8. suffruticosa}
\par 
42 Shoots glaucous-pruinose; leaves rigid, the midrib
\par 
   comprising more than ¾ of the width of the leaf ................. {\b 9. ophiolithica}
\par 
41 Stems usually less than 15 cm; inflorescence usually
\par 
   with only 1-3 ± capitate flower-clusters
\par 
43 Plant caespitose or laxly pulvinate; internodes 1-2 
\par 
   times as long as leaves
\par 
44 Corolla 3·2-5 mm; plant with hairs up to 0·3 mm;
\par 
    fruit 1-1·5 mm ................................................................................ {\b 10. idaea}
\par 
44 Corolla 5-8 mm; plant with hairs c. 0·1 mm; fruit 2-3 mm ..... {\b 11. suberosa}
\par 
43 Plant densely pulvinate; internodes shorter (or rarely
\par 
   slightly longer) than leaves
\par 
45 Shoots ± glaucous-pruinose, almost glabrous .......................... {\b 12. gussonii}
\par 
45 Shoots green, with sparse, patent hairs ...................................... {\b 13. pumila}
\par 
40 Inflorescence usually much-branched, with numerous
\par 
   corymbiform, capitate or ± spicate partial inflorescences
\par 
46 Shoots (at least in some individuals in each 
\par 
   population) distinctly glaucous-pruinose
\par 
47 Leaves in whorls of 4, at least below the middle of 
\par 
   the stem; young ovary green
\par 

\par 
5}
\par