{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 cauline leaves narrowly spathulate to ovate, obtuse, entire to sinuate-dentate; middle cauline spathulate-lanceolate, usually coarsely toothed; upper cauline linear-lanceolate, pinnatisect at base. Bracts more or less narrowly ovate, scarious, setose. Fruits c. 3 mm, in more or less dense, hemispherical, terminal clusters and often also solitary in the dichotomies immediately below them, falling separately, hemispherical, obtusely 3-angled and the side with the sterile loculi flattened, usually glabrous, rarely villous; sterile loculi much larger than the fertile, extending to base of fruit, separated by an elliptical to ovate area, or an irregular groove. Calyx usually reduced to an indistinct, narrow rim, sometimes shortly cupuliform, irregularly 4- to 6-toothed, sometimes coroniform, shorter than or as long as the fruit, divided to about the middle into 6 triangular-acuminate teeth, each with an uncinate mucro or arista at the apex. 2n = 14. {\i S. Europe, extending northwards to Hungary.} Bu Co Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Si Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Variable especially in the development of the calyx. Plants from various parts of Europe with the calyx shorter than the fruit and divided into 6 equal teeth, each tooth with an uncinate mucro at the apex, have been called {\b V. brachystephana} (Ten.) Bertol., {\i Fl. Ital. }{\b 1}: 193 (1833) ({\i Fedia brachystephana} Ten.); plants from S. Italy (prov. Potenza) with the calyx shorter than the fruit and divided into 5 unequal teeth, each with a mucro at the apex, have been called{\b  V. laticuspis} Bertol.,{\i  Fl. Ital. }{\b 1}: 856 (1834); plants from E. France (Hautes-Alpes) with a very short cupuliform calyx divided into 4-6 unequal teeth have been called{\b  V. cupulifera} Le Grand,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  44}: 219 (1897); the status of these 3 taxa is obscure.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. V. hirsutissima} Link,{\i  Linnaea} 9: 580 (1835). Up to 15 cm. Lower cauline leaves narrowly spathulate to ovate, obtuse, entire to sinuate-dentate; middle spathulate-lanceolate, coarsely toothed; upper linear-lanceolate, pinnatisect at base. Bracts broadly ovate, scarious, ciliate. Fruits c. 3 mm, all in dense, globose, terminal clusters which fall as a whole, broadly ovoid, 4-angled, lanate; sterile loculi reduced to slender ribs extending to base of fruit, separated by an ovate, flat area. Calyx longer than fruit, hairy inside, divided almost to the base into 12-27 filiform, ciliate, uncinate teeth, united at the base by a broad, reticulately veined, hairy membrane.{\i  E. Greece, Kriti; Turkey-in-Europe.} Cr Gr Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. V. kotschyi} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 3}): 60 (1843). Like {\b 5} but bracts ovate; fruits all in more or less dense, hemispherical clusters, some of which fall as a whole, densely villous; sterile loculi about as large as the fertile, separated by an oblong groove; calyx about half as long as fruit, glabrous inside, coroniform, reticulately veined, divided to about the middle into 6 broadly triangular, indistinctly uncinate teeth.{\i  S. Ukraine; S. Bulgaria.} Bu Rs (W, K). ({\i S.W. & S.C. Asia}.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. V. discoidea} (L.) Loisel.,{\i  Not. Pl. Fr.} 148 (1810). Up to 30 cm. Lower cauline leaves narrowly spathulate to ovate, obtuse, entire to sinuate-dentate; middle cauline spathulate-lanceolate, coarsely toothed; upper linear-lanceolate, pinnatisect at base. Bracts ovate, scarious, ciliate. Fruits c. 2 mm, all in dense, globose, terminal clusters which fall as a whole, obconical to obpyramidal, obtusely 4-angled, densely villous; sterile loculi about as large as the fertile, not extending to base of fruit, separated by an oblong groove. Calyx somewhat longer than fruit, coroniform, reticulately veined, glabrous outside, usually densely hairy inside, divided to about the middle or almost to the base into 8-15 unequal, ovate-triangular teeth, each with an uncinate arista at the apex; rarely calyx with 6 subequal teeth. 2n = 14. {\i Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Variable especially in the number of calyx-teeth and in the hairiness of the inside of the calyx at the base. Plants from N.E. Spain (Ebro valley) with the calyx glabrous inside at the base, divided to the base into 12-16 narrowly ovate to triangular-acuminate teeth have been called{\b  V. multidentata} Loscos & Pardo, {\i Ser. Pl. Arag.} 49 (1863) ({\i V. coronata} subsp. {\i multidentata} (Loscos & Pardo) Nyman); their status is obscure.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b V. platiloba} Dufresne,{\i  Hist. Nat. Méd. Fam. Valér.} 59 (1811), based on a single collection probably from Portugal, is like {\b 7} but has only 6 transversely ovate, acuminate calyx-teeth, each with a more or less uncinate mucro; further information is required.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. V. obtusiloba} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 3}): 59 (1843). Up to 20(-30) cm. Leaves ovate to lanceolate, entire to dentate, the uppermost more or less pinnatisect at the base. Bracts broadly ovate, scarious, ciliate. Fruits c. 2·5 mm, all in dense, globose, terminal clusters, broadly obconical to obpyramidal, obtusely 4-angled, densely lanate; sterile loculi about as large as the fertile. Calyx about twice as long as fruit, coroniform, reticulately veined, hairy on both surfaces at the base, divided to the middle into 6 more or less equal, broadly ovate teeth, each with usually 3 or more uncinate spines.{\i  S. Greece, Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. V. vesicaria} (L.) Moench, {\i Meth.} 493 (1794). Like {\b 8} but calyx inflated, depressed-ovoid, contracted at mouth, reticulately veined, glabrous or sometimes sparsely hairy outside, the margin of the circular apical aperture with 6 equal teeth.{\i  C. & E. Mediterranean region.} Cr Gr It Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. V. locusta} (L.) Laterrade,{\i  Fl. Bordel.} ed. 2, 93 (1821) ({\i V. olitoria} (L.) Pollich). Up to 40 cm. Lower cauline leaves broadly spathulate to ovate, obtuse, entire to sinuate; middle and upper ovate-spathulate to lanceolate, entire to remotely sinuate-dentate. Bracts oblong-spathulate, obtuse, green, with scarious auricles. Fruits 1·5-2·5 mm, in dense, hemispherical, terminal clusters and usually also solitary in the lower dichotomies, falling separately, lenticular, as wide as or wider than long, glabrous to minutely puberulent; fertile loculus with a thickened, spongy outer wall as thick as the cavity of the loculus; sterile loculi as large as the fertile, separated by a shallow, longitudinal groove; pericarp smooth or transversely rugose. Calyx reduced to a minute tooth above each loculus. 2n = 16.{\i  Most of Europe, but rarer in the north.} All except Az Bl ?Cr Fa Is Rs (N) Sb.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Variable mainly in size and shape of fruit and thickening of pericarp. Plants from Portugal with ovoid-oblong, less strongly flattened achenes and the pericarp with spongy thickening forming 8 more or less prominent ribs have been called{\b  V. lusitanica} Pau ex Font Quer,{\i  Trab. Mus. Ci. Nat. Barcelona} ({\i Ser. Bot.}){\b  5}: 39 (1924); their status is uncertain.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Larger plants with obtusely 3-angled fruit c. 4 mm and with prominent spongy thickening on the sterile loculi (var.{\i  oleracea} (Schlecht.) Breistr.), as well as normal forms of the species, are cultivated for salad in various parts of Europe.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. V. martinii} Loscos,{\i  Trat. Pl. Arag. }{\b 1}: 23 (1876). Like {\b 10} but fruits c. 4 mm, sometimes falling in clusters, glabrous, with a long horn at the apex above the fertile loculus. •{\i  E. Spain} ({\i prov. Teruel}). Hs.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. V. carinata} Loisel., {\i Not. Pl. Fr. }149 (1810). Like {\b 10} but fruits narrowly oblong-ovoid, obtusely 4-angled; fertile loculus
\par 
\par 50}
\par