{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 without a thickened outer wall; sterile loculi usually smaller than the fertile, separated by an oblong, scarious groove; calyx reduced to an indistinct tooth above the fertile loculus. 2n = 16.{\i  S., W. & C. Europe, extending north-eastwards to N. Ukraine.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co ?Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. V. turgida} (Steven) Betcke,{\i  Animadv. Bot. Valer. }14 (1826). Up to 25(-40) cm. Lower cauline leaves broadly spathulate to ovate, obtuse, entire to sinuate; middle and upper ovate-spathulate to lanceolate, entire to remotely sinuate-dentate. Bracts oblong-spathulate, obtuse, green, with scarious auricles. Fruits c. 3 mm, usually all in dense, globose, terminal clusters, hemispherical, obtusely 3-angled, as wide as long, falling separately, sparsely hairy to pubescent; sterile loculi much larger than the fertile, separated by an ovate-orbicular, flat, scarious area. Calyx reduced to an indistinct tooth above the fertile loculus.{\i  S.E. Europe.} Bu Cr Gr It Ju Rm Rs (W, K) Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. V. costata} (Steven) Betcke, {\i op. cit.} 11 (1826). Like {\b 13} but fruit-bearing internodes often thickened above; fruits 1·5-3 mm, in dense, hemispherical, terminal clusters and also usually solitary in the lower dichotomies, the clusters falling as a whole, lenticular; sterile loculi larger to smaller than the fertile; pericarp with more or less large, pellucid papillae and usually with prominent ribs on the sterile loculi; calyx absent.{\i  S.E. Europe; Sicilia; Islas Baleares}. Bl Bu ?Cr Gr Ju Rm Rs (W, K) Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. V. echinata} (L.) DC. in Lam. & DC., {\i Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  4}: 242 (1805). Up to 30 cm. Lower cauline leaves spathulate, obtuse, entire to remotely sinuate-dentate; middle and upper spathulate-lanceolate, obtuse, distinctly sinuate-dentate, the uppermost often pinnatifid at the base. Bracts green, auriculate, with a distinctly scarious margin, the lower linear-spathulate, obtuse, the upper narrowly triangular, acute. Lower fruit-bearing internodes usually distinctly thickened. Fruits in capitate, terminal clusters and also solitary in several of the lower dichotomies, connate with the preceding thickened internodes, glabrous, often papillose; solitary fruits 8-10 mm, falling attached to the thickened internodes, narrowly oblong, flattened, with 1 long horn at the apex, their sterile loculi reduced to slender ribs; clustered fruits 4-6 mm, falling in clusters with the thickened internodes, oblong-ovoid, 3- to 4-angled, with 3 unequal horns at the apex, their sterile loculi unequal, one larger and one smaller than the fertile loculus; pericarp with spongy thickening. Calyx reduced to an indistinct tooth at the apex of each horn. 2n = 16. {\i S. Europe.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable in the degree of inflation of the internodes and in the development of spongy thickening of the pericarp, particularly in the S.E. part of the range of the species. Plants with relatively little thickening of the internodes, the fruits falling separately, and little spongy tissue, have been called{\b  V. soyeri} Buchinger ex Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 10}): 74 (1849). A detailed study of the pattern of variation is required before the taxonomy can be elucidated.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. V. dentata} (L.) Pollich,{\i  Hist. Pl. Palat.}{\b  1} : 30 (1776) ({\i V. morisonii} (Sprengel) DC.). Up to 30(-50) cm. Lower cauline leaves ovate-spathulate, obtuse, entire to sinuate; middle and upper narrowly ovate to oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, entire to dentate, the uppermost coarsely toothed to pinnatifid at the base. Bracts toothed or auriculate at the base, green, with narrow, scarious margins, the lower linear-spathulate, obtuse, the upper narrowly triangular, acute. Fruits 1-2·5 mm, in numerous, small, fasciculate, terminal clusters and also solitary in the lower dichotomies, falling separately, obpyriform, the side with sterile loculi flattened, subglabrous to densely hairy; sterile loculi reduced to ribs, separated by an ovate flat area. Calyx obliquely truncate, much shorter and narrower than the fruit, with unequal teeth, that over the fertile loculus acute. 2n = 16. {\i Europe, northwards to N. England and S.E. Sweden, but absent from the U.S.S.R. except the south-west; casual elsewhere.} All except Az Cr Fa Fe ?Gr Is Lu Rs (N, B) Sb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. V. rimosa} Bast. in Desv.,{\i  Jour. Bot. Appl.}{\b  3}: 20 (1814) ({\i V. auricula} DC.). Like {\b 16} but fruits ovoid-globose, obtusely 3-angled, the sterile loculi larger than (or rarely slightly smaller than) the fertile, separated by a groove; calyx usually scarcely toothed, the tooth over the fertile loculus usually obtuse. 2n = 16.{\i  W., C. & S. Europe, extending northwards to Denmark and eastwards to E. Ukraine}. Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 18-19}). {\b V. eriocarpa} group. Up to 35(-45) cm. Lower cauline leaves ovate-spathulate, obtuse, entire to sinuate; middle and upper narrowly ovate to lanceolate, the uppermost coarsely toothed. Bracts more or less auriculate at base, green, with narrow, scarious margins, the lower linear-spathulate, obtuse, the upper narrowly triangular, acute. Lower fruit-bearing internodes somewhat thickened above, more or less winged, the uppermost short and broadly winged. Fruits in numerous, small, fasciculate terminal clusters, some of which fall as a whole, and also solitary in the lower dichotomies, ovoid, the side with sterile loculi flattened, subglabrous to densely hairy; sterile loculi reduced to ribs, separated by an ovate flat area.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Two species can be recognized, and there is considerable variation in the size of the fruits and development of the calyx especially in S. Europe; further investigation is required.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Fruit 1·5-2 mm; calyx well-developed ......................................... {\b 18. eriocarpa}
\par 
Fruit c. 1 mm; calyx reduced to a narrow rim .......................... {\b 19. microcarpa}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. V. eriocarpa} Desv.,{\i  Jour. Bot. Rédigé}{\b  2}: 314 (1809). Fruits 1·5-2 mm. Calyx obliquely coroniform, almost as wide and long as fruit, with 6 usually subequal teeth. 2n = 16. {\i S. & W. Europe, northwards to Scotland, but native only in S. Europe}. Al Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju ?Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Cultivated for salad in various parts of Europe.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants with obliquely truncate, auriculiform-acuminate calyx without or with few, more or less distinct teeth have been called{\b  V. muricata} (Steven ex Bieb.) J. W. Loudon in Loudon,{\i  Hort. Brit.} ed. 4,{\i  Suppl.} 654 (1850) ( {\i V. ibizae} Sennen & Elias, {\i V. truncata} (Reichenb.) Betcke); they have 2n = 16 and their status is uncertain.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. V. microcarpa} Loisel., {\i Not. Fl. Fr.} 151 (1810). Fruits c. 1 mm. Calyx reduced to an indistinctly dentate, narrow rim. 2n = 16.{\i  Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. V. puberula} (Bertol. ex Guss.) DC., {\i Prodr. }{\b 4}: 627 (1830). Up to 40 cm. Lower cauline leaves ovate-spathulate, obtuse, entire to sinuate; middle and upper narrowly ovate to oblong-lanceolate, entire to dentate, the uppermost coarsely dentate to pinnatifid at base. Bracts dentate or auriculate at base, green, with narrow, scarious margins, the lower linear-spathulate, obtuse, the upper narrowly triangular, acute. Fruits c. 1·5 mm, in numerous, small, fasciculate, terminal clusters and also solitary in the lower dichotomies, falling separately, ovoid-globose 3-angled, densely villous; sterile loculi smaller than the fertile
\par 

\par 
51}
\par