{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 contiguous. Calyx shortly 2-lipped, the lip above the fertile loculus broadly ovate-acuminate, entire to obscurely 3-dentate, the lip above the sterile loculi about half as long, crest-like, 3-dentate.{\i  S. Italy} ({\i Calabria}), {\i Sicilia.} It Si. ({\i N. Africa.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. V. pontica} Lipsky,{\i  Univ. Izv.} ({\i Kiev}) {\b 32}({\b 2}) ({\i Ind. Sem}.): 11 (1892) ({\i V. bulgarica} Velen.). Like {\b 20} but fruits c. 2 mm, oblong-ovoid, 4-angled; calyx with lip above fertile loculus broadly ovate, obtusely 3-dentate, the lip above the sterile loculi 2- to 3-dentate. {\i S. Bulgaria; E. Krym.} Bu Rs (K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. V. uncinata} (Bieb.) Dufresne,{\i  Hist. Nat. Méd. Fam. Valér.} 60 (1811). Up to 50 cm. Lower cauline leaves broadly spathulate-oblanceolate, obtuse, sinuate to dentate; middle pinnatifid; upper pinnatisect. Bracts green, the lower linear-spathulate, obtuse, auriculate at base, the upper narrowly triangular, acute. Fruits 3-5 mm, in lax, hemispherical to globose, terminal clusters, some of which fall as a whole, and also solitary in the lower dichotomies, oblong to flask-shaped, obtusely 4-angled, subglabrous to hirsute, with more or less clavate hairs; sterile loculi reduced to slender ribs inflated at the base, separated by an ovate flat area. Calyx about as long as fruit, deeply divided into 6 narrowly triangular, rigid, patent, uncinate teeth, the tooth above the fertile loculus broader and sometimes 2-fid.{\i  E. Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i S. W. & S.C. Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.           Fedia}             Gaertner
\par   

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By I.B.K. Richardson.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Erect, dichotomously branched annuals. Flowers hermaphrodite, in terminal, usually paired capitula. Calyx usually very small, not or scarcely accrescent, with 2-4 teeth. Corolla with 5 unequal lobes; tube cylindrical, more than twice as long as limb, obscurely gibbous c. 1/3 of way from base. Stamens 2, or 3 with 2 connate. Stigma 2-fid. Sterile loculi of fruit well developed.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. cornucopiae} (L.) Gaertner,{\i  Fruct. Sem. Pl.}{\b  2}: 37 (1790) (incl. {\i F. graciliflora} Fischer & C. A. Meyer). Plant glabrous, somewhat succulent. Stems 3-30 cm, usually branched. Leaves spathulate to elliptical, the lower 2-15 cm, more or less petiolate, usually entire; the upper smaller, sessile, denticulate. Peduncles inflated in fruit. Calyx reduced to a rim. Corolla 8-16 mm, purple, with pink markings on the limb. Fruits mostly broadly ovoid; sterile loculi usually larger than fertile.{\i  Fields and waste places. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Several species have been described, mostly from N.W. Africa, based primarily on fruit-anatomy. Two of these, which can be distinguished from 1 by their small sterile loculi, have been doubtfully recorded from Portugal. They are {\b F. caput-bovis} Pomel,{\i  Nouv. Mat. Fl. Atl.} 72 (1874), with usually 2 long calyx-teeth, and {\b F. scorpioides} Dufresne,{\i  Hist. Nat. Méd. Fam. Valér.} 55 (1811), with indistinct calyx-teeth. This polymorphism extends into some other parts of the western European range of the genus, but is not well defined; the variation cannot be given formal recognition at present.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.             Valeriana}              L.
\par    

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.J. Ockendon.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizomatous perennial herbs with erect, usually unbranched flowering stems. Flowers hermaphrodite or unisexual; inflorescence cymose, usually compound, with dense or lax partial inflorescences. Calyx-teeth 5-15, linear, inrolled in flower and accrescent and plumose in fruit. Corolla with (3)5 unequal lobes; tube infundibuliform, slightly gibbous near the base. Stamens 3. Stigma 3-fid. Sterile loculi of fruit usually very small.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   The leaves of a single plant vary in size and shape, forming a series from the basal leaves to the bracts, the lower leaves being usually simple, wide, petiolate and entire, and the upper being divided, narrow, sessile and with toothed margins. Some species are strictly dioecious, some polygamous or occasionally dioecious, and others hermaphrodite. In several cases the breeding system is not fully known and cannot be ascertained with certainty from the floral morphology. In the strictly dioecious species the corollas of female plants are smaller than those of male plants. Measurements of corolla-tube refer to male or hermaphrodite flowers. Measurements of fruits exclude the calyx.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   For an extensive review of the literature, see F. Weberling in G. Hegi,{\i  Illustrierte Flora von Mitteleuropa} ed. 2,{\b  6}({\b 2}): 131-172. München. 1970.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla-tube 1-2 mm
\par 
2 Flowers white or pink
\par 
3 Cauline leaves several pairs, pinnatifid, or simple and
\par 
  ovate to obovate; flowers usually pink .............................................. {\b 9. dioica}
\par 
3 Cauline leaves absent or 1 pair and linear; flowers white .......... {\b 15. saxatilis}
\par 
2 Flowers brownish, greenish or yellowish
\par 
4 Cauline leaves ovate-elliptical to deltate, crenate or
\par 
  with a few large, obtuse teeth ...................................................... {\b 17. elongata}
\par 
4 Cauline leaves oblanceolate to linear, entire ................................. {\b 16. celtica}
\par 
1 Corolla-tube more than 2 mm
\par 
5 Upper cauline leaves pinnatifid, pinnatisect or pinnate
\par 
6 Dioecious .......................................................................................... {\b 9. dioica}
\par 
6 Hermaphrodite or polygamous
\par 
7 Plant with tubers
\par 
8 Basal leaves reniform to orbicular, cordate at base ..................... {\b 4. asarifolia}
\par 
8 Basal leaves lanceolate to obovate, entire or pinna-
\par 
  tifid, not cordate at base
\par 
9 Fruit glabrous or subglabrous on one surface, more than
\par 
  twice as long as wide ................................................................. {\b 2. dioscoridis}
\par 
9 Fruit hairy on both surfaces, about twice as long as wide ........... {\b 3. tuberosa}
\par 
7 Plant without tubers
\par 
10 Basal leaves usually divided; bracteoles ± equalling fruit ...... {\b 1. officinalis}
\par 
10 Basal leaves simple; bracteoles exceeding fruit
\par 
11 Terminal lobe of middle cauline leaves less than 
\par 
   0·3 cm wide; fruit c. 1 mm wide, square in section ............. {\b 7. globulariifolia}
\par 
11 Terminal lobe of middle cauline leaves at least 0·3 cm
\par 
   wide; fruit c. 2 mm wide, elliptical in section ........ ({\b 10-14}). {\b montana} group
\par 
5  Upper cauline leaves simple, 3-fid or 3-foliolate
\par 
12 Inflorescence with fewer than 10 flowers; corolla-tube
\par 
   at least 6 mm ............................................................................ {\b 20. longiflora}
\par 
12 Inflorescence with at least 10 flowers; corolla-tube 
\par 
   less than 6 mm
\par 
13 Stems at least 50 cm; basal leaves more than 5 cm wide
\par 
14 Upper cauline leaves with 1-2 pairs of leaflets,
\par 
   deeply and irregularly dentate .................................................... {\b 6. pyrenaica}
\par 
14 Upper cauline leaves simple, crenate or shallowly dentate ... {\b 5. alliariifolia}
\par 
13 Stems less than 50 cm; basal leaves less than 4 cm wide
\par 
15 Cauline leaves absent, or linear to lanceolate; fruit 5-6 mm .... {\b 19. saliunca}
\par 
15 Cauline leaves oblanceolate to ovate; fruit less than 5 mm
\par 
16 Stems usually less than 10 cm; calyx-teeth 6-12 mm,
\par 
   conspicuous ................................................................................... {\b 18. supina}
\par 
16 Stems usually at least 10 cm; calyx-teeth less than 
\par 
   6 mm, inconspicuous 
\par 
17 Rhizome stout; fruit square in section ......................................... {\b 8. olenaea}
\par 
17 Rhizome slender; fruit elliptical in section
\par 
18 Dioecious ....................................................................................... {\b 9. dioica}
\par 
18 Polygamous .......................................................... ({\b 10-14}).{\b  montana} group
\par 

\par 
52}
\par