{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. V. officinalis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 31 (1753). Rhizome simple, short, not very stout, sometimes stoloniferous. Stem (15-)30-150(-240) cm, usually solitary, robust, sulcate, pubescent or glabrous. All leaves usually pinnate or pinnatisect with 3-25 leaflets; leaflets linear, lanceolate or elliptical, entire or toothed. Inflorescence compound, the partial inflorescences dense. Flowers hermaphrodite, pink or white; corolla-tube 2·5-5 mm. Bracteoles about equalling fruit. Fruit 2-5 mm, hairy or glabrous. 2n = 14, 28, (49), 56. {\i  Most of Europe, but rare in the extreme south.} All except Az Bl Co Cr Fa ?Gr Sb Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Extremely variable, many taxa having been described (see especially A. Maillefer,{\i  Mém. Soc. Vaud. Sci. Nat.}{\b  8}: 277-340 (1946), E. Walther, {\i Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ges.}{\b  2}, {\i Beih.}{\b  1}: 1-108 (1949)). Diploids, tetraploids and octoploids occur, but the level of ploidy is by no means constant within the taxa described. The following 3 subspecies can usually be distinguished, but intermediates occur and are common in certain regions; it is not certain how some of the described taxa should be accommodated.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant with epigeal stolons; middle cauline leaves with
\par 
  terminal leaflet distinctly wider than the middle 
\par 
  lateral leaflets ............................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b sambucifolia}
\par 
1 Plant without stolons, or with hypogeal stolons, only;
\par 
  middle cauline leaves with terminal leaflet not wider 
\par 
  than the middle lateral leaflets
\par 
2 Leaflets of middle cauline leaves lanceolate, dentate .. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b officinalis}
\par 
2 Leaflets of middle cauline leaves linear, entire ................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b collina}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b officinalis}: Plant without stolons. Stems glabrous, with 6-13 pairs of leaves. Middle cauline leaves with 11-19 lanceolate, dentate leaflets, the terminal not wider than the middle lateral leaflets. Corolla 2·5-5 mm. Fruit 2·5-4 mm. 2n = 14. {\i Damp or dry meadows, scrub and woods. E., S.E. & E.C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden and the S. Alps and perhaps locally further west}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b collina} (Wallr.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 336 (1879): Plants without stolons or with hypogeal stolons. Stems densely patent-hairy below, with 4-7 pairs of leaves. Middle cauline leaves with 15-27 linear, entire leaflets, the terminal not wider than the middle lateral leaflets. Corolla 3-6 mm. Fruit 2-4 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Dry, often calcareous meadows, scrub and woods. W. & C. Europe, extending locally eastwards to Ukraine and S.E. Russia.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b sambucifolia} (Mikan fil.) Celak.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Böhm.} 270 (1871) ({\i V. sambucifolia} Mikan fil.,{\i  V. excelsa} Poiret): Plant with both epigeal and hypogeal stolons. Stems glabrous, with 4-9 pairs of leaves. Middle cauline leaves with 5-9 lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, dentate leaflets, the terminal distinctly wider than the middle lateral leaflets. Corolla 4-8 mm. Fruit 4-5 mm. 2n = 56.{\i  Damp, shady places. N., N.C. & E.C. Europe, extending locally to N. Italy and C. Jugoslavia.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b V. salina} Pleijel, {\i Acta Horti Berg.}{\b  8}: 80 (1925) ({\i V. murmanica} Orlova), from Fennoscandia (coastal except in the Arctic), is morphologically intermediate in some ways between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b c}), and has 2n = 56.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Several taxa, including {\b V. pratensis} Dierbach ex Walther, {\i Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ges.}{\b  2}, {\i Beih.}{\b  1}: 83 (1949), non (Bentham) Bentham ex Steudel, from the upper Rhine basin, and {\b V. stolonifera} Czern., {\i Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  18}({\b 2}): 133 (1845), from E.C. Europe and S.W. part of U.S.S.R., differ from subsp. ({\b b}) chiefly in having glabrous stems; their status is uncertain.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b V. versifolia} Brügger, {\i Jahresb. Naturf. Ges. Graubündens}{\b  29}: 98 (1886), from the Alps, differing from subsp. ({\b b}) chiefly in having the middle cauline leaves with only 11-17, more or less lanceolate leaflets, the terminal slightly wider than the lateral, is somewhat intermediate between subspp. ({\b b}) and ({\b c}); similar plants from the E. Pyrenees, but more strongly pubescent and with simple (not compound) basal leaves have been called{\b  V. hispidula} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 3}): 56 (1843) ( {\i V. officinalis} subsp.{\i  hispidula} (Boiss.) Nyman).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b V. repens} Host,{\i  Fl. Austr. }{\b 1}: 35 (1827) ({\i V. procurrens} Wallr.), from W. & W.C. Europe, differs from subsp. ({\b c}) chiefly in having the stems hairy at least below and the middle cauline leaves with 5-17 leaflets; it has 2n = 56, and may perhaps be considered as a fourth subspecies.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 1} is cultivated on a small scale in many parts of Europe for its rhizome which yields the drug valerian. This drug has also been obtained from{\b  V. phu} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 32 (1753), a species of uncertain origin but said to be native in N. Anatolia. It resembles {\b 1}, but differs in having mostly undivided basal leaves and terete stems; it has been recorded in various parts of Europe as an escape from cultivation, but does not appear to be fully naturalized.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. V. dioscoridis} Sibth. & Sm., {\i Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 21 (1806). Rhizome very short, with a cluster of fusiform tubers. Stem 25-75(-90) cm, solitary, slightly hairy. Basal leaves elliptical in outline, entire or pinnatifid; cauline leaves pinnate, with shallowly dentate leaflets. Inflorescence compound; partial inflorescences dense. Corolla-tube 4·5-6 mm, pink or white. Fruit 4-5 mm, more than twice as long as wide, hairy on one surface, glabrous or subglabrous on the other. 2n = 16.{\i  Rock-crevices rocky woods and damp grassland. Balkan peninsula, northwards to} 42° 30' {\i N}. Al Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. V. tuberosa} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 33 (1753). Rhizome short, simple, tuberous, emitting short stolons each with its own tuber. Stem (5-)10-40(-60) cm, solitary, glabrous. Basal leaves simple, elliptical or ovate, entire; lower cauline usually pinnatifid, occasionally 3-fid or entire; upper pinnatisect with more or less linear leaflets. Inflorescence simple or somewhat branched, dense. Flowers hermaphrodite, pink; corolla-tube 3·5-5 mm. Fruit 4-5 mm, about twice as long as wide, hairy on both surfaces. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry grassland. S. Europe, extending northwards to} 47° 30' {\i N. in France and }52°{\i  N. in S.E. Russia}. Al Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (C, W, K, E) Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. V. asarifolia} Dufresne, {\i Hist. Nat. Méd. Fam. Valér.} 44 (1811). Rhizome short, simple, tuberous. Stem 25-50 cm, solitary, glabrous. Basal leaves 3-12 cm wide, simple, reniform or orbicular, cordate, crenate, long-petiolate; cauline irregularly pinnatifid. Inflorescence compound; partial inflorescences dense. Corolla-tube 5-6·5 mm, pink. Fruit 4-5 mm, hairy.{\i  Calcareous rocks},400-1300{\i  m. • Kriti and Karpathos. }Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. V. alliariifolia} Adams in Weber fil. & Mohr, {\i Beitr. Naturk. }{\b 1}: 44 (1805). Rhizome simple, not very stout. Stem 50-90 cm solitary, glabrous. All leaves simple; basal and lower cauline 5-20 cm wide, ovate, cordate, more or less entire, crenate or shallowly dentate, long-petiolate; upper ovate or lanceolate. Inflorescence compound; partial inflorescences dense. Flowers hermaphrodite, pink; corolla-tube 3-4 mm. Fruit 3·5-4 mm, glabrous. {\i Woods above} 1000{\i  m. E. Greece} ({\i Evvoia}). Gr. ({\i Caucasian region and Anatolia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. V. pyrenaica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 33 (1753). Rhizome short, simple, stout. Stem 70-110 cm, solitary, robust, pubescent at nodes. Basal leaves 8-20 cm wide, simple, ovate or suborbicular, cordate, deeply and irregularly dentate, long-petiolate; upper cauline with 1 or 2 pairs of small lateral leaflets. Inflorescence
\par 

\par 
53}
\par