{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 compound; partial inflorescences more or less dense. Flowers hermaphrodite, pink; corolla-tube 2·5-3 mm. Fruit 4·5-6 mm, glabrous.{\i  Damp woods and meadows. • Pyrenees and Cordillera Cantabrica.} Ga Hs [Br Hb].
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. V. globulariifolia} Ramond ex DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  4}: 236 (1805). Rhizome branched, woody, creeping. Stems 6-25 cm, several, glabrous. Basal leaves simple, rarely 3-fid, entire, oblanceolate, spathulate, elliptical or obovate; lower cauline pinnatifid, the upper pinnatisect with 1-2 pairs of more or less linear leaflets, the uppermost sometimes simple. Inflorescence simple or somewhat compound, dense. Corolla-tube 4-5 mm, pink. Bracteoles exceeding fruit. Fruit 3·5-4·5 × c. 1 mm, square in section,glabrous. 2n = 16.{\i  Mountain rocks. • Pyrenees and Cordillera Cantábrica; one station in S.E. Spain}. Ga Hs.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. V. olenaea} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 118 (1856). Like {\b 7} but basal leaves ovate to obovate, long-petiolate; cauline leaves simple or 3-fid, with elliptical or ovate segments.{\i  Rocks, }1500-2200{\i  m. S. Greece} ({\i N. Peloponnisos}). Gr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. V. dioica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 31 (1753). Dioecious. Rhizome creeping, usually unbranched, stoloniferous. Stems 10-40(-60) cm, usually several, slightly hairy at the nodes. Basal leaves simple, ovate, oblong or elliptical, entire, long-petiolate. Inflorescence compound; partial inflorescences dense. Flowers usually pink, occasionally white; corolla-tube 1·5-2·5 mm. Fruit 2·5-3 mm, elliptical in section, glabrous. {\i Wet places. W. & C. Europe, extending northwards to S.E. Norway, eastwards to Macedonia and the western borders of the U.S.S.R., and locally southwards to S. Italy.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Su ?Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b dioica}: Cauline leaves pinnatifid. 2n = 16, 32. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b simplicifolia} (Reichenb.) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 336 (1879) ({\i V. simplicifolia} (Reichenb.) Kabath): Cauline leaves simple, ovate to obovate, entire or irregularly toothed. 2n = 16.{\i  Mainly in the eastern part of the range of the species}.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 10-14}).{\b  V. montana} group. Polygamous. Rhizome creeping. Stems 5-50 cm. Basal leaves simple, orbicular to elliptical or cordate, entire to crenate, petiolate. Inflorescence compound; partial inflorescences lax or dense. Flowers pink, white or lilac; corolla-tube 2-5 mm. Fruit 3-5 mm, elliptical in section, glabrous.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  The relationships of the species in this group are very close and are not completely understood. Intermediates between {\b 10} and {\b 11} are not infrequent and authors are not agreed as to the diagnostic characters, some even treating the two as a single species; both species are variable and have been divided into subspecies. The following key works with only a majority of specimens.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Middle cauline leaves mostly 3-foliolate, or with a 
\par   pair of small basal lobes
\par 2 Basal leaves crenate or shallowly dentate; stems several ............ {\b 10. tripteris}
\par 2 Basal leaves entire; stems solitary ............................................... {\b 14. capitata}
\par 1 Middle cauline leaves simple, sometimes pinnatifid
\par 3 Upper cauline leaves pinnatifid at least near base of leaf; 
\par   corolla-tube 4-5 mm .................................................................... {\b 12. bertiscea}
\par 3 Upper cauline leaves usually entire to dentate
\par 4 Stems 5-12 cm; corolla-tube less than 3 mm ................................... {\b 13. crinii}
\par 4 Stems 12-50 cm; corolla-tube at least 3 mm .............................. {\b 11. montana}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. V. tripteris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 32 (1753). Rhizome branched, bearing short non-flowering stems sometimes resembling stolons. Flowering stems 10-40(-60) cm, several, hairy at the nodes. Leaves of non-flowering shoots and mature basal leaves ovate, cordate, crenate or shallowly dentate, long-petiolate; middle and upper cauline leaves usually 3-foliolate or -fid with ovate or lanceolate terminal segments, sometimes pinnatifid. Flowers pink or white; corolla-tube 2-4 mm. Fruit 3-4 mm, glabrous. 2n = 16.{\i  Woods, scrub and rocky ground, usually calcicole. • From the Vosges and the Carpathians to N. Spain, S. Italy and N. Greece.} Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 
\par  
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 11. V. montana} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 32 (1753). Rhizome somewhat branched. Stems 12-50 cm, several, hairy or subglabrous. Basal leaves entire, ovate, orbicular or elliptical (rarely cordate), petiolate; cauline simple, rarely 3-fid, ovate, entire or toothed. Flowers lilac, pink or white; corolla-tube 3-5 mm. Fruit 4-5 mm, glabrous. 2n = 32.{\i  Scrub and rocky ground, mainly in mountains; usually calcicole. From E.C. France and the E. Carpathians southwards to E.C. Spain, S. Italy and S. Bulgaria.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Lu Rm Sa.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. V. bertiscea} Pancic, {\i Elench. Pl. Vasc. Crna Gora} 42 (1875). Like {\b 11} but stems 6-25 cm; lower cauline leaves sometimes pinnately lobed, the upper pinnatifid at least at the base of the leaf; corolla-tube 4-5 mm.{\i  Mountain rocks. • Balkan peninsula, from C. Jugoslavia to S.C. Greece.} Al Gr Ju.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. V. crinii} Orph. ex Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 3}({\b 2}): 119 (1856). Like {\b 11} but stems 5-12 cm; leaves simple and entire or very obscurely repand-dentate; corolla-tube 2-2·5 mm.{\i  Mountain cliffs. • Greece and Albania.} Al Gr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b V. phitosiana} Quézel & Contandr., {\i Candollea}{\b  20}: 79 (1965), from N.E. Greece, differs from {\b 13} in its basal leaves cordate at the base and 0-1 pair of cauline leaves. It may be a hybrid between {\b 13} and {\b 15}({\b b}) and has 2n = 32.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. V. capitata} Link,{\i  Jahrb. Gewachsk.}{\b  1}({\b 3}): 66 (1820). Like {\b 11} but rhizome usually unbranched; stem 5-30 cm, usually solitary, pubescent; lower cauline leaves simple or with a pair of small basal lobes, the upper 3-fid with ovate or lanceolate segments, sometimes shallowly and irregularly dentate; partial inflorescences very dense, or inflorescence more or less simple. 2n = 56. {\i Wet places. Arctic Russia and N. Ural.} Rs (N). ({\i N. Asia}.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. V. saxatilis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 33 (1753). Dioecious. Rhizome creeping, branched, covered with persistent leaf-bases. Stems several, glabrous. All leaves simple; basal elliptic-oblanceolate or lanceolate, tapering to a long petiole, entire or irregularly crenate; cauline 1 pair, linear, or absent. Inflorescence compound with the lower branches often widely separated; partial inflorescences lax or dense. Flowers white; corolla-tube 1-2 mm. Fruit 3-4 mm.{\i  Rocky ground; calcicole. • E. & E.C. Alps and adjacent lowlands; N. Appennini; Crna Gora and Albania.} Al Au Ge He It Ju.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b saxatilis}: Persistent leaf-bases fibrous. Stems 7-30 cm. Basal leaves at least 0·8 cm wide, with 3-5 main veins, pubescent or glabrous but ciliate. 2n = 24.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except the Balkan peninsula}.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Old records from the Carpathians have not been confirmed and are probably erroneous.
\par 
\par 54}
\par