{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pancicii} (Halácsy & Bald.) Ockendon,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 274 (1976) ({\i V. pancicii} Halácsy & Bald.): Persistent leaf-bases membranous. Stems 5-15 cm. Basal leaves less than 0·8 cm wide, with a single main vein, glabrous. 2n = 24.{\i  Crna Gora and Albania}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. V. celtica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 32 (1753). Dioecious. Rhizome creeping, sparingly branched. Stems (2-)5-15(-25) cm, several, glabrous. All leaves simple; basal obovate, oblanceolate or more or less linear, entire; cauline 1-2 pairs, oblanceolate or linear. Inflorescence a narrow, usually elongate panicle with small, dense partial inflorescences. Flowers yellowish or brownish; corolla-tube 1-2 mm. Fruit 2·5-3 mm, pubescent or glabrous. 2n = c. 48, c. 72, c. 96.{\i   Alpine pastures, }1800-2800{\i   m; calcifuge. • Alps.} Au Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  The range of this species comprises two areas separated by a gap of over 300 km. One extends from 6° 50' to 8° 15' E. (mainly in Piemonte), the other from 12° 15' to 15° 10' E. (mainly in Karnten and Steiermark). The plants of the eastern area have been distinguished as subsp.{\b  norica} Vierh.,{\i  Veröff. Geobot. Inst. Rübel} ({\i Zürich}) {\b 3}: 244 (1925), but the diagnostic characters appear to be too variable and ill-defined to justify subspecific status.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. V. elongata} Jacq.,{\i  Enum. Stirp. Vindob.} 205 (1762). Dioecious. Rhizome creeping, branched. Stems 5-25 cm, several, glabrous. All leaves simple; basal ovate or oblong, more or less entire; cauline 1-2 pairs, ovate-elliptical or deltate, crenate or with a few large, obtuse teeth. Inflorescence an elongate panicle with small, dense partial inflorescences. Flowers brownish or greenish; corolla-tube 1-2 mm. Fruit 2·5-3 mm, glabrous. 2n = 24.{\i  Calcareous rocks and screes,} 1400-2200 {\i m. • E. Alps.} Au It Ju.
\par 

\par 
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 18. V. supina} Ard.,{\i  Animadv. Bot. Spec. Alt.} 13 (1763). Rhizome creeping, branched. Stems 2-12 cm, several, pubescent. All leaves simple; basal spathulate or more or less orbicular, entire or irregularly crenate; cauline 1-2 pairs, spathulate or oblanceolate. Inflorescence more or less simple, dense. Corolla-tube 3-4 mm, deep pink. Fruit 1·4-5 mm, glabrous. 2n = 16.{\i  Calcareous screes,} 1800-2900 {\i m. • E. & E.C. Alps.} Au Ge He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. V. saliunca} All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem. }{\b 1}: 3 (1785). Stock short, much-branched, woody, with a stout tap-root. Stems 2-15 cm, several, glabrous. Basal leaves simple, spathulate, oblanceolate or linear-lanceolate, entire; cauline 0-1(-2) pairs, simple, rarely 3-fid, lanceolate or linear. Inflorescence more or less simple, dense. Corolla-tube 3·5-4·5 mm, deep pink. Fruit 5-6 mm, glabrous, inflated. 2n = 16. {\i Rocks and stony slopes, }1800-2700{\i  m. Alps; C. Appennini}. Au Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. V. longiflora} Willk.,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 34}: 733 (1851). Stock short, branched. Stems 0-5 cm. All leaves simple, entire, orbicular, ovate or broadly elliptical, petiolate. Inflorescence with fewer than 10 flowers, often almost buried amongst the leaves. Corolla-tube 6-12 mm, pink. Fruit 3·5-4 mm, glabrous.{\i  Rocks,} c. 1000 {\i m. • Mountains of N.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.               Centranthus}                DC.
\par     

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By I.B.K. Richardson.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, usually glaucous annual or rhizomatous perennial herbs with erect, usually unbranched flowering stems. Flowers hermaphrodite or unisexual; inflorescence cymose, usually compound, with dense partial inflorescences. Calyx-teeth 5-25, linear, inrolled in flower and accrescent in fruit to form a plumose pappus. Corolla with 5 usually unequal lobes; tube cylindrical or infundibuliform, gibbous near the middle, or spurred near the base and with an internal longitudinal membrane from the insertion of the spur to the mouth. Stamen 1. Stigma entire to 3-fid. Sterile loculi of fruit very small.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: I.B.K. Richardson, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 211-234
\par 
(1976)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Annual; at least the upper leaves ± divided
\par 
2 Corolla-tube c. 2 mm, gibbous ................................................. {\b 7. calcitrapae}
\par 
2 Corolla-tube (4-)6-8 mm, spurred ......................................... {\b 8. macrosiphon}
\par 
1 Perennial; leaves entire
\par 
3 Corolla-tube (2-)3-4 mm, gibbous ................................................ {\b 6. trinervis}
\par 
3 Corolla-tube (5-)7-18 mm, spurred
\par 
4 Corolla-tube (11-)12-18 mm
\par 
5 Stems 40-200 cm, branched above; leaves 4-12 cm ................ {\b 4. longiflorus}
\par 
5 Stems not more than 40 cm, simple or branched only at
\par 
  base; leaves 1-4 cm ................................................................... {\b 5. nevadensis}
\par 
4 Corolla-tube not more than 10(-11) mm
\par 
6 Leaves linear, mostly c. 2 mm wide; corolla-spur 2-4 mm ... {\b 2. angustifolius}
\par 
6 Leaves ± lanceolate, (3-)4-30 mm wide; corolla-spur (2-)4-10(-12) mm
\par 
7 Leaves 4-6(-12) mm wide, erect or patent; inflorescence
\par 
  capitate; stems usually simple .......................................................... {\b 3. lecoqii}
\par 
7 Leaves up to 60 mm wide, patent; partial inflorescences
\par 
  several; stems usually branched ......................................................... {\b 1. ruber}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. CENTRANTHUS. Perennial. Leaves undivided. Corolla spurred near the base. Stigma entire. Fruit glabrous.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. ruber} (L.) DC. in Lam. & DC., {\i Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  4}: 239 (1805). Stems 30-80 cm, ascending, usually branched. Leaves 30-80(-120) × (5-)10-50(-60) mm, mostly lanceolate to ovate, obtuse to acuminate, patent, the uppermost sometimes irregularly dentate, amplexicaul. Partial inflorescences several, mostly oblong. Corolla red, pink or white; tube (5-)7-10(-11) mm; spur (2-)5-10(-12) mm. {\i Walls and rocky places. Mediterranean region, Portugal; cultivated for ornament and widely naturalized elsewhere.} Al Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu ?Sa Si Tu [Au Az Be Br Cr Ge Hb He Rs (K)].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ruber}: Leaves ovate to lanceolate, the uppermost often dentate, acute. Corolla-tube (5-)7-10 mm; spur (2-)4-7 (-9) mm. 2n = 32.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sibthorpii} (Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss.) Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 491 (1930) (incl.{\i  C. velenovskyi} Vandas): Leaves lanceolate, all entire, obtuse. Corolla-tube 5-11 mm; spur 2-12 mm. •{\i  Greece,S. Albania and Aegean region.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. angustifolius} (Miller) DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 4}: 239 (1805). Stems 30-80 cm, erect or ascending, much-branched above. Leaves 30-100 × 2-4 mm, linear, obtuse, entire, patent; axillary clusters of small leaves present. Inflorescence usually capitate. Corolla pink; tube 6-9 mm; spur 2-4 mm.{\i  Screes and rocky places, mainly in the mountains. • S. & E. France, N.W. Switzerland, N. & C. Italy.} Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. lecoqii} Jordan,{\i  Pug. Pl. Nov.} 76 (1852) ({\i C. angustifolius} var.{\i  lecoqii} (Jordan) Lange,{\i  C. angustifolius} auct., non (Miller) DC.). Stems 20-60 cm, erect, simple or scarcely branched above. Leaves 20-70(-100) × 4-7(-12) mm, lanceolate, acute or acuminate, entire, erecto-patent; axillary clusters of small leaves absent. Inflorescence usually capitate. Corolla pink or lilac; tube 5-8 mm; spur 4-5 mm.{\i  Stony places on mountains. N. & E. Spain, S. France.} Ga Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Hybridization occurs between {\b 1}, {\b 2} and{\b  3} where the ranges overlap, making identification difficult.
\par 

\par 
55}
\par