{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. longiflorus} Steven, {\i Mém. Soc. Nat. Moscou }{\b 7}: 272 (1829). Stems 40-200 cm, erect or ascending, branched above. Leaves 40-100(-120) × 2-35 mm, linear to ovate, entire. Partial inflorescences several, mostly oblong. Corolla pink or lilac; tube 12-18 mm; spur (8-)10-14 mm.{\i  Greece and W. Bulgaria.} Bu Gr. ({\i S.W. Asia; N.W. Africa.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b junceus} (Boiss. & Heldr.) I.B.K. Richardson,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 228 (1976) ({\i C. junceus} Boiss. & Heldr.): Plant 40-150 cm. Leaves mostly c. 2 mm wide, linear.{\i  Mountain rocks. • Greece}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b kellereri} (Stoj., Stefanov & Georgiev) I. B. K. Richardson,{\i  op. cit.} 227 (1976) ({\i C.longiflorus} var.{\i  kellereri} Stoj., Stefanov & Georgiev): Plant usually c. 200 cm, very robust. Leaves 10-35 mm wide, ovate-lanceolate.{\i  Calcareous screes. • W. Bulgaria}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. nevadensis} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 120 (1856). Caespitose. Stems (7-)15-30(-40) cm, erect, simple or branched at base. Leaves (10-)20-40 × c..5 mm, elliptical to spathulate, obtuse. Partial inflorescences several, mostly oblong. Corolla red or pink, tube (11-)12-14 mm.{\i  Mountain rocks. S. Spain; Kriti.} Cr Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nevadensis}: Flowering stems with 4-12 cauline leaves. Corolla-spur 4-5 mm.{\i  S. Spain}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sieberi} (Heldr.) I. B. K. Richardson,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 71}: 229 (1976) ({\i C. sieberi} Heldr.) : Flowering stems with 2-6 cauline leaves. Corolla-spur 13-17 mm. •{\i  Kriti}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. NERVOSAE Rouy. Perennial. Leaves undivided. Corolla gibbous near the middle. Stigma 3-fid. Fruit glabrous.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. trinervis} (Viv.) Béguinot in Fiori & Paol.,{\i  Fl. Anal. Ital.}{\b  3}: 135 (1903) ({\i C. nervosus} Moris). Stems 20-40 cm, simple or branched. Leaves 40-70(-100) × 10-30 mm, ovate-lanceolate, obtuse. Inflorescence usually capitate. Corolla pink; tube (2-)3-4 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Rocky places. • Corse} ({\i near Bonifacio}). Co ?Sa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CALCITRAPA Lange. Annuals. At least the upper leaves lyrate-pinnatifid. Corolla gibbous or shortly spurred. Stigma 3-fid. Fruit glabrous or hairy.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. calcitrapae} (L.) Dufresne, {\i Hist. Nat. Méd. Fam. Valér.} 39 (1811). Stems 4-40(-75) cm, simple or branched. Leaves 10-90 × 6-40 mm, orbicular to obovate in outline, the lobes entire to incise-serrate. Partial inflorescences several, capitate. Corolla pink or white, gibbous or shortly spurred with the spur not exceeding the base of the tube; tube 1-2(-3) mm. 2n = 32. {\i Waste places. S. Europe.} Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in characters of leaf and flower, but there is little correlation with geography. Two subspecies are recognized.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b calcitrapae}: Fruit glabrous. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b trichocarpus} I. B. K. Richardson, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 232 (1976): Fruit hirsute. •{\i  S. & S.E. Spain; Islas Baleares}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. macrosiphon} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 1}({\b 3}): 57 (1843). Stems 10-50 cm, branched. Leaves 30-50 × 10-30 mm, obovate to broadly elliptical in outline, the lobes entire or dentate. Partial inflorescences several, capitate. Corolla pink, red at mouth, the spur c. 1 mm; tube (4-)6-8 mm. Fruit glabrous, rarely hirsute. 2n = 32.{\i  Rocky and waste places. S. & S.E. Spain.} Hs [It].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Variable in vegetative and floral characters, and division into several subspecies may be justified when more material is available.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 167.         DIPSACACEAE}
\par       

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.M. Moore.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs, rarely shrubs. Leaves opposite or verticillate, exstipulate. Florets in a dense, cymose capitulum subtended by involucral bracts, often with marginal flowers radiate, rarely in a spike of verticillasters. Florets hermaphrodite or female, usually zygomorphic, each with a basal epicalyx ({\i involucel}) of connate bracteoles which may be expanded distally into a{\i  corona}, often subtended by a receptacular scale. Calyx small, cupuliform or divided into 4-5 teeth or of numerous teeth or setae. Corolla-lobes 4-5, subequal, or corolla 2-lipped. Stamens 2 or 4, epipetalous, alternating with corolla-lobes. Ovary inferior, 1-locular; ovule 1, pendent; stigma simple or 2-lobed. Fruit dry, indehiscent, enclosed in epicalyx and often surmounted by persistent calyx; seed 1, endospermic, with straight embryo.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Inflorescence a spike of verticillasters ........................................... {\b 1. Morina}
\par 
1 Inflorescence of 1 or more capitula
\par 
2 Stems with prickles ..................................................................... {\b 3. Dipsacus}
\par 
2 Stems without prickles
\par 
3 Involucral bracts connate in basal half; calyx-setae 
\par 
  present only in central florets of capitulum .......................... {\b 10. Pycnocomon}
\par 
3 Involucral bracts free; calyx-setae present or absent 
\par 
  in all florets
\par 
4 Calyx-setae plumose
\par 
5 Fruiting involucel with longitudinal furrows running 
\par 
  the whole length .................................................................... {\b 7. Pterocephalus}
\par 
5 Fruiting involucel with 8 pits in distal half, furrowed
\par 
  below ...................................................................................... {\b 9. Tremastelma}
\par 
4 Calyx-setae absent or, if present, not plumose
\par 
6 Calyx-setae or -teeth (6-)8-16(-24); receptacle hairy,
\par 
  without scales ................................................................................. {\b 6. Knautia}
\par 
6 Calyx-setae or -teeth 4-5 or absent; receptacle not 
\par 
  hairy, with scales
\par 
7 Marginal florets radiate; corolla 5-lobed ..................................... {\b 8. Scabiosa}
\par 
7 Marginal and central florets subequal; corolla 4-lobed
\par 
8 Involucral bracts in more than 3 rows ...................................... {\b 2. Cephalaria}
\par 
8 Involucral bracts in 1-3 rows
\par 
9 Calyx-setae 4-5 involucel angled ................................................... {\b 4. Succisa}
\par 
9 Calyx-setae absent; involucel ± terete ....................................... {\b 5. Succisella}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.            Morina}              L.
\par    

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J.F.M. Cannon.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Leaves verticillate, spinose. Inflorescence a spike of many-flowered, bracteate verticillasters. Involucre long, infundibuliform, spiny. Calyx deeply 2-lobed. Corolla with curved tube, distinctly 2-lipped. Fertile stamens 2. Fruit with an oblique apex, rugose.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. persica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 28 (1753). Robust plant 30-90 cm. Leaves 15-20 × 1-2 cm, linear to elliptical, dentate to pinnatifid, glabrous. Verticillasters rather distant; bracts 2-4·5 × c. 1 cm ovate-triangular, sometimes pinnatifid near base, with marginal spines up to c. 1 cm. Calyx-lobes subequal, entire or emarginate.
\par 

\par 
56}
\par