{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 Corolla-tube c. 3 cm, villous, the lips patent, pink.{\i  Rocky places, mainly in the mountains. S. & E. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Macedonia, said to have short leaf-lobes, less conspicuous bracts with shorter spines, and rather globose verticillasters, have been recognized as subsp.{\b  turcica} Halácsy,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  41}: 409 (1891), but probably do not merit recognition at this level.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.          Cephalaria}            Schrader
\par   
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By I.K. Ferguson.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, biennial or perennial herbs, rarely shrubs. Capitulum ovoid or subglobose. Receptacular scales scarious. Involucel 4 or 8-angled, 8-ridged, usually with 4 or more setae. Calyx cupuliform. Corolla 4-fid, blue, lilac, white or yellow.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: Z. Szabó, {\i Math. Term. Közl.}{\b  38}: 1-352 (1940).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Shrub; leaves coriaceous ......................................................... {\b 1. squamiflora}
\par 1 Herb; leaves not coriaceous
\par 2 Involucel with minute teeth or entire
\par 3 Involucel not constricted at throat, with a short 
\par   scarious corona ............................................................................ {\b 2. leucantha}
\par 3 Involucel constricted at throat, without a scarious corona
\par 4 Leaves pubescent ............................................. {\b 3. radiata}
\par 4 Leaves glabrous
\par 5 Basal leaves entire or weakly lobed ......................... {\b 5. coriacea}
\par 5 Basal leaves pinnatisect ................................... {\b 4. laevigata}
\par 2 Involucel with 4 or 8 prominent setae or teeth
\par 6 Involucral bracts with long spines at least as long as
\par   remainder of bract ........................................... {\b 7. syriaca}
\par 6 Involucral bracts with spines much shorter than 
\par   remainder of bract
\par 7 Receptacular scales sericeous or villous ..................... {\b 13. alpina}
\par 7 Receptacular scales appressed-pubescent
\par 8 Leaf-lobes glabrous or ciliate ......................... {\b 12. pastricensis}
\par 8 Leaf-lobes pubescent or sericeous
\par 9 Receptacular scales 4·5-6 mm ................................. {\b 9. joppica}
\par 9 Receptacular scales 7-15 mm
\par 10 Receptacular scales 12-15 mm; involucel with 4 setae
\par    1/4-1/2 as long as tube ............................................................ {\b 10. ambrosioides}
\par 10 Receptacular scales 7-12 mm; involucel with setae not
\par    more than 1/4 as long as tube
\par 11 Corolla 15-18 mm ................................................................... {\b 14. litvinovii}
\par 11 Corolla less than 15 mm
\par 12 Involucral bracts lanceolate, acute or acuminate .............. {\b 8. transsylvanica}
\par 12 Involucral bracts ovate, obtuse
\par 13 Leaves pinnatisect or lyrate; lobes ovate, elliptical
\par    or ovate-lanceolate, serrate-dentate ................................................. {\b 11. flava}
\par 13 Leaves entire or pinnatisect; lobes oblong or ob
\par    lanceolate, entire or weakly lobed ............................................... {\b 6. uralensis}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. squamiflora} (Sieber) W. Greuter,{\i  Candollea}{\b  22}: 235(1967). Shrub up to 90 cm. Leaves 4-17 × 1·5-5 cm, ovate-lanceolate to oblanceolate, entire, crenate or rarely weakly lyrate, coriaceous, tapering to a distinct petiole. Involucral bracts 4-6 × 3-5 mm, ovate, appressed-pubescent. Receptacular scales 6-7 × 3-4 mm, obovate-lanceolate. Corolla 9-12 mm, yellow or white. Involucel c. 6 mm in fruit, 4-angled.{\i  Crevices of calcareous rocks. Mediterranean islands.} Bl Co Cr Sa.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b balearica} (Willk.) W. Greuter, {\i op. cit.} 236 (1967). Young leaves ovate. Teeth of mature leaves often ciliate. Involucral bracts obtuse to subacute. Involucel with a scarious corona c. 1 mm, more or less dentate.{\i  Islas Baleares, Corse, Sardegna}.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b squamiflora} ({\i C. sieberi} Szabó): Young leaves often orbicular. Teeth of mature leaves not ciliate. Involucral bracts acute. Involucel with 4 short teeth on the angles and 4 very short intermediate teeth.{\i  Kriti, Karpathos}.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. leucantha} (L.) Roemer & Schultes, {\i Syst. Veg. }{\b 3}: 47 (1818) ({\i C. boetica} Boiss.). Perennial herb up to 100 cm, with a woody stock. Leaves 5-20 × 3-8(-10) cm, pinnatisect, glabrous or sometimes hairy, with linear or lanceolate, dentate, crenate-dentate or lobed segments. Involucral bracts 5-7 × 2-5 mm, ovate, obtuse or subacute, appressed-pubescent. Receptacular scales 7-9 × 3-5 mm, obovate-lanceolate to spathulate, acute or subacute. Corolla 10-15 mm, yellow or white. Involucel c. 6 mm in fruit, 4-angled, with a dentate or entire, ciliate, scarious corona. 2n = 18.{\i  Dry, stony places. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Al Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  C. linearifolia} Lange, {\i Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kjøbenhavn}{\b  1877-1878}: 226 (1878), from the mountains of S. Spain (Sierra Nevada), resembles {\b 2} but has longer, more or less entire or weakly lyrate or pinnatisect leaves, with few, entire, linear-lanceolate lobes. It should perhaps be treated as a distinct species but more information is required.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. radiata} Griseb. & Schenk,{\i  Arch. Naturgesch.} ({\i Berlin}) {\b 18} ({\b 1}): 351 (1852). Perennial herb 60-120 cm. Leaves 12-40 × 4-10 cm, lyrate or more regularly pinnatisect, with up to 7 pairs of ovate-lanceolate lateral lobes and a larger lanceolate terminal lobe, the lobes dentate or serrate and pubescent; cauline leaves often linear, glabrous or ciliate, long-petiolate. Involucral bracts 4-7 × 3-5 mm, ovate, obtuse, puberulent or appressed-pubescent. Receptacular scales 7-9 × 3-4 mm, obovate-lanceolate to spathulate, acute or subacute. Corolla 12-17 mm, yellow. Involucel c. 5 mm in fruit, with distinct ribs, constricted at apex, with minute, straight teeth, without a distinct collar or aristae.{\i  Dry pastures. Mountains of Romania.} Rm.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. laevigata} (Waldst. & Kit.) Schrader,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Gotting. }{\b 1821}: [2](1821). Like {\b 3} but basal leaves pinnatisect with linear or linear-lanceolate, entire lobes, rarely entire, glabrous, subcoriaceous; cauline leaves minutely puberulent; receptacular scales lanceolate, acuminate; involucel with inconspicuous ribs, the teeth minute, incurved. {\i Dry rocky places, mainly in the mountains. • C. & S.W. Romania, N.E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Ju Rm.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. coriacea} (Willd.) Roemer & Schultes ex Steudel,{\i  Nomencl. Bot.} ed. 2, {\b 1}: 327 (1840). Like {\b 3} but basal leaves elliptic- or linear-lanceolate, entire, very weakly lobed or obscurely crenate glabrous; cauline leaves lyrate or pinnatisect, rarely entire, receptacular scales ovate or oblong-lanceolate, acute, cuspidate; involucel with inconspicuous ribs, the teeth minute, incurved.{\i  Dry, stony slopes. Mountains of Krym.} Rs (K).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. uralensis} (Murray) Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  3}: 50 (1818) (incl. {\i C. demetrii} Bobrov). Perennial herb up to 100 cm. Basal leaves 10-21 × 3-5 cm, lyrate or pinnatisect, with 2 to 4 pairs of oblong or oblanceolate lateral lobes and a larger terminal lobe, entire or very weakly lobed, pubescent, long-petiolate; cauline leaves pinnatisect, the lobes oblong-linear. Involucral bracts 3*5-9 × 3-5 mm, ovate, obtuse, puberulent or appressed-pubescent. Receptacular scales 8-12 × 2*5-4 mm, lanceolate, acute or acuminate. Corolla 8-14 mm, yellow. Involucel c. 5 mm in fruit, 4-angled, with 4 teeth up to 1/4 as long as tube and 4 very short intermediate teeth. 2n = 18. {\i Dry places. S.E. Europe, extending northwards to} c. 54°{\i  N. in C. Russia.} Bu ?Gr Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par 
\par 57}
\par