{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 7. C. syriaca} (L.) Roemer & Schultes, {\i op. cit.} 45 (1818). Annual up to 90 cm, more or less setose. Leaves 3-15 × 1·5-3·5 cm, oblong-lanceolate to ovate-elliptical, entire, dentate to weakly lobed, sessile or shortly petiolate; cauline leaves sometimes connate at base. Involucral bracts 3-4 × 1·5-2·5 mm, ovate to broadly triangular, acuminate, appressed-pubescent or -puberulent. Receptacular scales 8-12 × 3-5 mm, oblong, with terminal spines as long as or longer than limb. Corolla 8-14 mm, blue or lilac. Involucel 4-5 mm in fruit, 8-angled, with 4 ridges produced into setae ½ as long as to as long as tube and 4 small intermediate ridges with short setae up to ¼ as long as tube. {\i Cultivated fields and waste places; a frequent casual in S. Europe and naturalized in France and Spain and perhaps elsewhere}. [ ?Bu Ga ?Gr Hs ?It ?Si.] ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. transsylvanica} (L.) Roemer & Schultes,{\i  loc. cit.} (1818). Annual up to 120 cm. Leaves 5-12 × 1-5 cm, lyrate or pinnatisect, with elliptic- to linear-lanceolate or linear lobes, entire or serrate-dentate or irregularly lobed, more or less pubescent. Involucral bracts 5-8 × 2-3 mm, lanceolate, acute or acuminate. Receptacular scales 7-10 × 2·5-4 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acute or acuminate, with short spine and purple vein at apex, long-ciliate. Corolla 10-12 mm, blue or yellow. Involucel 5-6 mm in fruit, 8-angled, with 8 equal setae about ¼ as long as tube. 2n = 18. {\i S.E. Europe, extending westwards to Sicilia and S. France, and northwards to S. Czechoslovakia.} Al Bu Cz Ga Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E) Si Tu [Au].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. joppica} (Sprengel) Béguinot in Fiori & Paol., {\i Fl. Anal. Ital.}{\b  3}: 144 (1903). Annual up to 90 cm. Leaves 7-18 × 3-9 cm, lyrate, with oblong or oblong-ovate, dentate, crenate-dentate or serrate lobes, more or less pubescent; cauline leaves with linear lobes. Involucral bracts 2-3·5 × 1·5 mm, ovate or orbicular, obtuse, appressed-pubescent or puberulent. Receptacular scales 4·5-6 × 2-3 mm, spathulate, mucronate. Corolla c. 9 mm, white or pink. Involucel c. 4 mm in fruit, 8-angled, with 8 subequal setae ¼-½ as long as tube.{\i  Roadsides. S. Italy, Sicilia.} It Si. ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. ambrosioides} (Sibth. & Sm.) Roemer & Schultes, Syst. Veg. 3: 45 (1818). Robust perennial herb up to 150 cm. Leaves 15-32(-40) × 5-11(-15) cm, pinnatisect or lyrate, with ovate-lanceolate or ovate, crenate-dentate or doubly dentate lobes, more or less pubescent or sericeous. Involucral bracts 4-9 × 3-4 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acute or obtuse. Receptacular scales 12-15 × 2·5-4 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, with short terminal spine. Corolla c. 12 mm, yellow. Involucel 8-10 mm in fruit, 8-angled, with 4 setae 1/4-1/2 as long as tube and 4 very short intermediate teeth. Rocky and bushy places. C. & N. Greece, S. Jugoslavia, S. Albania. Al Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. flava} (Sibth. & Sm.) Szabó, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  24}: 6 (1926). Perennial herb up to 90 cm, somewhat woody at base; stems pubescent, sericeous or glabrous. Leaves 7-16 × 2-5 cm, lyrate or pinnatisect, with ovate, elliptical or ovate-lanceolate, serrate-dentate lobes, more or less pubescent or sericeous. Involucral bracts 3-5 × 2-2·5 mm, ovate, obtuse. Receptacular scales 8-11 × 1·5-2·5 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acute or acuminate. Corolla c. 12 mm, yellow. Involucel 6-8 mm in fruit, 8-angled, with 4 teeth c. 1 mm and 4 shorter, intermediate teeth. •{\i  C. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b C. setulifera} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  3}: 124 (1875), from E. Greece, which differs from {\b 11} in its setose leaves and stems, lyrate leaves with small linear lateral lobes, and larger setae or teeth on the involucel, may be specifically distinct.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. pastricensis} Dörfler & Hayek,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  70}: 19 (1921). Robust perennial herb up to 200 cm. Leaves 18-30 × 8-15 cm, pinnatisect, glabrous or ciliate, with 4-7 pairs of lanceolate or oblong, serrate-dentate lobes, the upper lobes decurrent on the midrib. Involucral bracts 5-7 × 4-5 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acute or subacute, purplish-black at apex. Receptacular scales 6-8 × 3-4 mm, spathulate, acuminate, ciliate, glabrous or appressed-pubescent, purplish-black at apex. Corolla c. 14 mm, yellow. Involucel c. 8 mm in fruit, 8-angled, with 4 setae ¼ as long as tube and 4 shorter intermediate setae.{\i  Mountain pastures. • C. Jugoslavia, Albania.} Al Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. C. alpina} (L.) Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  3}: 43 (1818). Robust perennial herb up to 200 cm. Leaves 15-42 × 8-18 cm, pinnate or lyrate, pubescent or villous on veins, with 3-8 pairs of oblong-lanceolate, serrate-dentate leaflets, the upper leaflets decurrent, the terminal leaflet often larger than the lateral. Involucral bracts 6-7 × 3·5-4 mm, triangular-lanceolate, acute, sericeous or villous. Receptacular scales 9-12 × 2-3 mm, oblong-spathulate, acuminate, sericeous or villous, with terminal spine. Corolla c. 12 mm, yellow. Involucel 9-12 mm in fruit, 8-angled, with 4 setae c. 1·5 mm and 4 intermediate setae c. 1 mm. •{\i  S.W. & C. Alps, Jura, N. Appennini.} Au Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. C. litvinovii} Bobrov, {\i Bot. Zur.}{\b  17}: 495 (1932). Robust perennial herb up to 200 cm; stems glabrous below, pubescent above. Leaves 15-50 × 8-20 cm, pinnatisect or lyrate, pubescent, with 4-6 pairs of lanceolate, serrate-dentate lobes, the upper lobes decurrent, the terminal lobe larger than the lateral. Involucral bracts c. 6 × 5 mm, ovate or ovate-lanceolate, acute or subacute, appressed-pubescent. Receptacular scales 8-10 × 3 mm, lanceolate or spathulate, long-acuminate, appressed-pubescent, ciliate. Corolla 15-18 mm, yellow. Involucel c. 9 mm in fruit, 8-angled, with 4 setae c. 1 mm and 4 slightly shorter intermediate setae.{\i  In ravines, among scrub. • S.C. Russia} ({\i very local}). Rs (C, ?E).
\par 

\par 
 
\pard\f0\fs28  Doubtfully distinct from the Caucasian{\b  C. gigantea} (Ledeb.) Bobrov, {\i op. cit.} 490 (1932) ({\i C. tatarica} auct., non Roemer & Schultes), which is sometimes cultivated for ornament and occasionally escapes.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.           Dipsacus}           L. 
\par           

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A. Hansen.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Stout, biennial herbs, with prickly stems more or less branched above. Leaves opposite, often connate. Capitulum globose to subglobose, ovoid or cylindrical. Involucral bracts in 1-2 rows, linear or lanceolate, erect to patent, with apical spine. Receptacular scales more or less spine-tipped. Involucel more or less 4-angled, united with the ovary below and ending in a short, more or less 4-lobed cup. Calyx cupuliform, ciliate, persistent in fruit. Corolla with a long tube, unequally 4-fid. Achenes 4-angled, appressed-hairy.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Cauline leaves shortly petiolate; capitula globose;
\par 
  involucral bracts and receptacular scales similar
\par 
2 Capitula 1·5-2 cm; receptacular scales 10-12 mm .......................... {\b 7. pilosus} 
\par 
2 Capitula 2·5-4 cm; receptacular scales 15-20 mm ....................... {\b 8. strigosus} 
\par 
1 Cauline leaves sessile; capitula subglobose to ovoid or cylindrical;
\par 
   involucral bracts and receptacular scales dissimilar
\par 
3 Upper cauline leaves free at base .................................................. {\b 1. gmelinii}
\par 
3 Upper cauline leaves connate at base
\par 
4 Receptacular scales equalling florets, with recurved,
\par 
  rigid apical spine .............................................................................. {\b 2. sativus}
\par 
4 At least the lower receptacular scales exceeding florets,
\par 
   with straight or slightly recurved, flexible apical spine
\par 
5 Capitula subglobose to ovoid; involucral bracts ± 
\par 
  patent or recurved ............................................................................... {\b 6. ferox}
\par 
5 Capitula ovoid-cylindrical; involucral bracts curved upwards
\par 

\par 
58}
\par