{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min56}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min56}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1005}{\nofchars5731}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 6 Cauline leaves crenate-serrate to entire; involucral 
\par   bracts linear ................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. fullonum}{\fs28 
\par 6 Cauline leaves laciniate or pinnatifid; involucral 
\par   bracts lanceolate-subulte
\par 7 Involucral bracts shorter than florets; receptacular 
\par   scales ciliate but otherwise glabrous ............................................ }{\b\fs28 4. laciniatus}{\fs28 
\par 7 Involucral bracts much longer than florets; recep-
\par   tacular scales densely arachnoid-hairy and ciliate ........................ }{\b\fs28 5. comosus}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. D. gmelinii}{\fs28  Bieb.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 92 (1808). Stems 50-150 cm, densely covered with slender prickles. Basal leaves in a rosette, ovate-spathulate, narrowed to a long petiole, crenate-serrate; cauline leaves ovate-lanceolate, sessile, free at base, the lower deeply serrate-laciniate, the upper laciniate, with ascending, linear-lanceolate, acuminate segments. Capitula subglobose. Involucral bracts few, linear-lanceolate, spinose-ciliate, with apical spine curved upwards; receptacular scales linear-lanceolate, spinose-ciliate, exceeding florets. Corolla bluish. Achenes c. 4 mm, light brown.}{\i\fs28  Damp lake-shores and river-banks. S.E. Russia, S.E. Ukraine; one station in S.E. Romania.}{\fs28  Rm Rs (W, E). (}{\i\fs28 W.C. Asia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. D. sativus}{\fs28  (L.) Honckeny,}{\i\fs28  Vollst. Syst. Verz.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 374 (1782) (}{\i\fs28 D. fullonum}{\fs28  sensu Miller, non L.). Stems 50-200 cm, stout, erect, prickly on the angles. Basal leaves in a rosette, oblong-elliptical or oblanceolate, entire; cauline leaves sessile, linear-lanceolate, distantly crenate-dentate, connate at base. Capitula 3-9 cm, ovoid. Involucral bracts lanceolate-subulate, unequal, more or less patent. Receptacular scales spinose-ciliate, with a rigid, recurved apical spine, equalling florets. Corolla pinkish-purple. Achenes 3-4 mm, light brown, sulcate. 2n = 18. }{\i\fs28 Cultivated, formerly widely and still locally, for the dried inflorescences used in preparing cloth; naturalized in parts of S., W. & C. Europe}{\fs28 . [Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K).] (}{\i\fs28 Origin uncertain; probably derived from}{\b\fs28  6}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. D. fullonum}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  97 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 D. sylvestris}{\fs28  Hudson). Like }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 but cauline leaves crenate-serrate to entire; capitula ovoid-cylindrical; involucral bracts curved upwards, linear, unequal, the longest equalling or exceeding florets. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Woods, stream-sides and waste places. S., W. & C. Europe, extending to N.E. Ukraine}{\fs28 . Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Da].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. D. laciniatus}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  97 (1753). Like }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 but stems covered with slender prickles; cauline leaves pinnatifid with patent, obtuse lobes; capitula ovoid-cylindrical; involucral bracts lanceolate-subulate, unequal, curved upwards, not exceeding florets; receptacular scales with long, straight apical spine, exceeding florets; corolla pale pink; achenes c. 5 mm, blackish-brown. 2n = 16, 18. }{\i\fs28 Meadows, stream-sides and waste places. Europe northwards to C. France, N. Germany and N. Ukraine}{\fs28 . Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He ?Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W, K, E) Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. D. comosus}{\fs28  Hoffmanns. & Link,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Port.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 81 (1820). Stems 30-270 cm, stout, erect, prickly on the angles. Basal leaves in a rosette, sessile, sinuate; cauline leaves sessile, pinnatipartite, the upper linear, entire, connate at base, prickly beneath. Capitula 4-6 cm, ovoid-cylindrical. Involucral bracts lanceolate-subulate, with apical spine, distantly prickly on margins and midrib beneath, somewhat curved upwards, much exceeding florets. Outer receptacular scales lanceolate, densely arachnoid-hairy and ciliate, with long, slightly curved, flexible apical spine, equalling florets; inner sometimes like the involucral bracts. Corolla pinkish. Achenes 4-5 mm, blackish-brown, sulcate.}{\i\fs28  Dry, stony places. S. half of Iberian peninsula.}{\fs28  Hs Lu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. D. ferox}{\fs28  Loisel.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Gall.}{\fs28  719 (1807) (incl.}{\i\fs28  D. bulgaricus }{\fs28 Hayek). Stems 20-60 cm, densely covered with stout prickles. Basal leaves oblong-lanceolate, crenate-sinuate; cauline leaves sessile, pinnatifid, the upper sometimes entire, with prickles above and beneath, connate at base. Capitula 3-4 cm, subglobose to ovoid. Involucral bracts linear-lanceolate, spiny, more or less patent or recurved. Outer receptacular scales shortly acuminate, exceeding florets, the inner like the involucral bracts, more or less patent. Corolla pale purplish. Achenes c. 4 mm, blackish-brown, sulcate. }{\i\fs28 Wet, stony places. Corse and Sardegna; a few stations in C. Italy.}{\fs28  Co It Sa [Bu].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 7. D. pilosus}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  97 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 Cephalaria pilosa}{\fs28  (L.) Gren.). Stems 30-120 cm, erect, sparsely prickly. Basal leaves in a rosette, ovate, narrowed to a long petiole; cauline leaves shortly petiolate, ovate-elliptical, with a basal pair of unequal, elliptical leaflets, or sometimes simple. Capitula 1\'b75-2 cm, globose. Involucral bracts narrowly triangular, with apical spine, white-hispid, the receptacular scales 10-12 mm, similar. Corolla whitish. Achenes 4-5 mm, brown. 2n = 18. }{\i\fs28 Damp or shady places. W. & C. Europe, extending to Denmark, C. Italy, and locally eastwards to S.E. Russia.}{\fs28  Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 8. D. strigosus}{\fs28  Willd. in Roemer & Schultes,}{\i\fs28  Syst. Veg.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 : 520 (1818). Like }{\b\fs28 7}{\fs28 but generally larger in all its parts; stems up to 200 cm; capitula 2\'b75-4 cm; involucral bracts and receptacular scales less hairy, the latter 15-20 mm; corolla pale yellow; achenes 4-4\'b75 mm, greyish-brown, with black streaks.}{\i\fs28  S. Russia and Ukraine; introduced and more or less naturalized elsewhere in Europe}{\fs28 . Rs (C, W, K, E) [Br Cz Da Po Su].
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28  4.          Succisa}{\fs28              Haller
\par      }{\fs24 By J.F.M. Cannon
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial herbs. Capitula hemispherical, long-pedunculate. Involucel 4-angled. Calyx shallowly cupuliform, with (4-)5 persistent setae. Marginal and central florets subequal. Corolla-lobes subequal.
\par 
\par  Literature: L. Baksay,}{\i\fs28  Ann. Hist.-Nat. Mus. Hung.}{\fs28  nov. ser.,}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 237-259 (1952).
\par 
\par Basal and middle cauline leaves entire, or rarely slightly dentate .. }{\b\fs28 1. pratensis}{\fs28 
\par Basal leaves crenate-serrate, the middle cauline lobed ................ }{\b\fs28 2. pinnatifida}{\fs28 
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. S. pratensis}{\fs28  Moench,}{\i\fs28  Meth.}{\fs28  489 (1794) (}{\i\fs28 Scabiosa succisa}{\fs28  L.). Glabrous to pubescent, with ascending to erect stems up to 100 cm. Basal leaves 5-30 cm, narrowly obovate to narrowly elliptical, entire or rarely slightly dentate. Capitula gynodioecious, the hermaphrodite up to 3 cm in diameter, terminal, the female smaller. Corolla 4-7 mm, lilac to dark violet-blue, rarely white or pinkish. Fruit c. 5 mm. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  Most of Europe except for the extreme north and parts of the Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  All except Az Bl Co Cr Rs (K) Sa Sb Si Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. S. pinnatifida}{\fs28  Lange, }{\i\fs28 Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kj\'f8benhavn}{\b\fs28  1861}{\fs28 : 63 (1861). Like }{\b\fs28 1 }{\fs28 but covered with rather long, appressed hairs; stems not more than 60 cm, rather rigid; basal leaves crenate-serrate; capitula c. 1\'b75 cm in diameter.}{\i\fs28  Heaths and rocky places. \bullet  N.W. Spain, N. Portugal.}{\fs28  Hs Lu.
\par 
\par 59}
\par }