{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 48 Corolla less than 7 mm, yellowish; leaves 15-40 mm ........... {\b 4. crassifolia}
\par 
48 Corolla more than 7 mm, purplish; leaves 7-15 mm .................... {\b 5. calabra}
\par 
47 Leaves in pairs, apart from some whorls towards the base of
\par 
   the stem; young ovary glaucous-pruinose; corolla pink
\par 
49 Leaves c. 0·5 mm wide, thin; partial inflorescences spicate .... {\b 7. garganica}
\par 
49 Leaves more than 1·5 mm wide, thick; partial inflorescences
\par 
    ± capitate ...................................................................................... {\b 6. staliana} 
\par 
46 Shoots green (rarely very weakly glaucous-pruinose)
\par 
50 Partial inflorescences ± spicate to narrowly pyramidal ............... {\b 1. aristata}
\par 
50 Partial inflorescences corymbiform to capitate
\par 
51 Corolla papillose outside, narrowly hypocrateriform;
\par 
   stems distinctly woody at base ........................................................ {\b 3. tenella}
\par 
51 Corolla usually glabrous or hairy outside, broadly 
\par 
   hypocrateriform; stems usually scarcely woody at base
\par 
52 Stems usually more than 15 cm; leaves glabrous or papillose;
\par 
   lower leaves lanceolate; inflorescence not leafy 
\par 
   throughout ...................................................................................... {\b 1. aristata}
\par 
52 Stems 3-15 cm; leaves usually patent-hairy; lower 
\par 
   leaves ovate; inflorescence leafy throughout ............................ {\b 2. wettsteinii}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CYNANCHICAE (DC.) Boiss. (Sect. {\i Cynanchica} Griseb.). Dwarf shrubs or perennial herbs with taproot, usually without rhizomes or stolons, caespitose. Leaves in whorls of up to 4, the cauline linear-lanceolate, 1-veined, with a hyaline point or awn. Inflorescence pyramidal, corymbiform, or spicate to capitate; flowers with short pedicels or sessile, subtended by bracts and bracteoles. Corolla 4-merous, hypocrateriform to infundibuliform, purplish, pink, greenish, yellowish or sometimes whitish, externally hairy, papillose or smooth; anthers and stigma included. Ovary and fruit ovoid, more or less papillose or tuberculate, rarely hairy, never entirely smooth.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Most species grow on dry, open rocky ground or in dry grassland; the majority are calcicole. Data on habitat are given only for those species in which the habitat is very restricted, or different from the above.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. {\i Cynanchicae} includes many very polymorphic diploid and tetraploid races based on x = 10, which are connected with each other by transitional (perhaps hybridogenous) populations. The taxa are frequently very closely related to one another and the present treatment is provisional. A comprehensive study of the section is urgently needed.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. aristata} L. fil., {\i Suppl}. 120 (1781). Non-flowering shoots green or grey-green, woody at base or herbaceous. Stems 10-60 cm, often shortly papillose-hairy below, usually subglabrous above. Leaves (10-)15-25(-40) × 0·5-2 mm, in whorls of 4, lanceolate to linear, with short hyaline apex usually 0·1-0·2 mm. Inflorescence freely branched; bracts free. Corolla hypocrateriform to narrowly infundibuliform; tube (1¾-)2-3(-4) times as long as lobes. Fruit papillose, rarely hairy.{\i  S. Europe, extending northwards to S.E. Austria.} Al Au Bl Bu Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Rm Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  A very polymorphic complex. Since an accurate typification of{\i  A. aristata} L. fil. is not possible, this epithet is not used for any of the following subspecies.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  In Islas Baleares a variant occurs with leaves mostly in pairs; it has been called {\b A. paui} Font Quer, {\i Butll. Inst. Catalana Hist. Nat.}{\b  20}: 188 (1920) and is probably worth specific or subspecific rank.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla-lobes usually not or obscurely appendiculate
\par 
2 Pedicels not more than 0·5 mm, the partial inflorescences spicate-
\par 
  pyramidal; stems 35-60 cm, often rough with short hairs above;
\par 
   leaves usually shortly papillose ....................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b nestia}
\par 
2 Pedicels usually 0·5-1·5 mm, the partial inflorescences ± 
\par 
  corymbiform; stems 25-45 cm, glabrous at least above;
\par 
   leaves glabrous ............................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b thessala}
\par 
1 Corolla-lobes distinctly appendiculate
\par 
3 Partial inflorescences spicate; stems often more than 
\par 
  30 cm usually ± woody at base; middle internodes (2-)3-4 times
  as long as the leaves ......................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b scabra}
\par 
3 Partial inflorescences corymbiform; stems usually not 
\par 
  more than 30 cm, scarcely woody at base; middle 
\par 
  internodes (1-)2-3 times as long as the leaves
\par 
4 Leaves linear; partial inflorescences scarcely capitate; bracts ±
\par 
  narrowly lanceolate; stems often more than 20 cm .... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b oreophila}
\par 
4 Leaves lanceolate or oblanceolate; partial inflorescences
\par 
   distinctly capitate; bracts broadly lanceolate-ovate;
\par 
   stem usually not more than 20 cm ........................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b condensata}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b scabra} (J. & C. Presl) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 334 (1879) ({\i A. aristata} subsp.{\i  longiflora} (Waldst. & Kit.) Hayek): Stems more or less erect. Leaf-margin not or only slightly revolute. Partial inflorescences more or less spicate; pedicels less than 1 mm. Corolla (3-)5·5-8 mm, greenish-purple, pale purplish or yellowish; lobes distinctly appendiculate; tube rough with short hairs or papillae outside, or rarely smooth. Fruit 1·5-2 mm. 2n = 20, 40.{\i  Mediterranean to montane zones. S. Europe, northwards to S. France and N.W. Jugoslavia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b nestia} (Rech. fil.) Ehrend. & Krendl,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  68}: 268 (1974) ({\i A. nestia} Rech. fil.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but leaf-margin revolute to the midrib; corolla 5·5-9 mm, yellowish-red, lobes scarcely appendiculate; tube more or less rough with papillae outside. 2n = 40.{\i  Mediterranean zone. • N. Greece and S. Bulgaria}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b thessala} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 452 (1930): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but partial inflorescences corymbiform; pedicels 0·5-1·5 mm; corolla 6·5-10(-12) mm, reddish, lobes scarcely appendiculate, glabrous outside, rarely shortly papillose; fruit c. 1·5 mm. {\i Montane to subalpine zones. • Mountains of E. Greece}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b oreophila} (Briq.) Hayek in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  6}({\b 1}): 205 (1914): Stems more or less ascending, slender, sparingly branched. Leaf-margin weakly revolute. Bracts narrowly lanceolate. Pedicels 0-1 mm. Corolla (4-)5-8 mm, pink, glabrous or sometimes more or less papillose outside. Fruit 1·5-2 mm. 2n = 20. {\i Montane zone. •  S. Alps, E. Pyrenees, Appennini.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b condensata} (Heldr. ex Boiss.) Ehrend. & Krendl,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  68}: 268 (1974) ({\i A. longiflora} var. {\i condensata} Heldr. ex Boiss.): Stems procumbent-ascending. Leaves 10-20 × 0·8-1·7 mm. Bracts lanceolate to ovate; flowers sessile. Corolla (4-)5-6(-7) mm, purplish, more or less papillose outside. Fruit c. 1·5 mm. 2n = 20. {\i Subalpine zone. • W. & C. parts of Balkan peninsula}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Subsp. ({\b a}) is very polymorphic, usually with stems hairy or roughly papillose at lower elevations ({\i A. scabra }J. & C. Presl,{\i  A. canescens} Vis.), and more or less glabrescent at higher elevations ({\i A. longiflora} Waldst. & Kit.). Plants transitional towards {\b 31} have been called {\b A. sublongiflora} Borbás, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  44}: 399 (1894)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Intermediates between {\b 1}({\b d}) and {\b 31} have been called{\b  A. jordanii} Perr. & Song., {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  2}: 426 (1894), and are difficult to distinguish from {\b 23} in the Alps and{\b  24} in the Pyrenees.
\par 

\par 
6}
\par