{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.             Succisella}       G. Beck
\par    
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J.F.M. Cannon.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Succisa} but involucel urceolate; calyx 4-lobed, without setae.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: L. Baksay,{\i  Ann. Hist.-Nat. Mus. Hung.} nov. ser.,{\i  6}: 167-176 (1955).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Species{\b  2-4} are very poorly known and their status must remain in doubt until more material is available for investigation.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems glabrous below (sometimes hairy at the nodes) ................... {\b 1. inflexa}
\par 1 Stems hairy below
\par 2 Cauline leaves distantly serrate-dentate .................................. {\b 3. carvalhoana}
\par 2 Cauline leaves entire or rarely distantly dentate
\par 3 Peduncles hairy ................................................................................ {\b 2. petteri}
\par 3 Peduncles glabrous or very sparsely hairy ............................ {\b 4. microcephala}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. inflexa} (Kluk) G. Beck, {\i Fl. Nieder-Österr. }{\b 2}({\b 2}): 1145 (1893) ({\i Succisa australis} (Wulfen) Reichenb.). Subglabrous; stems (30-)60-80(-130) cm, ascending, glabrous below or sometimes hairy at the nodes. Basal leaves obovate, sometimes absent. Cauline leaves 6-20 cm, lanceolate, obtuse, subentire, sometimes slightly undulate, rarely distantly dentate, long-decurrent on petiole. Inflorescence branched; capitula 1-1·5 cm in diameter, hemispherical. Corolla pale lilac-blue. Receptacular scales shorter than the fruit. Involucel c. 4 mm, glabrous. 2n = 20.{\i  Wet places. • From N. Italy eastwards to White Russia and W. Romania; probably naturalized further west.} Al Au Cz Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W) [*Ga *Ge].
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. petteri} (J. Kerner & Murb.) G. Beck,{\i  loc. cit.} (1893). Like {\b 1} but stems not more than 60 cm, more slender, pubescent below; all leaves linear-lanceolate to linear, entire or sometimes distantly dentate; peduncles hairy; capitula c. 1 cm in diameter; involucel puberulent on the ribs.{\i  Meadows. • S.W. Jugoslavia, just extending to N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. carvalhoana} (Mariz) Baksay,{\i  Ann. Hist.-Nat. Mus. Hung.} nov. ser., {\b 6}: 174 (1955). Like {\b 1} but stems densely hairy below; cauline leaves linear or linear-lanceolate, distantly serrate-dentate, with scattered long hairs on the veins; involucel sparsely hairy on the ribs.{\i  Wet places. • W.C. Portugal} ({\i Porto to Coimbra}). Lu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. microcephala} (Willk.) G. Beck,{\i  Fl. Nieder-Österr.}{\b  2}({\b 2}): 1145 (1893) ({\i Succisa microcephala} Willk.). Like {\b 1} but more slender; stems not more than 20 cm, subglabrous above, densely hispid below; basal leaves densely hispid; cauline leaves entire; inflorescence not or slightly branched; peduncles glabrous or very sparsely hairy; involucel with crispate hairs on the ribs.{\i  Dry, sandy pastures. • W.C. Spain. }Hs.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b  6.             Knautia }                L.
\par     
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By F. Ehrendorfer.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial. herbs Leaves opposite, undivided to pinnate. Capitula long-pedunculate, hemispherical to cylindrical, hermaphrodite or female. Involucral bracts numerous, herbaceous, free. Receptacle hemispherical, hairy, without scales. Involucel compressed, 4-angled, inconspicuous, entire to dentate in fruit. Calyx patelliform to cupuliform, with (6-)8-16(-24) minute apical awns or teeth, deciduous. Corolla-tube short; limb unequally 4-lobed, patent and often larger in marginal florets. Fruit ovoid, oblong or cylindrical, more or less hairy, with soft elaiosome at base.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   The perennial and biennial species ({\b 1-44}) belong to Sect.{\i  Trichera }and form an extremely polymorphic group of diploids, tetraploids and hexaploids (x = 10). Hybridization is frequent and has given rise to many intermediate populations, as well as more or less autonomous races; taxonomic boundaries are, therefore, often obscured. It would be possible, for convenience, to assemble all these taxa into one species-group, but {\b 8-15}, {\b 18-22}, {\b 23-24}, {\b 28-37}, {\b 38} {\b 41} and {\b 42-43} form particularly closely inter-related subgroups.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   The structure of the monopodial or sympodial stock and the colour of the corolla are diagnostic, and should be noted in the field. Several plants from each population should be examined, because of variation in the division of the leaves, hairiness, and presence or absence of glandular hairs on the peduncles. A double indumentum is sometimes present on stems or leaves, consisting of both pubescence and another kind of hairs.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: Z. Szabó,{\i  Math. Term. Közl. }{\b 31}: 1-436 (1911);{\i  Bot. Közl. }{\b 31}: 115-141 (1934). F. Ehrendorfer,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  109}: 276-343 (1962). S. Breton-Sintes, {\i Étude Biosystématique du Genre} Knautia ({\i L}.){\i  Coult. en Auvergne,} Thèse Ser. E, no. 146, Univ. Clermont-Ferrand. 1971.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Annual, with a slender root
\par 2 Calyx patelliform, 8- to 10-awned; involucral bracts 
\par   with rigid cilia, eglandular ......................................................... {\b 45. byzantina}
\par 2 Calyx cupuliform, 12- to 24-dentate, the teeth rarely awned;
\par    involucral bracts ciliate-hirsute or shortly setose
\par 3 Capitula with 20-40 florets; involucre patelliform, the bracts 
\par    with inconspicuous veins; peduncles usually eglandular ....... {\b 46. integrifolia}
\par 3 Capitula with 5-15 florets; involucre cyathiform to cylindrical,
\par    the bracts with prominent veins; peduncles glandular
\par 4 Involucre cyathiform; capitula with 10-15 florets; corolla lilac
\par   to violet, the tube of the marginal florets usually 5-6 mm ............ {\b 47. degenii}
\par 4 Involucre cylindrical; capitula with 5-10 florets; corolla purplish
\par   -red, the tube of the marginal florets usually 7-12 mm .............. {\b 48. orientalis} 
\par 1 Perennial or biennial with a monopodial or sympodial
\par   stock, or a taproot
\par 5 Plant usually with a terminal, central, persistent leaf-rosette;
\par   flowering stems developed laterally from axils of previous season's
\par   rosette-leaves; stock usually monopodial; leaves always undivided
\par 6 Lower cauline leaves subcoriaceous, glabrous, ± ciliate ........ {\b 4. sarajevensis}
\par 6 Lower cauline leaves membranous, usually hairy
\par 7 Lower cauline leaves narrowly elliptical to sub-
\par   orbicular acute; base of stems usually with soft hairs ................... {\b 1. drymeia}
\par 7 Lower cauline leaves narrowly elliptical to lanceolate,
\par   acuminate; base of stems glabrous or with ± rigid hairs
\par 8 Stems glabrous below; upper internodes with soft hairs
\par   not more than 1 mm; stock monopodial ....................................... {\b 2. gussonei}
\par 8 Stems with ± rigid hairs often more than 1 mm; stock
\par   sometimes sympodial ............................................................... {\b 3. arvernensis}
\par 5 Plant without a terminal, central, persistent leaf-rosette,
\par    sometimes with lateral leaf-rosettes; flowering stems developed terminally;
\par     stock sympodial or plant with a taproot; leaves sometimes pinnate.
\par 9 Biennial with a thick taproot; cauline leaves subamp-
\par   lexicaul; flowers whitish ............................................................... {\b 44. tatarica}
\par 9 Perennial and with a sympodial stock, rarely biennial;
\par   leaves not subamplexicaul; flowers not whitish
\par 10 Basal rosette-leaves ± pubescent and hispid with 
\par    yellowish setae
\par 11 Peduncles eglandular; corolla bluish-lilac ................................. {\b 8. basaltica}
\par 11 Peduncles glandular; corolla purple
\par 12 Perennial not more than 80 cm; cauline leaves broadly
\par    or narrowly lanceolate, undivided or sublyrate with
\par    1-4 lateral lobes .......................................................................... {\b 16. dinarica}
\par 
\par 60}
\par