{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 12 Biennial or short-lived perennial up to 150 cm;
\par 
   cauline leaves ovate-lanceolate, undivided or pinnate
\par 
   with up to 8 lateral lobes ................................................................. {\b 17. lucana}
\par 
10 Basal rosette-leaves not pubescent and without 
\par 
   yellowish setae
\par 
13 All cauline leaves undivided (and uniformly so in all
\par 
   plants of a population), usually widest at or below 
\par 
   the middle
\par 
14 Lower internodes with numerous hairs more than 1 mm 
\par 
   (often also with shorter hairs)
\par 
15 Leaves green
\par 
16 Stem with soft hairs ................................................................. {\b 7. nevadensis}
\par 
16 Stem hispid, at least below
\par 
17 Upper cauline leaves attenuate or rounded towards the
\par 
   base; calyx 8- to 16-awned ........................................................ {\b 3. arvernensis}
\par 
17 Upper cauline leaves cuneate, subauriculate or cordate-
\par 
   amplexicaul; calyx usually 8-awned ......................................... {\b 5. dipsacifolia}
\par 
15 Leaves ± greyish-white, especially beneath
\par 
18 Lower internodes densely long-villous, sometimes also
\par 
   sparsely pubescent; leaves ± entire ........................................... {\b 15. magnifica}
\par 
18 Lower internodes short-villous or tomentose, and 
\par 
   densely pubescent
\par 
19 Leaves narrowly lanceolate, entire to subserrate, 
\par 
   appressed-hirsute above ............................................................. {\b 19. baldensis}
\par 
19 Leaves ovate to broadly lanceolate, crenate-serrate,
\par 
   sparsely pubescent above
\par 
20 Upper cauline leaves subcordate at base; peduncles 
\par 
   usually glandular ................................................................. {\b 18. subcanescens}
\par 
20 Upper cauline leaves cuneate to rounded at base;
\par 
   peduncles usually eglandular ........................................................... {\b 24. norica}
\par 
14 Lower internodes glabrous, or (rarely) with hairs less than 1 mm
\par 
21 Lower cauline leaves ± hispid, mostly ± dentate,
\par 
   usually less than 5 times as long as wide
\par 
22 Fruit 5-6 × 2-2·5 mm, oblong-ovoid; lower internodes 
\par 
   usually hispid ............................................................................ {\b 5. dipsacifolia}
\par 
22 Fruit c. 4-5 × 1·5-2 mm, cylindrical; lower internodes
\par 
   glabrous ...................................................................................... {\b 6. ressmannii}
\par 
21 Lower cauline leaves glabrous or subglabrous, often 
\par 
   subentire, usually more than 5 times as long as wide
\par 
23 Peduncles glandular
\par 
24 Upper cauline leaves broadly cuneate to rounded at 
\par 
   base; lower cauline leaves usually 6-9 times as long 
\par 
   as wide; calyx usually 8-awned ................................................. {\b 12. longifolia}
\par 
24 Upper cauline leaves often cordate and amplexicaul at
\par 
   base; lower cauline leaves usually 4-6 times as long 
\par 
   as wide; calyx usually 8- to 12-awned ................................... {\b 14. midzorensis}
\par 
23 Peduncles eglandular
\par 
25 Capitula 2-2·5 cm in diameter, 5-9 on each stem ....................... {\b 13. pancicii}
\par 
25 Capitula 2·5-5 cm in diameter, fewer than 5 on each stem
\par 
26 Corolla pink ............................................................................ {\b 11. salvadoris}
\par 
26 Corolla bluish-lilac or -violet 
\par 
27 Lower cauline leaves linear-lanceolate, 6-10 times as
\par 
   long as wide; upper cauline leaves with narrowly 
\par 
   cuneate base ................................................................................... {\b 10. godetii}
\par 
27 Lower cauline leaves elliptic-lanceolate, 4½-7 
\par 
   times as long as wide 
\par 
28 Middle cauline leaves broadly cuneate to rounded at base ...... {\b 9. foreziensis}
\par 
28 Middle cauline leaves ± amplexicaul and subcordate at base .... {\b 8. basaltica}
\par 
13 Upper cauline leaves lyrate or pinnate (at least in 
\par 
   some plants of each population); undivided leaves 
\par 
   usually widest at or above the middle
\par 
29 Leaves ± greyish-tomentose, or rarely densely hirsute
\par 
   beneath; terminal lobe of divided cauline leaves 
\par 
   usually as long as the divided part
\par 
30 Peduncles usually eglandular
\par 
31 Upper cauline leaves narrowly lanceolate, usually
\par 
   sublyrate with 1-4 lateral lobes .................................................... {\b 25. albanica}
\par 
31 Upper cauline leaves broadly lanceolate, usually
\par 
   lyrate-pinnate with (2-)4-12 lateral lobes
\par 
32 Corolla pale yellow ................................................................... {\b 30. kitaibelii}
\par 
32 Corolla pink, red, violet or lilac
\par 
33 Leaves densely hirsute; upper cauline leaves narrow at base .. {\b 26. velebitica}
\par 
33 Leaves tomentose-villous; upper cauline leaves broadly
\par 
   cuneate to subcordate at base
\par 
34 Corolla bright red; upper cauline leaves often sub-
\par 
   cordate at base ............................................................................ {\b 22. persicina}
\par 
34 Corolla pale lilac to violet; upper cauline leaves 
\par 
   broadly cuneate to rounded at base 
\par 
35 Lower leaves lanceolate-acuminate; corolla pale lilac ......... {\b 23. carinthiaca}
\par 
35 Lower leaves oblong-ovate; corolla violet ............................... {\b 24}. × {\b norica}
\par 
30 Peduncles usually glandular
\par 
36 Corolla, at least in some plants of each population 
\par 
   pale yellow
\par 
37 Robust; capitula usually 3-4 cm in diameter ............................. {\b 30. kitaibelii}
\par 
37 Slender; capitula usually 2-3 cm in diameter ............................ {\b 31. ambigua}
\par 
36 Corolla purple, violet or lilac
\par 
38 Cauline leaves usually with 4-10 lateral lobes and a
\par 
   terminal lobe usually shorter than the divided part
\par 
39 Terminal lobe of cauline leaves ovate-lanceolate;
\par 
   corolla reddish-purple ..................................................................... {\b 27. mollis}
\par 
39 Terminal lobe of cauline leaves narrowly lanceolate;
\par 
   corolla purplish-violet .................................................................. {\b 28. calycina}
\par 
38 Cauline leaves usually with 2-6 lateral lobes and a 
\par 
   terminal lobe usually about as long as the divided part
\par 
40 Basal leaf-rosettes usually absent at anthesis ............................ {\b 24}. × {\b norica}
\par 
40 Basal leaf-rosettes present at anthesis
\par 
41 Leaves densely velutinous with rather short hairs above;
\par 
   capitula mostly 2-3 cm in diameter; corolla purple ..................... {\b 20. velutina}
\par 
41 Leaves Sparsely velutinous with long hairs above;
\par 
   capitula mostly 3-4 cm in diameter; corolla pinkish-lilac ....... {\b 21. transalpina}
\par 
29 Leaves green, hirsute or pubescent beneath; terminal 
\par 
   lobe of divided cauline leaves usually shorter than 
\par 
   the divided part
\par 
42 Calyx (7-)9- to 18-awned or -dentate; divided lower 
\par 
   cauline leaves with lanceolate terminal lobe scarcely 
\par 
   longer than lateral lobes; rosette-leaves divided
\par 
43 Peduncles eglandular
\par 
44 Leaves uniformly pubescent, the lateral lobes usually
\par 
   3·2-5 mm wide ........................................................................... {\b 38. pectinata}
\par 
44 Leaves pubescent on margin and veins, hirsute or sub-
\par 
   glabrous elsewhere, the lateral lobes usually 2-3·5 mm
\par 
   wide ............................................................................................ {\b 39. clementii}
\par 
43 Peduncles glandular
\par 
45 Lateral leaf-lobes linear-lanceolate, usually 2-3·5 mm wide .... {\b 40. adriatica}
\par 
45 Lateral leaf-lobes linear, 0·5-1·5 mm wide .............................. {\b 41. dalmatica}
\par 
42 Calyx (6-)8- to 10-awned; divided lower cauline leaves with
\par 
    ovate, ovate-lanceolate or rhombic terminal lobe usually ± longer
\par 
    than lateral lobes; rosette-leaves usually undivided
\par 
46 Leaves subcoriaceous, sparsely setose or glabrescent,
\par 
   shiny; peduncles usually eglandular
\par 
47 Stem hispid or subglabrous; lower leaves ovate-
\par 
   lanceolate; calyx up to 11(-15)-awned ................................... {\b 42. travnicensis}
\par 
47 Stem usually subglabrous; lower leaves narrowly 
\par 
   lanceolate; calyx 8-awned ................................................... {\b 43. fleischmannii}
\par 
46 Leaves membranous and ± densely hirsute, if ± sub-
\par 
   coriaceous and glabrescent then peduncles glandular
\par 
48 Corolla, at least in some plants of each population,
\par 
   dark red, pale pink or pale yellow
\par 

\par 
61}
\par