{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min56}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min57}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1058}{\nofchars6033}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 49 Corolla, at least in some plants of each population, dark red; 
\par    flowering stems usually without green basal leaves at anthesis,
\par    and with evenly distributed cauline leaves ............................ }{\b\fs28 32. macedonica}{\fs28 
\par 49 Corolla pale yellow or pale pink; flowering stems 
\par    usually with green basal leaves at anthesis, and with
\par    cauline leaves confined to the lower half of stem
\par 50 Robust; corolla usually pale yellow, capitula usually
\par    3-4 cm in diameter ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 30. kitaibelii}{\fs28 
\par 50 Slender; corolla pale yellow or pale pink; capitula 
\par    usually 2-3 cm in diameter .......................................................... }{\b\fs28 31. ambigua}{\fs28 
\par 48 Corolla in all plants of a population bluish-violet,
\par    lilac or purple
\par 51 Leaves finely papillose, nearly glabrous, subcoriaceous;
\par    densely caespitose chasmophyte .................................................. }{\b\fs28 35. rupicola}{\fs28 
\par 51 Leaves hirsute, pubescent or glabrescent, not papillose,
\par    usually membranous; not caespitose
\par 52 Corolla predominantly bluish-violet to lilac; underground 
\par    stolons usually present ................................................................. }{\b\fs28 29. arvensis}{\fs28 
\par 52 Corolla predominantly purple; underground stolons absent
\par 53 Usually biennial; capitula often 1\'b78-2\'b75 cm in diameter ............. }{\b\fs28 33. visianii}{\fs28 
\par 53 Usually perennial; capitula usually more than 2\'b75 cm 
\par    in diameter
\par 54 Upper cauline leaves usually with 4-6 lateral lobes 
\par    and a cuspidate terminal lobe about as long as the 
\par    divided part .................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 37. illyrica}{\fs28 
\par 54 Upper cauline leaves usually with more than 6 lateral
\par    lobes and a non-cuspidate terminal lobe shorter than 
\par    the divided part
\par 55 Terminal lobe of upper cauline leaves lanceolate-rhombic; 
\par    stem usually more than 20 cm finely hirsute .............................. }{\b\fs28 34. purpurea}{\fs28 
\par 55 Terminal lobe of upper cauline leaves ovate-suborbicular; 
\par    stems usually not more than 20 cm, coarsely hirsute .............. }{\b\fs28 36. subscaposa}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. K. drymeia}{\fs28  Heuffel, }{\i\fs28 Flora }{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 Regensb}{\fs28 .) }{\b\fs28 39}{\fs28 : 53 (1856) (}{\i\fs28 Scabiosa sylvatica}{\fs28  L.). Perennial; stock usually monopodial, with terminal leaf-rosette and lateral flowering stems. Stem 30-100 cm, the base with soft greyish hairs or sometimes rigid yellowish setae, rarely subglabrous; peduncles glandular or eglandular. Leaves membranous, rather evenly distributed along the stem, undivided, crenate-serrate; lower cauline lanceolate to suborbicular, acute, petiolate; upper cauline more or less cordate, subacuminate, sessile. Capitula 1\'b75-3(-4) cm in diameter. Calyx patelliform, 8- to 16-awned. Corolla purple to pink. }{\i\fs28 Wood-margins. \bullet C. & S.E. Europe, N. Italy}{\fs28 . Al Au Bu Cz Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Rm.
\par 
\par  Hybrids are common between tetraploids of }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) and }{\b\fs28 29}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 K.}{\fs28  \'d7 }{\i\fs28 ramosissima}{\fs28  Szab\'f3) and often form extensive swarms, even in the absence of the parents. Furthermore, }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) is connected through }{\b\fs28 24}{\fs28  to }{\b\fs28 23}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Rosette-leaves (and usually base of stem) with rigid, yellowish
\par    setae; cauline leaves oblong to elliptic-lanceolate;
\par    stems usually less than 50 cm, sparingly branched ... (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 intermedia}{\fs28 
\par 1 Rosette-leaves and stems with soft, short, white or 
\par   greyish hairs; cauline leaves usually suborbicular to 
\par   ovate; stems more than 50 cm, usually with many branches
\par 2 Stems densely hairy; cauline leaves bright green above,
\par   greyish-pubescent to subvillous beneath
\par 3 Cauline leaves broadly ovate, deeply crenate-serrate (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 nympharum}{\fs28 
\par 3 Cauline leaves ovate-lanceolate, crenate-serrate ...... (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 centrifrons}{\fs28 
\par 2 Stems sparsely hairy; cauline leaves dark green above,
\par   subpubescent to glabrous beneath
\par 4 Cauline leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate, crenate-
\par   serrate .............................................................................. (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 drymeia}{\fs28 
\par 4 Cauline leaves broadly ovate to suborbicular, deeply
\par   crenate-serrate .............................................................. (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 tergestina}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 nympharum}{\fs28  (Boiss. & Heldr.) Ehrend.,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 71}{\fs28 : 40 (1975) (}{\i\fs28 K. nympharum}{\fs28  Boiss. & Heldr.): Stems more than 50 cm, usually with many branches. Peduncles often glandular. Rosette-leaves and stems with dense, soft, short, white or greyish hairs. Cauline leaves broadly ovate, deeply crenate-serrate, bright green above, greyish-pubescent to subvillous beneath. 2n = 20. }{\i\fs28 Balkan peninsula, from Crna Gora to N. Greece}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 tergestina}{\fs28  (G. Beck) Ehrend., }{\i\fs28 \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  122}{\fs28 : 263 (1973) (}{\i\fs28 K. sylvatica}{\fs28  var.}{\i\fs28  tergestina}{\fs28  G. Beck): Like subsp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) but rosette-leaves and stems with sparse hairs; cauline leaves broadly ovate to suborbicular, dark green above, subpubescent to glabrous beneath. 2n = 20. }{\i\fs28 Slovenija, just extending into N.E. Italy.}{\fs28 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 centrifrons}{\fs28  (Borb\'e1s) Ehrend.,}{\i\fs28  loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1973) (}{\i\fs28 K. centrifrons}{\fs28  Borb\'e1s): Like subsp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) but cauline leaves ovate-lanceolate, crenate-serrate. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  N. Italy, S. Switzerland.}{\fs28 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 drymeia}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 K. pannonica}{\fs28  (Jacq.) Wettst., non Heuffel): Like subsp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) but rosette-leaves and stems with sparse hairs; cauline leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate, crenate-serrate, dark green above, subpubescent to glabrous beneath. 2n = 40 (38, 42-44).}{\i\fs28  From S.E. Germany to Macedonia.}{\fs28 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 intermedia}{\fs28  (Pernh. & Wettst.) Ehrend.,}{\i\fs28  \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  122}{\fs28 : 263 (1973) (}{\i\fs28 K. intermedia}{\fs28  Pernh. & Wettst., ?}{\i\fs28 K dinarica}{\fs28  var.}{\i\fs28  croatica }{\fs28 Szab\'f3,}{\i\fs28  K. croatica}{\fs28  (Szab\'f3) Degen): Stems usually less than 50 cm, sparingly branched. Peduncles usually eglandular. Rosette-leaves (and usually base of stem) with rigid, yellowish setae. Cauline leaves oblong to elliptic-lanceolate, green, crenate-serrate. 2n = 20, 40. }{\i\fs28 E. Alps, N. Appennini}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par  Local variants of subsp. (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) without a terminal leaf-rosette (e.g. in S.E. Alps), but otherwise not showing evidence of hybridity, sometimes make separation from }{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 16}{\fs28  difficult.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. K. gussonei}{\fs28  Szab\'f3, Bot. K\'f6zl. 31: 136 (1934). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) but lower internodes glabrous; upper internodes with greyish hairs not more than 1 mm; leaves serrate, acuminate, petiolate, the rosette-leaves softly pubescent, the cauline ovate-lanceolate, acuminate-cuspidate, glabrescent, ciliate; calyx 8- to 10-awned. C. Appennini. It.
\par 
\par   Known only from the type-locality, and close to }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. K. arvernensis}{\fs28  (Briq.) Szab\'f3,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\fs28  132 (1934) (}{\i\fs28 K. lacaitae}{\fs28  Szabo, ?}{\i\fs28 K. ovatifolia}{\fs28  (Lag.) G. Don, ?}{\i\fs28 K. legionensis}{\fs28  (Lag.) DC. pro parte). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) but stock sometimes sympodial and with central leaf-rosette developing into a flowering stem; stem hispid below with rigid hairs more than 1 mm, rarely glabrous; leaves elliptical to narrowly lanceolate, crenate-serrate to subentire, sparsely hairy, the rosette-leaves without rigid, yellowish setae, the lower cauline long-acuminate, the upper cauline attenuate or rounded at base; capitula 3-5 cm in diameter; corolla purplish-violet to lilac. 2n = 40. }{\i\fs28 Wood-margins and mountain meadows; somewhat calcifuge. \bullet  From S.C. France to C. Spain.}{\fs28  Ga Hs ?Lu.
\par 
\par  Variable, especially in leaf-shape, and difficult to separate from }{\b\fs28 9}{\fs28  and tetraploid variants of }{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28 , especially in the Massif Central of France. Hybrid swarms with }{\b\fs28 29}{\fs28  are common.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. K. sarajevensis}{\fs28  (G. Beck) Szab\'f3, }{\i\fs28 Bot. Jahrb.}{\b\fs28  36}{\fs28 : 439 (1905). Like }{\b\fs28 1 }{\fs28 but stem glabrous (rarely somewhat hispid) below;
\par 
\par 62}
\par }