{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min57}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min58}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1085}{\nofchars6187}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 peduncles eglandular; leaves subcoriaceous, entire or subserrate, the rosette-leaves broadly lanceolate, acuminate, hispid with whitish hairs, rarely glabrescent, the cauline glabrous, ciliate, the lower cauline elliptical, the upper cauline lanceolate; capitula 3-4 cm in diameter; calyx 10- to 16-awned; corolla purplish. 2n = 40. }{\i\fs28 Wood-margins and meadows. \bullet  Mountains of Bosna.}{\fs28  Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. K. dipsacifolia}{\fs28  Kreutzer, }{\i\fs28 Anthochron. Pl. Eur. Med.}{\fs28  223 (1840) (}{\i\fs28 Scabiosa dipsacifolia}{\fs28  Schrank,}{\i\fs28  Knautia sylvatica}{\fs28  (L.) Duby, nom. ambig.). Perennial; stock sympodial, with terminal and lateral buds developing into flowering stems (or leaf-rosettes). Stem 40 150 cm, usually hispid, the lower and middle internodes sometimes glabrous; peduncles glandular or eglandular. Leaves membranous to subcoriaceous, green, undivided, oblong-lanceolate or ovate-elliptical to narrowly lanceolate, more or less acuminate; upper cauline subdentate to serrate, cuneate, rounded, subauriculate or cordate-amplexicaul at base; lower cauline subdenticulate to serrate, hispid, subsetose (sometimes glabrescent), petiolate. Capitula 2\'b75-4 cm in diameter. Calyx patelliform, usually 8-awned. Fruit 5-6 \'d7 2-2\'b75 mm, oblong-ovoid.}{\i\fs28  Wood-margins and tall-herb communities. \bullet  Mountains of C. Europe, extending to E. Belgium and S.C. France.}{\fs28  Au Be Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 
\par  The tetraploid subspecies hybridize extensively with }{\b\fs28 29}{\fs28  at zones of contact. The taxonomic separation from related, geographically adjacent or sympatric polyploid species (e.g. }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 6}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 9}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 18}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 19}{\fs28 ) is often difficult.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Corolla pinkish-purple
\par 2 Upper cauline leaves distinctly cordate-amplexicaul,
\par   usually subdentate ........................................................ (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 lancifolia}{\fs28 
\par 2 Upper cauline leaves dilated or subauriculate at base,
\par   usually dentate
\par 3 Upper cauline leaves broadly cuneate or rounded at base,
\par   usually dentate ............................................................... (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 pocutica}{\fs28 
\par 3 Upper cauline leaves mostly subauriculate at base,
\par   usually deeply serrate-dentate ..................................... (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 turocensis}{\fs28 
\par 1 Corolla predominantly bluish-violet to lilac
\par 4 Leaves narrowly lanceolate, entire to subdentate; leaves
\par   and lower and middle internodes usually glabrescent ...... (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 sixtina}{\fs28 
\par 4 Leaves oblong-lanceolate to ovate-elliptical, dentate;
\par   at least the lower internodes setose
\par 5 Peduncles eglandular; upper cauline leaves usually 
\par   attenuate at base; middle internodes usually glabrescent;
\par   plants slender ................................................................... (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 gracilis}{\fs28 
\par 5 Peduncles often glandular; upper cauline leaves broadly
\par   rounded, auriculate at base; middle internodes setose;
\par   plants robust .............................................................. (}{\b\fs28 f}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 dipsacifolia}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 lancifolia}{\fs28  (Heuffel) Ehrend.,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  71}{\fs28 : 40 (1975) (}{\i\fs28 K. sylvatica}{\fs28  var.}{\i\fs28  lancifolia}{\fs28  Heuffel): Middle internodes usually glabrescent. Peduncles eglandular. Upper cauline leaves with more or less convex margin, usually subdentate, distinctly cordate-amplexicaul. Corolla pinkish-purple.}{\i\fs28  W. & C. Romania to E. Jugoslavia.}{\fs28 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 pocutica}{\fs28  (Szab\'f3) Ehrend.,}{\i\fs28  loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1975) (}{\i\fs28 K. sylvatica}{\fs28  var.}{\i\fs28  pocutica}{\fs28  Szab\'f3): Middle internodes usually subsetose. Peduncles glandular or eglandular. Upper cauline leaves with convex margin, usually dentate, broadly cuneate or rounded at base. Corolla pinkish-purple. 2n = 40. }{\i\fs28 W. & E. Carpathians}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 turocensis}{\fs28  (Borb\'e1s) J\'e1v. ex Kiss, }{\i\fs28 Tisia}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 : 253 (1939) (}{\i\fs28 K. sylvatica}{\fs28  var. }{\i\fs28 turocensis}{\fs28  Borb\'e1s): Middle internodes glabrous or setose. Peduncles glandular or eglandular. Upper cauline leaves with more or less concave margin, usually deeply serrate-dentate, usually subauriculate at base. Corolla pinkish-purple. 2n = 40.}{\i\fs28  W. Carpathians, mountains of N. Hungary}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 gracilis}{\fs28  (Szab\'f3) Ehrend., }{\i\fs28 \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b\fs28 122}{\fs28 : 264 (1973) (}{\i\fs28 K. gracilis}{\fs28  Szab\'f3): Usually slender. Middle internodes often glabrescent. Peduncles usually eglandular. Upper cauline leaves dentate, usually attenuate at base. Corolla predominantly bluish-violet to lilac. 2n = 40. }{\i\fs28 From C. Germany to S.C. France}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 sixtina}{\fs28  (Briq.) Ehrend.,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\fs28  265 (1973) (}{\i\fs28 K. sixtina}{\fs28  Briq.): Middle internodes often glabrescent. Peduncles usually glandular. Upper cauline leaves narrowly lanceolate, entire to subdentate. Corolla predominantly bluish-violet to lilac. 2n = 60.}{\i\fs28  S.W. Alps}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 S. of Lac Leman}{\fs28 ).
\par  (}{\b\fs28 f}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 dipsacifolia}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 K. sendtneri}{\fs28  Br\'fcgger): Usually robust. Middle internodes with purplish-based setae. Peduncles often glandular. Upper cauline leaves broadly rounded, auriculate at base. Corolla predominantly bluish-violet to lilac. 2n = 60. }{\i\fs28 Mountains of W.C. Europe, extending to W. Hungary and E. France}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. K. ressmannii}{\fs28  (Pacher) Briq.,}{\i\fs28  Annu. Cons. Jard. Bot. Gen\'e8ve}{\b\fs28  6}{\fs28 : 130 (1902). Like }{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 f}{\fs28 ) but lower internodes glabrous; upper internodes subpuberulent and with intermixed long hairs, glabrescent; peduncles eglandular or subglandular; leaves subcoriaceous, shining, subentire to serrate, subglabrous, the basal elliptic-lanceolate, the cauline narrowly lanceolate, all amplexicaul; corolla purple; fruit 4-5 \'d7 1\'b75-2 mm, cylindrical. 2n = 60. }{\i\fs28 Coniferous woods and grassy slopes. \bullet  S.E. Alps.}{\fs28  It Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 7. K. nevadensis}{\fs28  (M. Winkler ex Szab\'f3) Szab\'f3,}{\i\fs28  Math. Term. K\'f6zl.}{\b\fs28  31}{\fs28 : 326 (1911). Perennial; stock sympodial, without leaf-rosettes at anthesis. Stem 35-60 cm, with short and long, soft hairs; peduncles eglandular. Leaves membranous, green, narrowly lanceolate, attenuate-acuminate, undivided, crenate to deeply serrate; upper ovate to subcordate, glabrescent above, softly hirsute beneath, ciliate. Capitula 3-4 cm in diameter. Calyx 8-awned. Corolla lilac. 2n = 64.}{\i\fs28  Mountain scrub. \bullet  S. Spain; N.W. Portugal.}{\fs28  Hs Lu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 8. K. basaltica}{\fs28  Chassagne & Szab\'f3,}{\i\fs28  Bot. K\'f6zl.}{\b\fs28  31}{\fs28 : 129 (1934). Perennial; stock sympodial, with terminal flowering stems and lateral leaf-rosettes. Stem 45-75 cm, with fewer than 5 capitula; lower internodes short, glabrous, shining; upper internodes hirsute; peduncles eglandular. Leaves subcoriaceous, somewhat shining, brown when dry, elliptic-lanceolate, dentate, cuspidate, undivided, glabrous except for some yellowish setae on basal rosette-leaves and ciliate margin; lower cauline 5-7 times as long as wide, petiolate; middle cauline shorter, subcordate, amplexicaul. Capitula 3-5 cm in diameter. Calyx patelliform, 8- to 11-awned. Corolla bluish-lilac. 2n = 20. }{\i\fs28 Grassland; calcifuge. \bullet  Mountains of S.C. France.}{\fs28  Ga.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 9. K. foreziensis}{\fs28  Chassagne & Szab\'f3,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\fs28  130 (1934). Like }{\b\fs28 8 }{\fs28 but stem 50-100 cm, the lower internodes longer; leaves greenish when dry, the basal rosette-leaves without yellowish setae, the lower cauline 4\'bd-7 times as long as wide, the middle and upper cauline broadly cuneate to rounded at base; corolla bluish-violet. 2n = 40.}{\i\fs28  Mountain scrub. \bullet  C. France}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Monts du Forez}{\fs28 ). Ga.
\par 
\par  Closely related to and intermediate between }{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ), }{\b\fs28 8}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 10}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 10. K. godetii}{\fs28  Reuter, }{\i\fs28 Cat. Gr. Jard. Bot. Gen\'e8ve}{\fs28  4 (1857). Like }{\b\fs28 8 }{\fs28 but stem 25-70 cm; peduncles rarely sparsely glandular; leaves linear-lanceolate, attenuate, the basal without yellowish setae (sometimes sub-hirsute when young), the lower cauline 6-10 times as long as wide, the middle and upper cauline cuneate at base; capitula 2\'b75-4 cm in diameter; calyx usually 7- to 9-awned; corolla bluish-violet. 2n = 20. }{\i\fs28 Damp meadows and bogs. \bullet  Mountains of C. & E. France and N.W. Switzerland.}{\fs28  Ga He.
\par 
\par 63}
\par }