{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. K. salvadoris} Sennen ex Szabó,{\i  Bot. Közl.}{\b  31}: 136 (1934). Perennial; stock sympodial, with terminal flowering stems and lateral leaf-rosettes. Stem 35-90 cm, with fewer than 5 capitula; lower internodes glabrous, rarely pubescent; peduncles eglandular. Leaves subcoriaceous, greenish when dry, undivided, narrowly lanceolate, attenuate, entire to subdentate, glabrous except for ciliate margin at maturity; basal and lower cauline petiolate, the lower cauline 4-8 times as long as wide; middle and upper cauline sessile. Capitula 2·5-4·5 cm in diameter. Calyx patelliform, usually 8-awned. Corolla pink. 2n = 20.{\i  Tall-herb communities and open coniferous woods; calcifuge. • E. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. K. longifolia} (Waldst. & Kit.) Koch, {\i Syn. Fl. Germ.} 343 (1835) ({\i K arvensis} subsp.{\i  kochii} (Brügger) Rouy,{\i  K. brachytricha} Briq.,{\i  K. kochii} Brügger). Perennial; stock sympodial, with terminal flowering stems and lateral leaf-rosettes. Stem (20-)40-80(-120) cm, with fewer than 5 capitula; lower internodes short, glabrous, rarely puberulent, shining; upper internodes and peduncles puberulent and with long hairs, glandular. Leaves subcoriaceous, green when dry, shining above, undivided (rarely lobed), lanceolate, attenuate, entire to subcrenate, glabrous except for ciliate margin or puberulent; basal sub-hirsute when young, petiolate; cauline sessile, the lower (4½-)6-9 times as long as wide, attenuate at base, the upper usually 3-9 times as long as wide, somewhat widened at base. Capitula (2·5-)3·5-5(-6) cm in diameter. Calyx patelliform, usually 8-awned. Corolla pinkish-purple. 2n = 20. {\i Mountain meadows and wood-margins. • S. & E. Alps; E. Carpathians; W.C. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Gr He It Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 
 
\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from the E. Carpathians and from some parts of the Balkan peninsula have wider upper leaves and wider, less attenuate bracts than those from the Alps. Separation from {\b 14} is difficult in parts of the Balkan peninsula.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. K. pancicii} Szabó, {\i Math. Term. Közl.}{\b  31}: 376 (1911) ({\i K. midzorensis} var.{\i  pancicii} (Szabó) Hayek). Like {\b 12} but stem with 5-9 capitula; peduncles eglandular; leaves subentire, the lower cauline 7½-12 times as long as wide; capitula 2-2·5 cm in diameter.{\i  Damp mountain meadows. • C. Jugoslavia }({\i Zlatibor Planina}). Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Closely related to {\b 12}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. K. midzorensis} Form., {\i Deutsche Bot. Monatsschr.}{\b  16}: 19 (1898). Like {\b 12} but stem (40-)60-120(-150) cm; stem and leaves sometimes subtomentose, the lower cauline (3½-)4-6(-9) times as long as wide, broadly lanceolate, the upper cauline (1½-)2-4(-6) times as long as wide, ovate, cuspidate, sessile, often cordate and amplexicaul; calyx (6-)8- to 12(-14)-awned; corolla pale yellow, pink or light purple. 2n = 20. {\i Mountain meadows. • E.C.part of Balkan peninsula.} ?Al Bu ?Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Populations from Albania and Greece approach {\b 12}. Hairy variants which occur in S.W. Bulgaria (Rila Planina) resemble {\b 15}. The specific status of {\b 14} and {\b 15} is, therefore, somewhat doubtful.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. K. magnifica} Boiss. & Orph., {\i Bull Congr. Bot. Pétersb. }{\b 1869}: 138 (1870). Like {\b 12} but lower internodes densely long-villous, sometimes also sparsely pubescent; leaves narrowly lanceolate, acuminate, more or less entire, sericeous-sublanate, the lower cauline petiolate, the upper elongate, cuspidate, sessile and sometimes subcordate at base; calyx (6-)8(-9)-awned; corolla pink. Mountain meadows.•{\i  N. & C. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. K. dinarica} (Murb.) Borbás, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  44}: 399 (1894). Perennial; stock sympodial, subcaespitose, usually with leaf-rosettes at anthesis which develop into flowering stems next year, without underground stolons. Stem 30-80 cm; lower internodes often short, shortly pubescent and with yellowish setae, rarely subvillous; upper internodes and peduncles hairy and usually glandular. Leaves of non-flowering rosettes elliptic or oblong-lanceolate, undivided, crenate-serrate, yellowish-setose, petiolate; cauline leaves broadly or narrowly lanceolate, acuminate, undivided or sublyrate with 1-4 lateral lobes in the lower 1/3(-1/2), the lower petiolate, the upper entire or crenate-serrate, densely greyish-pubescent, subcordate and amplexicaul. Capitula 2·5-4 cm in diameter. Calyx cupuliform, usually 8-awned. Corolla purple.{\i  Mountain meadows and open woods. • C. part of Balkan peninsula; S.W. Italy.} Al Bu It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b dinarica}: Lower internodes hispid and densely pubescent. Petioles of rosette- and lower cauline leaves usually less than ½ as long as lamina. 2n = 20, 40. {\i From Bosna and N.E. Albania to S.W. Bulgaria.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b silana} (Grande) Ehrend., {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 40 (1975) ({\i K arvensis} var.{\i  silana} Grande): Lower internodes hispid and usually not pubescent. Petioles of rosette- and lower cauline leaves as long as lamina. 2n = 40.{\i  Siliceous soils. S.W. Italy} ({\i La Sila}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Subspecies ({\b a}) is polymorphic in habit, division of the leaves and indumentum. It hybridizes with {\b 1}({\b d}), {\b 12}, {\b 25} and {\b 29}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. K. lucana} Lacaita & Szabó,{\i  Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.} nov. ser., {\b 29}: 179 (1923). Biennial or short-lived perennial; stock sympodial, usually without leaf-rosettes at anthesis. Stem up to 150 cm, fistular; lower internodes long, with brown-based setae up to 5 mm and sparsely pubescent; upper internodes hirsute and pubescent; peduncles glandular. Basal rosette-leaves soon withering, obovate-oblanceolate, hispid, yellowish-setose; cauline leaves ovate-lanceolate, crenate-serrate, undivided or pinnate with up to 8 lateral lobes in the lower 1/2-2/3 and an ovate-acuminate terminal lobe, finely and sparsely hairy, the lower petiolate, the upper subamplexicaul. Capitula 2·5-3·5 cm in diameter. Calyx subpatelliform, 8-awned. Corolla purple.{\i  Mountain woods. • S. Italy} ({\i S.E. of Potenza}). It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. K. subcanescens} Jordan, {\i Cat. Jard. Grenoble }{\b 1853}: 12 (1853). Perennial; stock sympodial, with flowering stems often without basal leaves and usually without leaf-rosettes at anthesis. Stem 50-100 cm, the lower internodes rather long, villous and densely pubescent; peduncles usually glandular. Leaves undivided, ovate to broadly lanceolate, crenate-serrate; lower cauline petiolate; upper cauline acuminate, sparsely pubescent above, greyish-white and subvelutinous beneath, subcordate to cordate at base, sessile. Capitula 3·5-4·5 cm in diameter. Calyx subpatelliform, 8-dentate. Corolla violet-purple. 2n = 40. {\i Mountain meadows. • S.W. Alps.} Ga ?It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Closely related to {\b 5}({\b d}) and {\b 1}, from which it is sometimes separated with difficulty.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. K. baldensis} A. Kerner ex Borbás, {\i Acta Inst. Bot. Kolozsvár }{\b 1}: 37, 42 (1904). Like {\b 18} but stem 20-80 cm, the lower internodes often very short, sometimes less densely hairy; peduncles glandular or eglandular; leaves narrowly lanceolate, long-acuminate, entire to subserrate, densely appressed-hairy (rarely glabrescent) beneath, the upper rounded at base, sessile; calyx usually 7- to 9-awned; corolla reddish-purple. 2n = 40. {\i Mountain meadows and woodland clearings. • S Alps} ({\i around Lago di Garda}). It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Glabrescent variants ({\i K. decalvata }Borbás, {\i op. cit.} 42 (1904)) resemble {\b 5} and {\b 12}.
\par 

\par 
64}
\par