{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min58}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min1}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1052}{\nofchars6002}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 20. K. velutina}{\fs28  Briq.,}{\i\fs28  Annu. Cons. Jard. Bot. Gen\'e8ve}{\b\fs28  6}{\fs28 : 94 (1902). Perennial; stock sympodial, rather caespitose, with basal leaf-rosettes and flowering stems. Stem (15-)25-40(-60) cm, patent-tomentose and pubescent; peduncles glandular. Leaves membranous, densely velutinous with rather short hairs above, greyish-subtomentose beneath; basal green at anthesis, broadly lanceolate, acuminate, undivided, crenate-serrate, petiolate; cauline undivided or sublyrate-pinnate with 2-4(-8) lateral lobes and a lanceolate, subcrenate-serrate terminal lobe about as long as the divided part, with a narrow, rounded base. Capitula (1\'b78-)2-3(-3\'b75) cm in diameter. Calyx patelliform, usually 8-awned. Corolla purple. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  Rocky limestone slopes. \bullet  S. Alps, from}{\fs28  c. 9\'b0 30'}{\i\fs28  to}{\fs28  12\'b0 30' E. It.
\par 
\par   Hybridizes with }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) & (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 21. K. transalpina}{\fs28  (Christ) Briq., }{\i\fs28 op. cit.}{\fs28  91 (1902). Like }{\b\fs28 20}{\fs28  but stem 20-70 cm, the lower internodes subtomentose, sometimes glabrescent; leaves greyish-green, laxly velutinous with long hairs above, sometimes glabrescent, the basal oblong-lanceolate, subserrate, the cauline lyrate with 2-6(-10) lateral lobes and a broadly lanceolate terminal lobe; capitula (2\'b75-)3-4(-4\'b75) cm in diameter; corolla pinkish-lilac. 2n = 40. }{\i\fs28 Woodland clearings and meadows. \bullet  S. Alps, from}{\fs28  c. 8\'b0 45' }{\i\fs28 to}{\fs28  9\'b0 45'}{\i\fs28  }{\fs28 E}{\i\fs28 .}{\fs28  He It.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 22. K. persicina}{\fs28  A. Kerner, }{\i\fs28 Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung.}{\b\fs28  6}{\fs28 : 99 (1893). Like }{\b\fs28 20}{\fs28  but peduncles eglandular; leaves subtomentose, usually lyrate-pinnate with (2-)4-6(-10) lateral lobes and an oblong, acuminate terminal lobe, or undivided and serrate, the upper cauline often subcordate at base; capitula (3-)3\'b75-4\'b75(-5) cm in diameter; calyx (8-)9- to 12(-15)-awned; corolla bright red. 2n = 40. }{\i\fs28 Grassland or scrub; calcicole. \bullet  S.Alps}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 region E.of Lago di Garda}{\fs28 ). It.
\par 
\par   Transitional forms with the partly sympatric }{\b\fs28 19}{\fs28  occur.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 23. K. carinthiaca}{\fs28  Ehrend.,}{\i\fs28  \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  109}{\fs28 : 335 (1962). Perennial; stock sympodial, rather caespitose, with leaf-rosettes at anthesis. Stem (10-)15-30(-50) cm, the lower internodes short, patent-tomentose and densely pubescent; peduncles usually eglandular. Leaves membranous, appressed-sericeous above, greyish-tomentose-villous beneath; basal lanceolate-acuminate, often undivided, subcrenate-serrate, petiolate; upper cauline usually lyrate with 2-6(-8) lateral lobes and a long-attenuate terminal lobe about as long as the divided part, cuneate to rounded at the base, sessile. Capitula 2-3 cm in diameter. Calyx subpatelliform, usually 6- to 8-awned. Corolla pale lilac. 2n = 20. }{\i\fs28 Limestone hills. \bullet  S. Austria}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 N.E. Karnten}{\fs28 ). Au.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 24. K.}{\fs28  \'d7}{\b\fs28  norica}{\fs28  Ehrend.,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\fs28  336 (1962) (}{\i\fs28 K carinthiaca}{\fs28  \'d7}{\i\fs28  drymeia}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  drymeia}{\fs28 ). Like }{\b\fs28 23}{\fs28  but basal leaf-rosettes usually absent at anthesis; stem up to 50(-70) cm, the lower internodes usually longer than in }{\b\fs28 23}{\fs28 ; basal leaves oblong-ovate, usually with laxer indumentum, the cauline often undivided or lyrate with an ovate-acuminate, crenate terminal lobe, sometimes pinnate; capitula up to 4 cm in diameter; calyx usually 8- to 10-awned; corolla violet. 2n = 40. }{\i\fs28 Scrub and grassland; calcicole and on serpentine. \bullet  S.C. Austria}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 N.E. Karnten and C. Steiermark}{\fs28 ). Au.
\par 
\par   Polymorphic and often growing without one or both parents. Certain plants from the W. & S. Carpathians are greenish-pubescent and have undivided, ovate-lanceolate rosette-leaves, usually lyrate-pinnate cauline leaves, glandular or eglandular peduncles and reddish-purple corolla. They would key out here, but are certainly not identical with}{\b\fs28  24}{\fs28 , and have usually been mistaken for}{\b\fs28  29}{\fs28 ; their taxonomic position needs further attention.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 25. K. albanica}{\fs28  Briq., }{\i\fs28 Annu. Cons. Jard. Bot. Gen\'e8ve}{\b\fs28  6}{\fs28 : 125 (1902). Perennial; stock sympodial, rather caespitose, with leaf-rosettes and flowering stems. Stem up to 50 cm; lower internodes rather short, whitish-tomentose and pubescent; peduncles eglandular. Leaves mostly basal, subcoriaceous, narrowly lanceolate, acuminate, entire or subserrate, with revolute margin, long-greyish-tomentose beneath, glabrescent and shining above; lower cauline undivided; upper cauline usually sublyrate with 1-4 lateral lobes in lower third, terminal lobe about as long as divided part, sessile. Capitula 3-3\'b75 cm in diameter. Calyx sub-patelliform, (8-)10- to 12(-14)-awned. Corolla pink to light purplish. 2n = 20. }{\i\fs28 Stony mountain slopes. \bullet  S.W. Jugoslavia, N. Albania.}{\fs28  Al Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 26. K. velebitica}{\fs28  Szab\'f3, }{\i\fs28 Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b\fs28  9}{\fs28 : 50 (1910). Like }{\b\fs28 25}{\fs28  but leaves crenate-serrate, with rather flat margin, greyish-hirsute, broadly lanceolate-acuminate, undivided or the cauline lyrate-pinnate with (2-)4-8(-12) lateral lobes; capitula 2\'b75-3\'b75 cm in diameter; calyx cupuliform, 8- to 14-awned; corolla pink. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  Calcareous hillsides. \bullet  N.W. Jugoslavia}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 E. of Velebit}{\fs28 ). Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 27. K. mollis}{\fs28  Jordan, }{\i\fs28 Cat. Jard. Dijon }{\fs28 25 (1848). Perennial; stock sympodial. Stem (9\'b75-)25-40(-60) cm; lower internodes short, densely lanuginous and pubescent; peduncles glandular. Leaves membranous, greyish-tomentose, ciliate; basal broadly oblanceolate, usually undivided, crenate-serrate, petiolate; cauline pinnate with (2-)4-8(-10) lanceolate lateral lobes and an ovate-lanceolate, subacute, deeply crenate-serrate terminal lobe usually shorter than the divided part. Capitula (2-)3-4(-5) cm in diameter. Calyx cupuliform, 8- to 10-awned. Corolla reddish-purple. 2n = 20. }{\i\fs28 Dry,grassy mountain slopes. \bullet  S.W. Alps.}{\fs28  Ga It.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 28. K. calycina}{\fs28  (C. Presl) Guss.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Sic. Syn.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 170 (1843). Like }{\b\fs28 27}{\fs28  but leaves rather coriaceous, usually less densely and more coarsely hirsute, sometimes glabrescent, the cauline with (4-)6-10(-12) linear-lanceolate lateral lobes and a narrowly lanceolate, long-attenuate terminal lobe; corolla purplish-violet. 2n = 20. }{\i\fs28 Grassy hillsides. \bullet  Mountains of C. & S. Italy and Sicilia.}{\fs28  It Si.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 29. K. arvensis}{\fs28  (L.) Coulter, }{\i\fs28 Mem. Dipsac.}{\fs28  41 (1823). Perennial or biennial; stock sympodial, laxly caespitose, with leaf-rosettes and flowering stems, usually with underground stolons. Stem (15-)25-75(-100) cm, the lower internodes long or short, sometimes with purplish spots, more or less hirsute or setose and puberulent; peduncles glandular or eglandular. Leaves membranous, usually subhirsute; basal green, undivided or lyrate-pinnate; cauline often confined to lower half of stem, lanceolate to narrowly ovate, usually lyrate-pinnate with (2-)4-12(-16) lateral lobes and an ovate-lanceolate, subacute, subdentate terminal lobe usually much shorter than the divided part. Hermaphrodite capitula (2\'b75-)3-4 cm in diameter; female capitula (1\'b75-)2-3 cm in diameter. Calyx cupuliform, (6-)8(-10)awned. Corolla bluish-violet to lilac, rarely purple or pink. 2n = 20, 40, 43, 46. }{\i\fs28 Meadows, pastures and open woods. Most of Europe, but absent from parts of the Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  ?Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Su [Fa Is].
\par 
\par    A very polymorphic taxon, hybridizing with }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 9}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 16}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 18}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 21}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 23-25}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 30-34}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 37}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 39}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 42}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 43}{\fs28 . An often greyish-subtomentose diploid with deeply multi-pinnate leaves and bluish-lilac corolla is subsp.}{\b\fs28  pannonica}{\fs28  (Heuffel) O. Schwarz,}{\i\fs28  Mitt. Th\'fcr. Bot. Ges.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 118 (1949) (}{\i\fs28 K arvensis}{\fs28  var.}{\i\fs28  budensis}{\fs28  (Simonkai) Szab\'f3) from E.C. Europe. Other diploid plants from E.C. Europe with
\par 
\par 65}
\par }