{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 long stems, wide and undivided greenish leaves, and lilac-pink corolla, have been called subsp.{\b  rosea }(Baumg.) Soó, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  83}: 129 (1972) ({\i K. dumetorum} Heuffel). They link {\b 29} with {\b 32}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Slender, sparsely hairy, occasionally biennial diploids are widespread from N. Italy to the N. part of the Balkan peninsula, connecting{\b  29} to {\b 34} in the west and to {\b 31}, {\b 33} and {\b 37} in the southeast. Similar tetraploids in the S. Jura and foothills of the S.W. Alps have been called{\b  K. timeroyi} Jordan,{\i  Cat. Jard. Dijon }25 (1848), and {\b K. leucophaea} Briq.,{\i  Annu. Cons. Jard. Bot. Genève}{\b  6}: 75 (1902); they approach {\b 34}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Tetraploids, which are widespread from the Pyrenees, S. Alps and Carpathians northwards, are usually robust, with coarse indumentum, purplish-spotted lower internodes and large terminal leaf-lobes.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. K. kitaibelii} (Schultes) Borbás,{\i  Acta Inst. Bot. Kolozsvár }{\b 1}: 60 (1904). Like {\b 29} but a robust perennial; stem usually not more than 50 cm, hirsute or greyish-subtomentose, the lower internodes without purplish spots; leaves elliptic-lanceolate, with dentate-crenate terminal lobe, subhirsute or greyish-subtomentose, broadly subamplexicaul; capitula (2-)3-4 cm in diameter; corolla pale yellow, rarely suffused with lilac. •{\i  E.C. Europe.} Au Cz Ge Hu Po.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Records from the E. & S. Carpathians (as{\b  K. kitaibelii} subsp.{\b  alpigena} (Schur) Soó, {\i Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  11}: 251 (1965)) possibly refer to albino variants of {\b 29}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b kitaibelii}: Stem green, hirsute with rigid hairs. Leaves green, subhirsute. 2n = 40. {\i Grassland and wood-margins. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tomentella} (Szabó) Baksay, {\i Ann. Hist.-Nat. Mus. Hung.} nov. ser., {\b 7}: 325 (1956): Stem and leaves greyish-subtomentose and puberulent. 2n = 40. {\i Woodland clearings on dolomite hills. Hungary} ({\i W. of Budapest}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. K. ambigua} Boiss. & Orph. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 6}): 95 (1859). Like {\b 29} but a slender perennial or, rarely, biennial, usually without underground stolons; peduncles usually glandular; leaves somewhat hairy to greyish-subvillous or pubescent, the lower cauline usually undivided, the upper cauline narrow at base or subamplexicaul; capitula (1·5-)2-3(-3·5) cm wide; corolla usually pale yellow or pale pink. 2n = 20.{\i  Wood-margins. • From S. Macedonia to C. Bulgaria.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Variants from high elevation with less divided, often subvillous leaves, approach {\b 15}, {\b 16} and {\b 25}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. K. macedonica} Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 178 (1846) ({\i K. atrorubens} Janka ex Brandza). Like {\b 29} but leaves evenly distributed along the stem, the basal usually withered at anthesis, undivided, the cauline with ovate, crenate-serrate terminal lobe; capitula 1·5-3 cm in diameter; corolla usually dark red, sometimes lilac or pink. 2n = 20.{\i  Scrub and open woods. • C. part of Balkan peninsula, S.E. Romania.} Al Bu ?Gr Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Biennial variants with wide-based cauline leaves, from S.E. Romania, have been named{\b  K. tulceanensis} E. I. Nyárády, {\i Bul. Grad. Bot. Univ. Cluj}{\b  19}: 82 (1939). Populations are often polymorphic in the colour of the corolla, possibly because of hybridization, and approach {\b 29} and {\b 31}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. K. visianii} Szabó, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  9}: 42 (1910) ({\i E purpurea} var.{\i  montenegrina} (G. Beck) Szabó). Like {\b 29} but biennial, rarely short-lived perennial, without underground stolons; stem (25-)40-120(-250) cm; peduncles glandular; basal leaves lyrate, usually withered at anthesis; cauline pinnate, more or less crenate-serrate, with oblong-rhombic terminal lobe; capitula (1·3-)1·8-2·5(-3) cm in diameter; calyx usually 8-dentate; corolla purple. 2n = 20.{\i  Scrub and grassland. • S.W.& C.Jugoslavia, N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Short-lived perennial variants resemble {\b 31} and diploids of {\b 29}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. K. purpurea} (Vill.) Borbás, {\i Acta Inst. Bot. Kolozsvár}{\b  1}: 51 (1904) ({\i Trichera collina} (Req.) Reichenb.). Perennial, rarely short-lived; stock sympodial, with leaf-rosettes and flowering stems, without underground stolons. Stem (10-)15-50(-80) cm; lower internodes short, finely hirsute and pubescent; peduncles glandular. Leaves membranous to subcoriaceous, oblong-lanceolate, sparsely hirsute, subtomentose or subglabrous; lower sometimes undivided, subdentate; upper 1- to 2-pinnate, with (4-)8-16(-20) narrowly oblong or linear-lanceolate, often rather deeply dentate, lateral lobes and a lanceolate-rhombic terminal lobe shorter than the divided part. Capitula (1·5-)1·8-2·5(-3·5) cm in diameter. Calyx cupuliform, 8- to 10(-12)-awned. Corolla purple to violet. 2n = 20.{\i  Dry grassland and rocky slopes. W. Mediterranean region, S.W. & S.C. Alps. }Ga He Hs It ?Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  In S. Italy more robust, short-lived perennial plants with broadly rhombic-ovate terminal leaf-lobes occur; they appear related to {\b 17} and are very similar to taxa described from N.W. Africa such as{\b  K. numidica }(Debeaux & Reverchon) Szabó, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  36}: 437 (1905). These and {\b 34} are possibly conspecific.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  In S.W. Europe and W. Italy delimitation from {\b 29} seems to coincide with diploid-tetraploid differences but morphological separation is sometimes difficult. Close contacts are evident with parallel tomentose diploids; transitional variants occur between {\b 34} and the tomentose, diploid {\b 27} in the S.W. Alps and {\b 28} in Italy and Sicilia.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  A tetraploid population of small tomentose plants with narrowly lanceolate, predominantly undivided and subdentate, or sublyrate leaves with 2-4 small lateral lobes and eglandular peduncles, occurs in S.W. France (S. of Cahors); its status requires investigation.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. K. rupicola} (Willk.) Szabó,{\i  Bot. Közl.} {\b 31}: 124 (1934). Like {\b 34} but densely caespitose from woody base; stem 10-20 cm, slender, papillose; leaves subcoriaceous, finely papillose, sparsely ciliate below and on midrib, the lower oblong, the upper lyrate with 2-6 lateral lobes and an ovate terminal lobe; capitula c. 2·5 cm in diameter; calyx usually 8-awned.{\i  Rock-crevices. • N.E. Spain} ({\i mountains near Tortosa}). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. K. subscaposa} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 53 (1852) (?{\i K legionensis }(Lag.) DC. pro parte). Like {\b 34} but stem up to 20(-30) cm, coarsely hirsute and pubescent; leaves usually subcoriaceous, obovate to broadly oblanceolate, the upper usually lyrate-pinnate with (2-)4-10(-14) oblong-obovate, entire or subdentate lateral lobes and an ovate-suborbicular terminal lobe, coarsely appressed-hirsute and scabrid to pubescent; capitula (2-)2·5-3·5(-4) cm in diameter; calyx usually 8-awned. 2n = 20. {\i Grassy and rocky slopes. • C. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Variants of {\b 34} in E. Spain, and of {\b 29} on the southern slopes of the C. Pyrenees sometimes approach {\b 36} and make separation difficult.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. K. illyrica} G. Beck,{\i  Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}){\b  9}: 351 (1894) ({\i K purpurea} var.{\i  illyrica} (G. Beck) Szabó). Like {\b 34} but stem sometimes with purplish spots; peduncles glandular or eglandular; leaves usually membranous, crenate-serrate, the
\par 

\par 
66}
\par