{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords1016}{\nofchars5796}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 basal ovate-lanceolate, undivided or lyrate, the upper usually pinnate with (2-)4-6(-10) ovate-oblong lateral lobes and a rhombic, cuspidate terminal lobe about as long as the divided part; capitula (2\'b75-)3-3\'b75(-4) cm in diameter; calyx (7-)8- to 10(-11)awned. 2n = 40. }{\i\fs28 Scrub-margin and dry grassland. \bullet  N.E. Italy, N.W. Jugoslavia.}{\fs28  It Ju.
\par 
\par  Morphologically and geographically intermediate between }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) and }{\b\fs28 26}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 38. K. pectinata}{\fs28  Ehrend., }{\i\fs28 \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b\fs28 109}{\fs28 : 336 (1962). Perennial; stock sympodial, with leaf-rosettes and flowering stems. Stem (10-)15-30(-60) cm, with short lower internodes, retrorsely hirsute, puberulent; peduncles eglandular. Leaves somewhat coriaceous, uniformly pubescent, pectinate-pinnate, with (10-)12-16(-22) lanceolate, acute, entire or subdentate lateral lobes (2\'b75-)3\'b72-5(-6) mm wide, and a slightly broader terminal lobe. Capitula 2-3 cm in diameter. Calyx cupuliform, (7-)9-to 12(-15)-dentate. Corolla lilac. 2n = 20. }{\i\fs28 Stony limestone slopes. \bullet  N.W. Jugoslavia}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 W. slopes of Velebit}{\fs28 ). Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 39. K. clementii}{\fs28  (G. Beck) Ehrend.,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\fs28  337 (1962). Like }{\b\fs28 38}{\fs28  but leaves heterotrichous, hirsute or glabrescent and pubescent on margin and veins, rather shiny, with linear-lanceolate lateral lobes (1\'b75-)2-3\'b75(-5) mm wide; calyx (9-)10- to 15(-18)-dentate; corolla purplish. 2n = 40. }{\i\fs28 Stony limestone slopes. \bullet  Mountains of W. Jugoslavia, from }{\fs28 c. 43\'b0 }{\i\fs28 to }{\fs28 c. 45\'b0 }{\i\fs28 N}{\fs28 . Ju.
\par 
\par  Morphological intermediates between }{\b\fs28 39}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 38}{\fs28  occur.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 40. K. adriatica}{\fs28  Ehrend., }{\i\fs28 Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  71}{\fs28 : 40 (1975). Like }{\b\fs28 38}{\fs28  but peduncles glandular; leaves heterotrichous, densely long-hirsute and pubescent, with linear-lanceolate, obtuse lateral lobes (1\'b75-)2-3\'b75(-4) mm wide; calyx (10-)12- to 15(-16)dentate; corolla pale lilac-purplish. 2n = 40.}{\i\fs28  Coastal limestone hills. \bullet  W. Jugoslavia}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 between Zadar and Sibenik}{\fs28 ). Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 41. K. dalmatica}{\fs28  G. Beck,}{\i\fs28  Ann. Naturh. Mus.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Wien}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  9}{\fs28 : 352 (1894). Like }{\b\fs28 38}{\fs28  but stems up to 30 cm; peduncles glandular; leaves rather rigidly ciliate and pubescent, with linear lateral lobes 0\'b75-1\'b75 mm wide; calyx (12-)14- to 17(-18)-dentate; corolla purplish. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  Stony limestone slopes. \bullet  W. Jugoslavia}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 near Split}{\fs28 ). Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 42. K. travnicensis}{\fs28  (G. Beck) Szab\'f3, }{\i\fs28 Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b\fs28  9}{\fs28 : 51 (1910). Perennial; stock sympodial, with lateral leaf-rosettes and flowering stems. Stem (20-)30-60(-80) cm, usually robust, with a basal leaf-rosette, retrorsely hispid or subglabrous; peduncles usually eglandular. Leaves subcoriaceous, shining, sparsely setose or glabrescent; lower usually 3-6 times as long as wide, usually undivided, ovate-lanceolate, subacuminate, crenate-dentate, petiolate; upper usually lyrate-pinnate, with 1-8(-12) lanceolate lateral lobes and a larger, ovate-lanceolate terminal lobe. Capitula 2-4 cm in diameter. Calyx cupuliform, (7-)8- to 11(-15)-awned. Corolla purple. 2n = 60.}{\i\fs28  Limestone slopes. \bullet  Mountains of W. Jugoslavia.}{\fs28  Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 43. K. fleischmannii}{\fs28  (Hladnik ex Reichenb.) Pacher,}{\i\fs28  Jahrb. Naturh. Landes-Mus. Karnten}{\b\fs28  22}{\fs28 : 73 (1893) (}{\i\fs28 K. rigidiuscula }{\fs28 (Koch) Wettst.). Like }{\b\fs28 42}{\fs28  but stem usually more slender, often subglabrous; lower leaves usually 5-9 times as long as wide, usually narrowly lanceolate, long-acuminate, subcrenate; capitula c. 2 cm in diameter; calyx 8-awned. 2n = 40. }{\i\fs28 Coniferous woods on dolomite. \bullet  N.W. Jugoslavia}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 mountains W. of Ljubljana}{\fs28 ). Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 44. K. tatarica}{\fs28  (L.) Szab\'f3,}{\i\fs28  Bot. K\'f6zl.}{\b\fs28  13}{\fs28 : 65 (1914) (?}{\i\fs28 K. montana}{\fs28  (Bieb.) DC.). Biennial with a thick taproot. Stem up to 200 \'d7 2 cm, fistular, much-branched, with deflexed setae; peduncles glandular or eglandular. Leaves membranous, sparsely setose; basal narrowly elliptical, usually undivided, crenate, petiolate; cauline elliptic-lanceolate, undivided or sublyrate, repand-crenate, cuspidate, connate and subamplexicaul. Capitula 2-4 cm in diameter. Calyx cupuliform, 8- to 12-awned. Corolla pale yellow. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  Open woods. \bullet  E. Russia, from the middle Volga to S. Ural.}{\fs28  Rs (C, E).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 45. K. byzantina}{\fs28  Fritsch, }{\i\fs28 Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b\fs28  45}{\fs28 : 429 (1896). Annual. Stem 20-30 cm, crispate-puberulent; peduncles eglandular. Leaves setose and puberulent, especially above; basal in a rosette, narrowly lanceolate, acuminate, entire or crenate-serrate; upper cauline linear to lanceolate, undivided or pinnate, entire to laciniate, more or less amplexicaul. Capitula 2-3 cm in diameter, with 35-40 florets. Involucre patelliform; bracts many, linear-deltate, puberulent and with conspicuous, rigid cilia, with whitish margin. Calyx patelliform, 8- to 10-awned. Corolla bluish-violet; marginal corollas with outer median lobe somewhat wider than the lateral, the tube c. 6 mm. Fruit with unequal involucel-teeth. }{\i\fs28 Scrub and cultivated fields. Turkey-in-Europe, S.E. Bulgaria.}{\fs28  Bu Tu. (}{\i\fs28 Anatolia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 46. K. integrifolia}{\fs28  (L.) Bertol., }{\i\fs28 Fl. Ital.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 32 (1835) (}{\i\fs28 K. hybrida}{\fs28  (All.) Coulter). Annual. Stem 20-80 cm, hirsute below, subhirsute to subglabrous above; peduncles usually eglandular. Basal leaves in a rosette, dentate or crenate, glabrous or hirsute, undivided or lyrate-pinnate with obovate or lanceolate, obtuse lobes, petiolate; upper leaves linear to lanceolate, more or less amplexicaul. Hermaphrodite capitula c. 3 cm in diameter, with 30-40 florets; female capitula c. 1\'b75 cm in diameter, with 20-30 florets. Involucre patelliform; bracts in 2-3 rows, ovate at base, lanceolate-acuminate, with 3-5(-7) inconspicuous veins, greyish velutinous, ciliate-hirsute, usually eglandular. Calyx cupuliform, 12- to 24-dentate, rarely with some teeth awned. Corolla violet; marginal corollas with outer median lobe somewhat wider than the lateral, the tube c. 3-5 mm. Fruit with equal involucel-teeth, or those on 2 angles much longer and distinctly 2-horned. 2n = 20. }{\i\fs28 Grassland, scrub and disturbed ground. Mediterranean region, Bulgaria.}{\fs28  Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 47. K. degenii}{\fs28  Borb\'e1s,}{\i\fs28  Verh. Naturf. Ver. Br\'fcnn}{\b\fs28  33}{\fs28 : 29 (1895). Annual. Stem 20-60 cm, hirsute; peduncles glandular. Basal leaves in a rosette, denticulate, acute, hirsute, petiolate, undivided or pinnate; upper leaves linear to narrowly lanceolate. Capitula with 10-15 florets. Involucre more or less cyathiform or subcylindrical at anthesis; bracts (7-)8-10(-13) mm, 10-15, in 2-3 rows, lanceolate, with 7-9 prominent veins, shortly setose and with dark, long-stalked glands. Calyx cupuliform, 12- to 16-dentate. Corolla lilac to violet; marginal corollas with outer median lobe up to twice as wide as the lateral, the tube (4\'b75-)5-6(-6\'b75) mm. Fruit hairy, with prominent involucel-teeth. }{\i\fs28 Scrub and disturbed ground. Turkey-in-Europe}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 around Istanbul}{\fs28 ). Tu. (}{\i\fs28 N.W. Anatolia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 48. K. orientalis}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  101 (1753). Like }{\b\fs28 47}{\fs28  but capitula with 5-10 florets; involucre cylindrical at anthesis, the bracts (9-)10-14(-15) mm, 8-10, in 1-2 rows; corolla purplish-red; marginal corollas with outer median lobe 2-5 times as wide as the lateral, the tube (5\'b75-)7-12(-13) mm; fruit glabrous, with short involucel-teeth. 2n = 16.}{\i\fs28  Scrub and disturbed ground. S.E. part of Balkan peninsula, N. Aegean region.}{\fs28  Bu Gr Tu.
\par 
\par 67}
\par }