{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 7.               Pterocephalus}            Adanson
\par    

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By I.K. Ferguson.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs or shrubs with usually hairy stems. Capitula hemispherical; the outer florets sometimes radiate. Receptacular scales hairy or absent. Involucel sulcate, with terminal seta, minute teeth or a short corona. Calyx short, stipitate, with 5-24 plumose setae. Corolla 5-fid.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: B. L. Burtt,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  22}: 279-283 (1957).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems procumbent
\par 
2 Leaves entire ............................................................................ {\b 5. spathulatus}
\par 
2 Leaves lyrate, crenate or dentate .................................................. {\b 6. perennis}
\par 
1 Stems erect
\par 
3 Leaves 1- to 2-pinnatisect, with linear lobes
\par 
4 Annual; fruiting involucel with a long, flattened,
\par 
  curved seta up to 15 mm ............................................................... {\b 3. diandrus}
\par 
4 Perennial; fruiting involucel without a seta ............................ {\b 4. intermedius}
\par 
3 Leaves lyrate or pinnatisect, with ovate-lanceolate or
\par 
  lanceolate, crenate-dentate terminal lobes
\par 
5 Involucel with a narrow, scarious corona and an 
\par 
  internal collar surrounding neck of ovary ......................................... {\b 2. brevis}
\par 
5 Involucel with a toothed margin, the corona and 
\par 
  internal collar absent .................................................................... {\b 1. papposus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. papposus} (L.) Coulter,{\i  Mém. Dipsac.} 32 (1823) ({\i P. plumosus} (L.) Coulter). Erect annual up to 60 cm, with long and short glandular and eglandular hairs. Leaves 3-15 × 0·5-5 cm, oblong, crenate-dentate, or lyrate or pinnatisect; terminal lobe large, lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, dentate or crenate; lateral lobes small, linear. Involucral bracts 12-20 × 2·5-4 mm, linear, acute, equal to or longer than florets. Corolla 12-18 mm, pink or purplish. Involucel 4-6 mm in fruit, minutely dentate; corona and internal collar absent. Calyx 9-11 mm, with 11-12 setae free almost to base.{\i  Dry places. E. Mediterranean region; Krym.} Al Bu Cr Gr Ju Rs (K) Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. brevis} Coulter, {\i loc. cit.} (1823) ({\i P. papposus} sensu Hayek pro parte, non (L.) Coulter). Erect annual or biennial 15-20(-40) cm, with long, whitish eglandular and short glandular hairs. Leaves 3-9 × 0·5-2 cm, pinnatisect; lobes linear-oblong, decurrent, entire or divided. Involucral bracts 10-16 × 2-3 mm, linear, acute, equal to or longer than florets. Corolla 12-18 mm, whitish, usually purplish distally. Involucel 4-6 mm in fruit, with a narrow, scarious corona and an internal collar surrounding the neck of the ovary. Calyx 7-8 mm, with 11-16 setae free almost to base.{\i  Karpathos.} Cr. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. diandrus} (Lag.) Lag.,{\i  Gen. Sp. Nov.} 9 (1816) ({\i P. papposus} Coulter pro parte et auct. iber.). Erect, pubescent or puberulent annual up to 45 cm. Leaves 2-5 × 0·8-1·5 cm, pinnatisect; lobes linear. Involucral bracts 6-10 mm, ovate, acuminate, shorter than florets. Corolla 5-7 mm, blue or lilac. Involucel 3-4 mm in fruit, with dentate corona and a long, flattened, curved seta up to 15 mm. Calyx 5-6 mm, with 20-24 setae united at base to form a distinct cup.{\i  Dry places. • C. Spain, Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. intermedius} (Lag.) Coutinho, {\i Fl. Port.} 594 (1913) ({\i P. broussonetii }Coulter ex DC.). Erect, pubescent or puberulent perennial up to 80 cm, woody below. Leaves 4-9 × 1·5-3·5 cm, 2-pinnatisect; lobes linear. Involucral bracts 6-9 mm, linear-lanceolate, equalling or rather shorter than florets. Corolla 7-9 mm, pale lilac. Involucel 4-5 mm in fruit, with a short, scarious corona. Calyx 5-6 mm, with 5-7 setae, free almost to the base.{\i  Dry, sandy ground. • S. Spain, S. & C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. spathulatus} (Lag.) Coulter,{\i  Mém. Dipsac.} 32 (1823). Procumbent, rather woody, caespitose, densely white- or grey-lanate-tomentose perennial up to 5 cm. Leaves 6-20 × 4-5 mm, spathulate, entire. Capitulum with outer florets more or less radiate. Involucral bracts 6-10 mm, linear-lanceolate, shorter than florets. Corolla 15-18 mm, pink. Involucel 3-4 mm in fruit, densely sericeous, with a hairy corona. Calyx c. 12 mm, with 13-16 setae free almost to base.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. perennis} Coulter,{\i  op. cit.} 33 (1823). Procumbent, rather woody, caespitose perennial up to 12 cm. Leaves 2-5 × 0·5-1·5 cm, lyrate or undivided, oblong-spathulate, crenate or dentate; terminal lobe ovate or ovate-oblong, crenate; lateral lobes small, linear. Involucral bracts 8-15 mm, lanceolate, shorter than florets. Corolla 12-20 mm, pink, or pale purplish. Capitulum with outer florets radiate. Involucel 3-4 mm in fruit, densely sericeous, with a corona of short plumose setae c. 2 mm. Calyx 12-14 mm, with 13-16 setae free almost to base.{\i  Mountain rocks. • Greece and Albania. }Al Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b perennis} ({\i P. perennis} subsp.{\i  parnassi} (Sprengel) Vierh.): Leaves more or less densely grey-pubescent or -tomentose, usually sparsely glandular, the veins on the lower surface hidden.{\i  S. & E. Greece}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b bellidifolius} (Boiss.) Vierh., {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  69}: 244 (1919): Leaves green, pubescent, usually densely glandular, the veins on the lower surface distinct.{\i  N.W. Greece, Albania}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 8.           Scabiosa}           L.
\par            

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A. Jasiewicz
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs, rarely woody at base. Leaves opposite, simple or pinnate, often in non-flowering basal rosettes. Capitula long-pedunculate; involucral bracts herbaceous, in 1-3 rows. Receptacle hemispherical to cylindrical; receptacular bracts usually linear-lanceolate. Involucel-tube cylindrical, 8-ribbed, expanded above into an orbicular or infundibuliform, scarious corona with many, sometimes excurrent, veins. Calyx cupuliform below, the upper part usually prolonged into 5 setae. Corolla with 5 unequal lobes and a short tube, usually longer in marginal than central florets.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucel-tube longitudinally sulcate, but without pits
\par 
2 Corona with 8 veins; ribs of involucel-tube becoming 
\par 
  wider and confluent at margin
\par 
3 All fruits in capitulum with long calyx-setae; corona 
\par 
  broadly infundibuliform ....................................................... {\b 23. atropurpurea}
\par 
3 Outer fruits in capitulum without or with very short
\par 
  calyx-setae; corona very narrowly infundibuliform ............. {\b 24. semipapposa}
\par 
2 Corona with 20-24 veins; ribs of involucel-tube of 
\par 
  uniform width and not confluent at margin
\par 
4 Leaves of non-flowering rosettes and lower cauline 
\par 
  leaves entire
\par 
5 Terminal segments of cauline leaves distinctly wider 
\par 
  and longer than the lateral ......................................................... {\b 25. silenifolia}
\par 
5 Terminal segments of cauline leaves as wide as and
\par 
  slightly longer than the lateral
\par 
6 Calyx-setae 5-9 times as long as corona ...................................... {\b 26. vestina}
\par 
6 Calyx-setae 2-2½ times as long as corona ............................... {\b 27. canescens}
\par 
4 Leaves of non-flowering rosettes and lower cauline 
\par 
  leaves dentate or pinnatifid
\par 
7 Annual
\par 
8 Stems dichotomously branched ............................................... {\b 28. parviflora}
\par 
8 Stem simple or not dichotomously branched ................................. {\b 29. tenuis}
\par 
7 Perennial or biennial
\par 

\par 
68}
\par