{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 9 Corolla purple or reddish .................................... ({\b 30-38}). {\b columbaria} group
\par 9 Corolla yellow or whitish .................................... ({\b 39-43}). {\b ochroleuca} group
\par 1 Involucel-tube terete, with 8 pits
\par 10 Annual
\par 11 Corona more than 3·5 mm
\par 12 Receptacular bracts narrowly oblanceolate .................................. {\b 18. rotata}
\par 12 Receptacular bracts broadly ovate
\par 13 Involucral bracts entire ............................................................... {\b 16. stellata}
\par 13 Involucral bracts 3-fid or pinnatifid ................................ {\b 17. monspeliensis}
\par 11 Corona not more than 3·5 mm
\par 14 Corolla of marginal florets slightly longer than that
\par    of the central; fruiting capitula ellipsoid
\par 15 Corona circular in outline, the veins slightly excurrent ........ {\b 19. micrantha}
\par 15 Corona square in outline, the veins distinctly excurrent .............. {\b 20. sicula}
\par 14 Corolla of marginal florets considerably longer than 
\par    that of the central; fruiting capitula globose
\par 16 Corolla dark violet; calyx-setae c. 6 times as long as
\par    corona ..................................................................................... {\b 22. cosmoides}
\par 16 Corolla yellow; calyx-setae 4-5 times as long as corona ........ {\b 21. hispidula}
\par 10 Perennial or biennial
\par 17 Leaves stellate-tomentose beneath
\par 18 Leaves glabrous above ........................................................... {\b 1. limonifolia}
\par 18 Leaves pubescent above ............................................................. {\b 2. saxatilis}
\par 17 Leaves glabrous, or pubescent with simple hairs
\par 19 Calyx-setae shorter than corona
\par 20 At least some leaves 3- to 9-fid, obovate- to lanceolate-
\par    spathulate, the early ones glabrous
\par 21 Leaves deeply 3- to 9-fid, densely sericeous ............................. {\b 7. hymettia}
\par 21 Leaves entire or 3-fid, pubescent .............................................. {\b 6. variifolia}
\par 20 Leaves entire, lanceolate to elliptic-lanceolate, the
\par    early ones pubescent
\par 22 Leaves with long, straight hairs .............................................. {\b 4. albocincta}
\par 22 Leaves with long hairs and with short, hooked hairs
\par 23 Leaves oblanceolate, 31/2-5 times as long as wide ......................... {\b 3. cretica}
\par 23 Leaves elliptic-obovate, 11/2-21/2 times as long as wide .............. {\b 5. minoana}
\par 19 Calyx-setae longer than corona
\par 24 All leaves entire or serrate
\par 25 Leaves elliptic-lanceolate ............................................................. {\b 8. epirota}
\par 25 Leaves linear-lanceolate
\par 26 Corolla blue ....................................................................... {\b 13. graminifolia}
\par 26 Corolla pale yellow ............................................................ {\b 14. rhodopensis}
\par 24 Lower leaves 1- to 2-pinnatifid
\par 27 Stem herbaceous; upper leaves entire ...................................... {\b 15. argentea}
\par 27 Stem woody at base; upper leaves pinnatifid
\par 28 Involucel-tube less than 2 mm; capitulum 10-15 mm in
\par    diameter ................................................................................... {\b 9. sphaciotica}
\par 28 Involucel-tube more than 3 mm; capitulum more than
\par    20 mm in diameter
\par 29 Wider involucral bracts pinnatifid .................................... {\b 10. pulsatilloides}
\par 29 Involucral bracts entire
\par 30 Calyx-setae 2-3 times as long as corona; corona shorter
\par   than involucel-tube; corolla yellow ............................................. {\b 11. isetensis}
\par 30 Calyx-setae 11/2 times as long as corona; corona 
\par    longer than involucel-tube; corolla reddish .................................. {\b 12. crenata}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. TROCHOCEPHALUS Mert. & Koch (Sect. Asterocephalus Coulter). Involucel-tube with 8 pits below the corona.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. limonifolia} Vahl, {\i Symb. Bot.}{\b  2}: 27 (1791). Caespitose perennial, woody at base. Stem 20-50(-80) cm, whitish-lanate. Basal leaves 30-60 mm, spathulate to oblong-spathulate, obtuse, entire, glabrous above, densely stellate-tomentose beneath, fleshy-coriaceous; cauline leaves 1(-3) pairs, smaller than the basal. Capitula usually 3, globose. Involucral bracts triangular-ovate, obtuse, densely lanate, 1/2 as long as florets. Involucel-tube densely lanate; pits c. 1·5 mm; corona 3-4 mm, 28-veined, indistinctly 4- to 5-lobed, irregularly dentate. Calyx-setae twice as long as corona. Corolla 10-12 mm, slightly longer in marginal than in central florets, lilac.{\i  Limestone rocks. • Sicilia. }Si.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. saxatilis} Cav.,{\i  Icon. Descr.}{\b  2}: 68 (1793). Caespitose perennial, woody at base. Stem 20-40 cm, procumbent, hirsute when young, becoming glabrous. Basal leaves 2-6 cm, broadly lanceolate, acute, entire, stellate-tomentose but green above, densely white-stellate-tomentose beneath, long-petiolate; cauline leaves 1-2(-3) pairs, smaller than the basal. Capitula usually (1-)3-5, globose. Involucral bracts c. 15 mm, lanceolate, obtuse, shorter than florets. Corona with 4 dentate or subentire lobes. Corolla c. 20 mm, slightly longer in marginal than in central florets, white. {\i Rock-crevices. E. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b saxatilis}: Corona with shallow, dentate lobes, shortly pubescent. •{\i  E. Spain}.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b grosii} Font Quer,{\i  Arx. Secc. Ci. Inst. Est. Catalans }{\b 18}: 27 (1950): Corona with deep, subentire lobes, sometimes divided to the base. •{\i  S. Spain}.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. cretica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }100 (1753). Caespitose perennial, woody at base. Stem 10-25(-30) cm, procumbent, white-lanate, often leafless. Basal leaves obovate-lanceolate, 31/2-5 times as long as wide, subacute, appressed-sericeous and with short curved hairs, tapering into petiole. Capitula 35-50(-55) mm in diameter, globose, solitary; peduncle scarcely exceeding leaves. Involucral bracts ovate or narrowly ovate, obtuse, densely white-lanate, 1/2-2/3 as long as florets. Receptacular bracts linear, with narrow membranous margin. Involucel-tube 5-7 mm; pits 2-2·5 mm, narrowly elliptical, densely lanate; corona 7-9 mm, hirsute, irregular, with 24-35 veins. Calyx-setae shorter than corona. Corolla about twice as long in marginal as in central florets, lilac.{\i  Rocky places. W. Mediterranean region.} Bl It Si.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. albocincta} W. Greuter,{\i  Candollea }{\b 22}: 242 (1967). Like {\b 3} but leaves broadly elliptical, with longer straight hairs only, especially on the margin; peduncle 30-40 cm, much exceeding leaves.{\i  Rock-crevices. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. minoana} (P. H. Davis) W. Greuter,{\i  op. cit.} 241 (1967). Like {\b 3} but leaves elliptic-obovate, 11/2-23/4 times as long as wide, subobtuse, entire, appressed-sericeous and with short, curved hairs; involucral bracts 2 2/5-3 times as long as wide; corona with 27-33 veins. {\i Calcareous rocks. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. variifolia} Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  3}: 137 (1875). Like {\b 3} but leaves obovate, 2-2 2/3 times as long as wide, subacute, sericeous when young, becoming glabrous, the outer and inner entire, the middle pinnatifid, with 2-5 lobes 10-25 mm; cauline leaves pinnatifid; corona with 27-38 veins. {\i Rocky places. Karpathos.} Cr. ({\i Rhodos.})
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. hymettia} Boiss. & Spruner in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 2}): 111 (1843). Caespitose perennial, woody at base. Stem c. 25 cm Leaves, except the lowest, 3- or 5-fid, densely silvery sericeous. Capitula 25-35(-40) mm in diameter. Involucral bracts ovate, obtuse, usually 1/3-1/2 as long as florets. Receptacular bracts ovate-lanceolate, widened and membranous towards base. {\i Rock-crevices. • C. & S. Greece and N. Aegean region.} Gr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   Information on the florets is apparently not available.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. epirota} Halácsy & Bald., {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  42}: 577 (1893). Perennial, woody at base. Stem 15-40 cm, ascending, leafy in the lower half, densely hirsute, with 1-4 capitula. Leaves elliptic-lanceolate, entire or serrate, densely hirsute. Capitula 35-55 mm in diameter. Involucral bracts 12-20 mm, 2/3 as long as flowers, linear-lanceolate, shortly acute, densely hirsute. Involucel-tube c. 4·5 mm; pits c. 2 mm, linear; corona
\par 
\par 69}
\par