{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b 1}({\b e}) is very near to {\b 2}, {\b 14} and {\b 31}.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. wettsteinii} Adamovic,{\i  Deutsche Bot. Monatsschr.}{\b  7}: 117 (1889). Caespitose; shoots green, usually patent-hairy. Stems 3-15 cm, ascending; middle internodes not more than 11/2(-2) times as long as the leaves. Leaves 10-20 × 1-1*5 mm, the cauline lanceolate to broadly linear, the basal ovate, acute; midrib comprising less than 3/4 of the width of the leaf; margin somewhat revolute. Inflorescence corymbiform; partial inflorescences more or less capitate, surrounded by broadly lanceolate leaves. Corolla 5-6 mm, narrowly infundibuliform, usually sparsely hairy outside, pink; tube 11/2-2 times as long as lobes; lobes distinctly appendiculate. Fruit 1·2-1·5 mm, densely hairy to subglabrous. {\i Alpine zone. • Mountains of S.W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. tenella} Heuffel ex Degen in A. Kerner, {\i Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung.}{\b  8}: 43 (1899) (incl.{\i  A. stevenii} V. Krecz., {\i A. bidentata} Klokov). Shoots woody at the base, usually green (rarely weakly glaucous-pruinose). Stems 35-45(-50) cm, more or less erect, usually shortly papillose-hairy especially below, often much branched from base; middle internodes (11/2-)2-3(-4) times as long as the leaves. Leaves 25-35 × 0*5-1 mm, linear to acicular; midrib comprising less than 3/4 of the width of the leaf; margin distinctly revolute. Inflorescence ovoid, with somewhat patent branches; partial inflorescences corymbiform; bracts lanceolate; pedicels 0·5-0·8 mm. Corolla (3-)4-6 mm, narrowly hypocrateriform, reddish, finely papillose outside; tube 2-3 times as long as the lobes; lobes rather shortly appendiculate. Fruit 1·2-1·7 mm, papillose. {\i Plains and hills. S.E. Europe.} Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E) Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Intermediates between this species and {\b 32} occur.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. crassifolia} L.,{\i  Mantissa} 37 (1767) ({\i A. tomentosa} Ten.). Shoots woody at the base, usually glaucous-pruinose, often with long, patent hairs. Stems 15-45 cm, often solitary, erect or geniculate-ascending; middle internodes 1-3 times as long as the leaves. Leaves 15-30(-40) × 1*5-2 mm, lanceolate to broadly linear, usually brownish when dry, thickish, more or less obtuse, often conspicuously crowded at the base of the stem, often in pairs from middle of stem upwards; midrib comprising less than 3/4 of width of leaf; margin distinctly revolute. Inflorescence pyramidal; partial inflorescences more or less capitate. Corolla 4·7-6·3 mm, hypocrateriform, yellowish, densely patent-hairy, sometimes subglabrous; tube 2-3 times as long as lobes. Fruit 1·5-2·5 mm, hairy. {\i Calcareous rocks near the coast. • S.Italy} ({\i near Napoli}); {\i Sardegna} ({\i Tavolara}). It Sa.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Tavolara are entirely glabrous and may merit specific distinction as{\b  A. deficiens} Viv.,{\i  Ann. Stor. Nat.} ({\i Bologna}){\b  4}: 231 (1830).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. calabra} (Fiori) Ehrend. & Krendl, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  68}: 268 (1974) ({\i A. cynanchica} var.{\i  calabra} Fiori). Like {\b 4} but shoots glaucous or green; stems 10-25(-30) cm, more caespitose, only slightly woody at base; leaves 7-15 × 1-2 mm, narrowly oblanceolate, brownish to blackish when dry, rather thin, acute; margin weakly revolute; corolla 7-12 mm, pale purplish, glabrous outside or rarely more or less patent-hairy; fruit glabrous. •{\i  Mountains of S.W. Italy.} It.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. staliana} Vis.,{\i  Fl. Dalm.}{\b  3}: 11 (1852). Shoots always glaucous-pruinose, laxly caespitose. Stems 10-35 cm, ascending, more or less woody and glabrous or shortly hairy at the base; middle internodes 1-2 times as long as the leaves. Leaves 10-30 × 1*5-3*5 mm, thickish, acute, in pairs on upper two-thirds of stem; midrib comprising less than 3/4 of width of leaf; margin revolute. Inflorescence ovoid, moderately dense; partial inflorescences condensed to more or less capitate. Corolla 3-8 mm, hypocrateriform to narrowly infundibuliform, pink, glabrous outside; tube 2-3 times as long as the distinctly appendiculate lobes. Fruit c. 2 mm, papillose, otherwise glabrous, glaucous-pruinose.{\i  Maritime rocks. • Islands off the coast of N.W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. garganica} Huter, Porta & Rigo ex Ehrend. & Krendl, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  68}: 268 (1974): Like {\b 6} but stems 10-20 cm, glabrous; leaves 5-15 × c. 0·5 mm, thin; inflorescence lax, sparingly branched; partial inflorescences spicate; corolla c. 6 mm, hypocrateriform, the tube about twice as long as the lobes.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • S.E. Italy} ({\i Monte Gargano}). It.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. suffruticosa} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 111 (1856). Shoots green, even when young. Stems 15-35 cm, laxly caespitose, woody at base, ascending, glabrous below or with short, sparse hairs; middle internodes mostly 3-5 times as long as the leaves. Leaves 10-20 × 0*5-1 mm, linear, mostly somewhat falcate, usually blackish when dry; midrib comprising less than 3/4 of width of leaf; margin revolute. Inflorescence elongate, usually unbranched, laxly spicate, with 3-6 flower-clusters; bracts more or less connate. Corolla (3-)4-6*5 mm, more or less hypocrateriform, dirty yellow, glabrous outside; tube 2-21/2 times as long as lobes; lobes obscurely appendiculate. Fruit papillose.{\i  Rocks, montane to alpine zones. • E. Greece} ({\i Dhirfis Oros, Evvoia}). Gr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. ophiolithica} Ehrend., {\i Pl. Syst. Evol.}{\b  123}: 153 (1975) ({\i A. stricta} auct. eur., non Boiss.,{\i  A. stricta} subsp.{\i  pruinosa} Ehrend.). Shoots glaucous-pruinose, particularly when young. Stems 20-45 cm, woody at base, ascending, glabrous or with patent hairs up to 0*3 mm below. Leaves 8-15 × 0*5-0*8 mm, linear, usually straight and erect; midrib comprising more than 3/4 of width of leaf; margin revolute. Inflorescence elongate, somewhat branched, laxly spicate, with 4-6 flower-clusters; bracts scarcely connate. Corolla 4·2-5·2 mm, hypocrateriform, brownish-yellow, more or less glabrous; tube 2-3 times as long as lobes. Fruit 2-3 mm, papillose. {\i Serpentine rocks. • E. Greece} ({\i Evvoia}). Gr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. idaea} Halácsy,{\i  Consp. Fl. Graec.}{\b  1}: 737 (1901). Shoots green, rarely glaucous-pruinose, with patent hairs up to 0·3 mm or sometimes subglabrous. Stems 3-15 cm, caespitose to pulvinate; middle internodes mostly 1-2 times as long as the leaves. Leaves 5-8 × 0*5-1*5 mm, narrowly oblanceolate to linear; midrib usually comprising more than 3/4 of width of leaf; margin revolute. Inflorescence compact, rarely slightly elongate, unbranched, with (1-)2-3(-4) flower-clusters; bracts somewhat connate. Corolla 3·2-5 mm, hypocrateriform to narrowly infundibuliform, pink, with dense, patent, short hairs outside, sometimes subglabrous; tube 2-3 times as long as lobes; lobes obscurely appendiculate. Fruit 1-1·5 mm, with dense, short hairs or elongate papillae.{\i  Subalpine zone. • Mountains of Kriti.} Cr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. suberosa} Sibth. & Sm., {\i Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 89(1806) (incl. {\i A. pirinica} Stoj. & Acht.). Like {\b 10} but shoots always glaucous-pruinose, with patent hairs c. 0*1 mm; leaves 4-10 × 0*5-0*8 mm, the midrib usually comprising less than 3/4 of width of leaf; inflorescence with 1-3 flower-clusters; bracts not connate; corolla 5-8 mm, hypocrateriform, the tube 21/2-3 times as long as
\par 
\par 7}
\par