{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 c. 3·5 mm, with c. 25 veins. Calyx-setae c. 3 times as long as corona. Corolla of marginal florets 2-3 cm, about twice as long as that of the central, pink. Anthers c. 1·9-2·2 mm.{\i  Limestone rocks. • S. Albania, N.W. Greece.} Al Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. sphaciotica} Roemer & Schultes, {\i Syst. Veg. }{\b 3}: 86 (1818). Caespitose perennial, woody at base. Stem 3-10 cm, slender, leafless or with 1 pair of leaves at base. Leaves up to 20 × c. 5 mm, linear or linear-lanceolate, pinnatifid, with broadly elliptical lobes, white-lanate or green and densely hirsute. Capitula 10-15 mm in diameter, solitary, with c. 8(-13) florets. Involucral bracts 4-5 mm, c. 2/3 as long as florets, ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, densely white-pubescent. Involucel-tube c. 1·5 mm; pits c. 0·6 mm; corona with 25-30 veins. Calyx-setae about twice as long as corona. Corolla of marginal florets 6-10 mm, distinctly longer than that of the central, lilac-pink. Anthers c. 1·5 mm.{\i  Mountain screes. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. pulsatilloides} Boiss., {\i Elenchus }58 (1838). Caespitose perennial, woody at base. Stem densely whitish-pubescent, with 1(-2) pairs of leaves at base. Basal leaves c. 1·5-4 cm, elliptic-oblong, 1- to 2-pinnatifid or 2-pinnatisect, the segments oblanceolate or obovate, entire or scarcely dentate. Capitula (20-)27-35(-40) mm in diameter. Involucral bracts 7-12(-20) mm, ½-¾ as long as florets, ovate-lanceolate, entire or the larger pinnatifid, pubescent. Corona 3-4 mm, slightly shorter than involucel-tube. Calyx-setae 2-3 times as long as corona. Corolla distinctly longer in marginal than central florets, purple or bluish. Anthers 2-3 mm. {\i Limestone rocks. • N.E. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pulsatilloides}: Stem 4-12(-20) cm, with one capitulum. Leaves silvery-lanate. Capitulum solitary. Corona with 16-20 veins. Calyx-setae purple.{\i  S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b macropoda} (Costa ex Willk.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 342 (1879): Stem up to 35 cm. Leaves green, hirsute. Capitula 3. Corona with 24-25 veins. Calyx-setae pale.{\i  N.E. Spain}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. isetensis} L.,{\i  Mantissa }37 (1767). Sparsely hirsute perennial, woody at base. Stem 25-45 cm, erect or ascending, leafy, slightly branched above. Leaves elliptic-ovate, pinnate or 2-pinnatisect, the segments 1-3 mm wide, linear-lanceolate. Capitula 1-3(-5), c. 23-25 mm. Involucral bracts 6-8 mm, 1/2- 2/3 as long as florets, narrowly ovate, obtuse, densely white-hirsute. Corona 2-3·6 mm, shorter than involucel-tube, with 24-30 veins. Calyx-setae c. 1½ times as long as corona. Corolla of marginal florets 13-15 mm, about twice as long as that of the central, pale or pinkish-yellow. Anthers 1·8-1·9 mm.{\i  Steppes. E.C. & S.E. Russia}. Rs (C, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. crenata} Cyr.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Neap.}{\b  1}: 11 (1788). Caespitose perennial, woody at base. Stem 3-25(-80) cm, simple or branched towards base, leafy throughout or with leaves crowded towards base. Leaves oblong-ovate, the lower spathulate, dentate, the upper pinnatifid or 1- to 2-pinnatisect; segments broadly elliptical or linear-lanceolate, densely hirsute or glabrous. Capitula 2-4 cm in diameter, usually solitary. Involucral bracts c. 4 mm, 1/3 as long as florets, elliptic-ovate, densely white-lanate. Corona 3-5·2 mm, longer than involucel-tube, with 26-29 veins. Calyx-setae 2-3 times as long as corona. Corolla of marginal florets (10-)13-16(-20) mm, distinctly longer than the central, pinkish-lilac. Anthers (1·6-)1·7-2(-2·2) mm.{\i  Rocky places. C. & E. Mediterranean region.} Al Gr It Ju Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem more than 8 cm ..................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b crenata}
\par 
1 Stem not more than 8 cm
\par 
2 Leaves ± glabrous .................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b dallaportae}
\par 
2 Leaves densely hirsute .............................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b breviscapa}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b crenata}: Stem more than 8 cm. Leaves pinnatisect.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b dallaportae} (Heldr. ex Boiss.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 511 (1930): Stem not more than 8 cm. Leaves dentate to pinnatisect, more or less glabrous. •{\i  S.E. Italy and W. Greece}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b breviscapa} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Hayek,{\i  loc. cit.} (1930): Stem not more than 8 cm. Leaves 1- or 2-pinnatifid to -pinnatisect, densely hirsute. •{\i  S. Greece} ({\i Taïyetos}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. S. graminifolia} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl. }{\b 1}: 6 (1755). Densely silvery-sericeous, caespitose perennial, woody at base. Stem (10-)20-30(-40) cm, ascending, leafy for lower 1/3-2/3. Leaves (1·5-)2·5-3·5 mm wide, linear or linear-lanceolate, acute. Capitula (25-)30-40(-45) mm in diameter, solitary. Involucral bracts 7-10(-14) mm triangular-ovate, 1/2-2/3 as long as florets. Involucel-tube 3·5-4(-4·2) mm; pits 1·5-2(-2·2) mm, narrowly elliptical, hirsute; corona 3-4 mm, about as long as or slightly shorter than tube, with 22-28(-30) veins. Calyx-setae about as long as corona. Corolla c. 20 mm in marginal florets, about twice as long as that of the central, bluish-violet. 2n = 16, 18. {\i Rocks and stony places; calcicole. S. Europe.} Al Ga Gr He Hs It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. S. rhodopensis} Stoj. & Stefanov, {\i Kew Bull.}{\b  1924}: 98 (1924). Like {\b 13} but leaves 1-2(-2·7) mm wide; capitula 14-30 mm in diameter; corolla pale yellow. 2n = 18. {\i Limestone rocks. • Rodopi.} Bu Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. S. argentea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 100 (1753) ({\i S. eburnea} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  S. thracica} Velen., {\i S. ucranica} L.). Biennial or perennial, pubescent to subglabrous, with short curved hairs and long setae. Stem 30-70 cm, ascending, branched, pubescent at base. Lower and middle leaves 1- to 2-pinnatifid, with narrowly lanceolate to linear, entire or scarcely dentate segments; upper leaves linear, entire. Capitula 15-25 mm in diameter. Involucral bracts narrowly lanceolate to linear, widened at base. Involucel-tube (2·2-)2·6-3·3 mm; pits (0·7-)1-1·5(-1·7) mm, obovate, pubescent in the lower part; corona 1-1·8(-2·4) mm, shorter than tube, with 21-25 veins. Calyx-setae 2-4 times as long as corona, with short glandular hairs at the base. Corolla of marginal florets 12-15 mm, distinctly longer than that of the central, whitish-yellow, yellow or pinkish-yellow. Anthers (1·6-)1·7-2·2 mm. 2n = 16. {\i  S. Europe, extending northwards to} c. 51° 30' {\i N. in S.C. Russia}. Al Bu Gr It Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E) Si Tu [Ga].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  A very variable species, within which several taxa have been described, but these have very insignificant and inconstant characters and seem to be worthy of no more than varietal status.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. S. stellata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 100 (1753). Shortly pubescent annual, with scattered, long, erect hairs. Stem (10-)20-60 cm, erect, simple or branched. Middle leaves elliptic-oblong, dentate to pinnatifid with 4-6(-7) pairs of elliptic-lanceolate to linear segments. Involucral bracts (10-)12-20 mm, lanceolate, entire, shorter than to about equalling florets. Receptacular bracts broadly ovate, long-acuminate. Involucel-tube 5-8·5 mm; pits 2·3-2·5 mm, hirsute and narrow in the lower part; corona 6-9·5 mm, distinctly longer than tube, with 30-39 veins. Calyx-setae 6·3-10 mm, slightly longer than corona, with very short 1- to 2-celled basal glandular hairs having globose glands. Corolla of marginal florets distinctly longer than that of the central, pale blue. Anthers 1·9-2·1 mm.{\i  S.W. Europe.} Bl Ga Hs It Lu Sa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b stellata}: Cauline leaves, except the upper, obovate-lanceolate, simple, dentate. Capitula 23-50 mm in diameter. Corolla of marginal florets 14-21 mm. Involucel-tube 6·7-8·5 mm. {\i Spain and Portugal}.
\par 

\par 
70}
\par