{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b simplex} (Desf.) Coutinho,{\i  Fl. Port.} 595 (1913): Cauline leaves, except the lowest, pinnatifid. Capitula 19-25 mm in diameter. Marginal florets few, with corolla 12-16 mm. Involucel-tube 5·2-7·1 mm. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. S. monspeliensis} Jacq.,{\i  Misc. Austr. Bot.}{\b  2}: 320 (1781). Like {\b 16}({\b b}) but capitula (10-)14-20(-27) mm in diameter; involucral bracts trifid or pinnatifid; involucel-tube 3·6-5·7 mm; pits (1·6-)1·8-2·4 mm, obovate; corona (3·6-)4-7 mm, with 32-36 veins; calyx-setae 8-16 mm, 2-2½ times as long as corona, with long 2- to 4-celled glandular hairs with obovoid glands; marginal florets with corolla (9·5-)12-13(-14) mm, scarcely longer than that of the central; anthers 0·7-1·1 mm.{\i  S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. S. rotata} Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3}: 102 (1819). Densely pubescent annual with some long, erect hairs. Stem (10-)20-50 cm, erect, branched. Lower leaves oblong-lanceolate, entire or slightly dentate; upper leaves lyrate, pinnatifid or pinnatisect, with 1-2 pairs of narrowly lanceolate, entire segments. Capitula 15-20 mm in diameter. Involucral bracts lanceolate, distinctly longer than florets. Receptacular bracts oblanceolate. Involucel-tube (4·5-)5-6(-6·5) mm; pits 2-3 mm, obovate; corona (5-)6-8(-9·5) mm, longer than tube, with 27-35 veins. Calyx-setae c. 1½ times as long as corona, glabrous at base. Corolla of marginal florets 9-11(-12) mm, slightly longer than that of the central, reddish. 2n = 18.{\i  Dry, stony places. C. part of Balkan peninsula; Krym.} Al Bu Ju Rs (K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. S. micrantha} Desf.,{\i  Ann. Mus. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Paris}) {\b 11}: 168 (1808). Shortly hirsute annual, with some long, erect hairs. Stem 20-60 cm, erect, branched. Lower leaves oblong-spathulate, entire; upper leaves lyrate, pinnatisect, with linear-lanceolate segments. Capitula 20-30 mm in diameter, oblong-ovoid in fruit. Involucral bracts (10-)12-15(-20) mm, lanceolate, longer than florets. Involucel-tube 3-4 mm; pits 1-1·7 mm; corona (1·7-)2-3 mm, shorter than tube, circular in outline, with (20-)27-30(-33) very slightly excurrent veins. Calyx-setae 2-3 times as long as corona. Corolla of marginal florets 8·5-12 mm, slightly longer than that of the central, reddish. {\i C. part of Balkan peninsula; Krym.} Bu Ju Rs (K, ?E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. S. sicula} L., {\i Mantissa Alt.} 196 (1771). Shortly pubescent annual, with some long, erect hairs. Stem (10-)20-40 cm, branched. Lower leaves oblong-lanceolate, spathulate, entire or slightly dentate; upper leaves lyrate-pinnatisect, with narrowly lanceolate or linear segments. Capitula 10-15 mm in diameter, ellipsoid or globose-ellipsoid in fruit. Involucral bracts 18-24 (-28) mm, narrowly lanceolate, about twice as long as florets. Involucel-tube 2·5-3·8 mm; pits 1·2-1·6 mm, glabrous; corona (1·6-)2-2·5(-2·7) mm, shorter than tube, square in outline, with (20-)23-25 veins, distinctly excurrent for c. 1-1·5 mm. Calyx-setae 2-4 times as long as corona. Corolla of marginal florets 6-8 mm, slightly longer than that of the central, reddish. {\i Dry, stony places. Mediterranean region and Macedonia.} Bu Cr Gr Hs Ju Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. S. hispidula} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 2}): 112 (1843). Densely pubescent annual. Stem 15-50 cm, branched. Leaves pinnatifid or pinnatisect, the upper slightly lyrate, with 1-7 pairs of segments, lanate, the terminal segments slightly wider than the lateral. Capitula 10-20 mm in diameter. Involucral bracts (8-)11-15(-17) mm, linear-lanceolate, as long as or longer than florets, rarely slightly shorter. Involucel-tube (1·2-)1·8-2·4 mm; pits 0·6-1(-1·3) mm, pubescent; corona (0·8-)1-1·2(-1·5) mm, with 17-24, distinctly excurrent veins. Calyx-setae 4-7 mm, 4-5 times as long as corona, with long white hairs and shorter glands at the base. Corolla of marginal florets 9-12(-14) mm, about twice as long as that of the central, yellow, pinkish towards apex. {\i Dry, stony places. E. Bulgaria.} Bu. ({\i Anatolia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. S. cosmoides} Boiss., {\i op. cit.} 113 (1843). Like {\b 21} but less densely pubescent; basal leaves obovate-lanceolate, dentate; cauline leaves lyrate, with 1-4 pairs of segments, the terminal 3-6(-10) mm wide. distinctly larger than the lateral, lanceolate. Capitula 15-25(-30) mm. Involucral bracts (12-)14-18(-23) mm. Calyx-setae c. 6 times as long as corona, with only short glandular hairs at base. Corolla of marginal florets 13-18 mm, deep reddish-purple. {\i Dry, stony places. S.E. Bulgaria.} Bu. ( {\i W. Anatolia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CYRTOSTEMMA Mert. & Koch. Ribs on involucel-tube becoming wider and confluent upwards; corona with 8 veins joining at margin.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. S. atropurpurea} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }100 (1753) ({\i S. maritima }L.). Subglabrous or somewhat hirsute biennial. Stem 20-60 cm, branched. Lower leaves oblong-spathulate, entire or lyrate, long-petiolate; middle and upper leaves pinnatifid, with entire or dentate segments. Capitula 20-30 mm in diameter, oblong-ellipsoid in fruit. Involucral bracts narrowly lanceolate, wider towards base, as long as or shorter than florets. Corolla of marginal florets 12-18 mm, slightly longer than the central, lilac to dark purple. Involucel-tube hispid or subglabrous; corona about as long as tube, broadly infundibuliform; calyx-setae c. 3-5 times as long as corona, on long stipe. All fruits with long calyx-setae. 2n = 16. {\i Dry places. S. Europe.} Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Br].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. S. semipapposa} Salzm. ex DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  4}: 658 (1830). Like {\b 23} but more densely pubescent; corolla of marginal florets distinctly longer than the central; corona very narrowly infundibuliform; lowest and sometimes middle fruits in capitulum with the calyx-setae very short or absent.{\i  Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. SCLEROSTEMMA Mert. & Koch. Ribs on involucel-tube of uniform width and not confluent; corona with 20-24 veins.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. S. silenifolia} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  2}: 170 (1803-1804). Perennial. Stem 3-10(-15) cm, simple or branched towards base, shortly pubescent, leafy towards base. Leaves of non-flowering rosettes and lower cauline leaves spathulate, obtuse to subacute, entire, ciliate, otherwise glabrous; upper cauline leaves lyrate, with lanceolate- to elliptic-lanceolate segments, the terminal distinctly wider than the lateral. Capitula 15-25 mm in diameter. Involucral bracts 6-10 mm, ovate-lanceolate, as long as or shorter than florets. Involucel-tube c. 3 mm; corona c. 0·7 mm. Calyx-setae 2-3 times as long as corona. Corolla of marginal florets c. 9-12 mm, distinctly longer than that of the central, lilac-blue.{\i  Rocky mountain pastures. • C. Appennini and N.W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. S. vestina} Facch. ex Koch,{\i  Syn. Fl. Germ.} ed. 2, 447 (1843). Perennial. Stem 10-40 cm, simple or branched, shortly pubescent, leafy. Leaves on non-flowering rosettes narrowly spathulate, obtuse or subacute, entire, glabrous; cauline leaves, except the lowest, pinnatisect, the segments linear or linear-lanceolate. Capitula 20-32 mm in diameter. Involucral bracts (7-)10-16(-18) mm, narrowly lanceolate, shorter than to as long as florets. Involucel-tube 2-2·7 mm; corona 0·7-1·4 mm. Calyx-setae 6-7 mm, c. 5-9 times as long as corona. Corolla of marginal florets 10-15 mm, about twice as long as the central, purple. 2n = 16. {\i Rocky places and scrub. • S. Alps, N. Appennini.} It.
\par 

\par 
71}
\par