{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. S. canescens} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung. }{\b 1}: 53 (1801) ({\i S. suaveolens} Desf. ex DC.). Perennial. Stem 15-60 cm, branched, shortly pubescent, leafy. Leaves of non-flowering rosettes and lower cauline leaves lanceolate, entire, acute, upper cauline leaves pinnatifid or pinnatisect, the segments linear or linear-lanceolate. Capitula 15-25 mm in diameter. Involucral bracts 4-6 mm, ovate-lanceolate, 1/3-1/2 as long as florets. Involucel-tube 2·1-2·2 mm; corona 0·4-1 mm. Calyx-setae 1·4-1·6 mm, 2-2½ times as long as corona. Corolla of marginal florets 10-15 mm, about twice as long as the central, blue or lilac. 2n = 16. •{\i  C. & W. Europe, extending northwards to S. Sweden and southwards to C. Jugoslavia}. Au Be Cz Da Ga Ge He Hu Ju Po ?Rm Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. S. parviflora} Desf., {\i Fl. Atl.}{\b  1}: 119 (1798) ({\i S. dichotoma} Ucria, non Lam.). Slightly pubescent annual. Stem 20-30 cm, dichotomously branched, with capitula in the angles. Leaves elliptic-obovate to lanceolate, obtuse, entire or dentate to pinnatifid. Capitula c. 10 mm in diameter, globose, sessile or very shortly pedunculate. Involucral bracts linear or linear-lanceolate, slightly longer than florets. Involucel-tube 1·7-2·3 mm; corona 1-1·3 mm. Calyx-setae shorter than corona. Corolla 4·5-7 mm, slightly longer in marginal than central florets, reddish-pink. Anthers 0·5-0·6 mm. {\i Cultivated fields. • Sicilia.} Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. S. tenuis} Spruner ex Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 2}): 114 (1843). Slightly pubescent annual. Stem 10-70 cm, usually branched. Basal leaves oblanceolate, dentate, the upper 2-pinnatisect, with linear segments 0·5-1 mm wide. Capitula 25-30 mm in diameter. Involucral bracts 7-10 mm, linear-lanceolate, the outer ovate, shorter than florets. Involucel-tube 2·4-3·3 mm; corona 0·7-1·3 mm. Calyx-setae 5-12 mm, on stipe about as long as corona. Corolla 12-15 mm, slightly longer in marginal than central florets, purple. {\i Rocky places. • Albania, N.W. & C. Greece.} Al Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 30-38}). {\b S. columbaria} group. Densely lanate, stellate-hairy, hispid or subglabrous perennials, rarely biennials. Basal leaves simple, lyrate or pinnatifid; cauline leaves 1- to 2-pinnatifid, pinnatisect or simple. Capitula 20-40 mm in diameter. Involucral bracts narrowly lanceolate, wider towards base, longer to shorter than florets. Corona shorter than tube, c. 24-veined. Calyx-setae up to 6 times as long as corona. Corolla of marginal florets slightly longer than the central, reddish-purple to lilac-blue.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   A variable group in which many of the taxa perhaps merit only subspecific rank. Populations characteristic of the species are found in only a few areas. Populations intermediate between two or three species occur in often widely separated areas; they are not considered in the following key.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves densely stellate-pubescent ................................................ {\b 30. cinerea}
\par 
1 Leaves without stellate hairs 
\par 
2 Leaves densely lanate
\par 
3 Basal and lower cauline leaves 1- to 2-pinnatifid or slightly
\par 
   lyrate with terminal segment slightly longer than the lateral ... {\b 31. turolensis}
\par 
3 Basal and lower cauline leaves simple, or slightly lyrate
\par 
   with terminal segment several times as long as the lateral
\par 
4 Leaves silvery-lanate; upper cauline leaves with narrow, 
\par 
   lanceolate segments, the terminal segment slightly wider
\par  
   than the lateral ......................................................................  {\b 32. holosericea}
\par 
4 Leaves yellow- or greenish-lanate; upper cauline leaves
\par 
  with orbicular-ovate or elliptical terminal segment,
\par 
  several times as wide as the lateral .............................................. {\b 33. taygetea}
\par 
2 Leaves glabrous to shortly hispid
\par 
5 Calyx-setae much shorter than corona or absent
\par 
6 Leaves of non-flowering rosette and lower cauline 
\par 
  leaves lyrate .................................................................................. {\b 34. triandra}
\par 
6 Leaves of non-flowering rosette and lower cauline 
\par 
  leaves 2-pinnatisect ....................................................................... {\b 35. achaeta}
\par 
5 Calyx-setae 2-6 times as long as corona
\par 
7 Calyx-setae winged at base in fruit ................................................ {\b 36. lucida}
\par 
7 Calyx-setae not winged at base in fruit
\par 
8 Leaves glabrous, shiny; middle and upper cauline leaves
\par 
  usually simple .................................................................................. {\b 37. nitens}
\par 
8 Leaves hispid; middle and upper cauline leaves pinnatifid
\par 
  or lyrate .................................................................................. {\b 38. columbaria}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. S. cinerea} Lapeyr. ex Lam.,{\i  Tabl. Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 1}: 251 (1792). Stem simple or branched. Leaves whitish-stellate pubescent; leaves of non-flowering rosettes and lower cauline leaves lanceolate, crenate-dentate; upper cauline leaves 1- to 2-pinnatifid or -pinnatisect, the terminal segments much larger than the lateral, lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate. Corolla bluish-violet. 2n = 16.{\i • Pyrenees; E. Alps; Albania and W. Jugoslavia.} Al Ga Hs It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cinerea} ({\i S. pyrenaica} auct., non All., {\i S. leucophylla} Borbás): Leaves whitish-stellate; cauline leaves, except the lowest, lyrate; stem usually leafy in the lower part.{\i  Pyrenees; Balkan peninsula}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b hladnikiana} (Host) Jasiewicz,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 50 (1975) ({\i S. hladnikiana} Host): Leaves greenish, not so densely covered by stellate hairs; cauline leaves, except the lowest, 2-pinnatisect or lyrate; stem usually leafy for lower 2/3-3/4.{\i  E. Alps and N.W. Jugoslavia}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Intermediate between {\b 30}({\b a}) and {\b 36}({\b b}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. S. turolensis} Pau ex Willk., {\i Suppl. Prodr. Fl. Nisp.} 74 (1893) ({\i S. tomentosa} Cav., non J. F. Gmelin). Leaves densely whitish-lanate, the basal and lower cauline 1- to 2-pinnatifid or -pinnatisect, with short, elliptic-ovate, entire or dentate segments, the obtuse terminal segment slightly longer than the lateral; upper cauline leaves pinnatisect, with narrow, linear, pubescent segments. Corolla reddish-purple.{\i  S. & C. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. S. holosericea} Bertol.,{\i  Rar. Lig. Pl.}{\b  3}: 49 (1810) (?{\i S. pyrenaica }All.). Leaves densely silvery-lanate, the basal and lower cauline elliptic-lanceolate, acute, crenate or entire; upper cauline leaves pinnatifid or pinnatisect, with narrow, lanceolate segments, or absent. Corolla-reddish-purple.{\i  Italy, Sardegna.} It Sa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants intermediate between {\b 32} and {\b 38} occur in S.E. & S.C. France.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. S. taygetea} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 6}): 73 (1846). Leaves densely yellow- to greenish-lanate, with very long hairs, the basal obovate, simple or somewhat lyrate, long-petiolate; cauline leaves lyrate, with very large, orbicularovate or elliptical terminal segment and obovate-oblanceolate lateral segments. Corolla reddish. {\i Limestone rocks. • S. & C. Greece; S. Jugoslavia; S.E. Italy.} Gr It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   The most characteristic populations occur only in S. Greece (Taïyetos). The plants from Jugoslavia and Italy, which are sometimes given varietal status, are intermediate between {\b 33} and {\b 38}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. S. triandra} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 99 (1753) ({\i S. gramuntia} L.). Leaves densely hispid, the basal lyrate; cauline leaves 1- to 2(-3)pinnatisect, with narrowly lanceolate or linear segments. Calyx setae usually absent, sometimes 1-2. Corolla bluish-violet. 2n = 16. {\i S. & S.C. Europe.} Al Au Co Cz Ga He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Sa Si
\par 

\par 
72}
\par