{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  A very polymorphic species, with many variants intermediate between it and most other species of the group.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. S. achaeta} Vis. & Pancic,{\i  Mem. Ist. Veneto }{\b 12}: 465 (1866). Biennial, densely hispid towards base. Basal leaves pinnatisect, with narrowly linear, obtuse segments; cauline leaves 1- to 2 pinnatisect, with very narrow segments. Involucral bracts ovate-lanceolate. Calyx-setae absent. Corolla purple. •{\i  C. Jugoslavia}. Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. S. lucida} Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 18 (1779). Stem usually simple, rarely branched. Leaves glabrous or subglabrous, the basal ovate-lanceolate or rhombic. Capitula usually solitary. Calyx-setae distinctly winged at base, 4-5 times as long as corona. Corolla reddish-purple. 2n = 16. •{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe, from the Vosges and Carpathians southwards to the Pyrenees, N. Appennini and S.W. Bulgaria.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b lucida}: stem leafy for up to lower 1/3. Leaves, except the lowest, 1- to 2-pinnatifid or -pinnatisect; basal rosettes of leaves always present.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b stricta} (Waldst. & Kit.) Jasiewicz, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71}: 50 (1975) ({\i S. stricta }Waldst. & Kit.): stem leafy for the lower 2/3-3/4. Leaves, except the upper, simple, ovate-lanceolate or rhombic, acute; basal leaves absent at flowering.{\i  E. Alps and N.W. Jugoslavia.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. S. nitens} Roemer & Schultes, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  3}: 82 (1818). Glabrous or subglabrous perennial. Stem simple or branched. Leaves lanceolate, acute, deeply crenate-dentate, simple or rarely the upper lyrate, shiny. Calyx-setae 2 1/2-4 times as long as corona. Corolla reddish-purple. •{\i  Açores.} Az.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. S. columbaria} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 99 (1753) ({\i S. dubia }Velen., non Moench). Stem usually branched. Basal and non-flowering rosette-leaves ovate-lanceolate, obovate, lanceolate or lyrate-pinnatifid; cauline leaves 1- to 2-pinnatifid or pinnatisect, the segments lanceolate or linear, usually hispid, rarely subglabrous. Calyx-setae 3-6 times as long as corona. Corolla bluish-lilac. 2n = 16.{\i  Europe, from S. Scotland and Estonia southwards, but absent from most of the islands.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucral bracts at least as long as florets, with 
\par 
  long hairs .............................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b pseudobanatica}
\par 
1 Involucral bracts shorter than florets, with short hairs
\par 
2 Leaves with long hairs ........................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b portae}
\par 
2 Leaves with short hairs ............................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b columbaria}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b columbaria}: Leaves with short hairs, the cauline with narrowly lanceolate terminal segments, not or scarcely wider than the lateral; involucral bracts shorter than florets, with short hairs.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pseudobanatica} (Schur) Jáv. & Csapody,{\i  Icon. Fl. Hung. }496 (1933): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but involucral bracts at least as long as florets, with long hairs. •{\i  E. & C. Carpathians}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b portae} (A. Kerner ex Huter) Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 517 (1930): Leaves with dense, long hairs; cauline leaves with wide terminal segment, sometimes wider than the lateral. {\i Italy and N.W. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Intermediate between {\b 38}({\b a}) and {\b 33}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 39-43}).{\b  S. ochroleuca} group. Shortly hairy to lanate or subglabrous perennials. Basal leaves simple, lyrate or pinnatifid; cauline leaves 1-to 3-pinnatifid or pinnatisect. Capitula 15-25 mm in diameter. Involucral bracts narrowly lanceolate, wider at base, shorter to longer than florets. Corona shorter than tube, with c. 24 veins. Calyx-setae up to 6 times as long as corona. Corolla of marginal florets slightly to much longer than that of the central, yellow to whitish.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  A very variable group in which many intermediates have been described as species. The intermediate populations are probably of hybrid origin and often grow in the absence of the parents; they are not considered in the following key.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Non-flowering rosette-leaves and lower cauline leaves
\par 
  2- to 3-pinnatifid
\par 
2 Calyx-setae absent or shorter than corona ............................ {\b 42. fumarioides} 
\par 
2 Calyx-setae 2-5 times as long as corona ................................... {\b 43. triniifolia}
\par 
1 Non-flowering rosette-leaves and lower cauline leaves
\par 
  entire, 1-pinnatifid or lyrate
\par 
3 Leaves glabrous or very slightly pubescent ............................. {\b 39. balcanica}
\par 
3 Leaves pubescent or lanate
\par 
4 Leaves shortly pubescent ....................................................... {\b 40. ochroleuca}
\par 
4 Leaves densely pubescent or lanate ......................................... {\b 41. webbiana}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. S. balcanica} Velen., {\i Fl. Bulg.} 243 (1891). Stem glabrous in the lower and middle part, shortly pubescent below the capitula. Leaves glabrous or slightly pubescent on veins and margins; leaves of non-flowering rosettes ovate-lanceolate, crenate-dentate, long-petiolate; basal leaves entire or lyrate; cauline leaves lyrate, pinnatisect or somewhat 2-pinnatisect, with linear segments. Involucral bracts narrowly lanceolate, as long as florets, pubescent. Calyx-setae up to 4 times as long as corona, dark brown. Corolla slightly longer in marginal than central florets. {\i Alpine meadows; calcifuge. • S & E. Jugoslavia, W. Bulgaria.} Bu Ju.
\par

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. S. ochroleuca} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 101 (1753). Stem pubescent. Leaves of non-flowering rosettes obovate-lanceolate, crenate; lower cauline leaves entire or lyrate; upper cauline leaves lyrate or 1-pinnatisect, pubescent. Involucral bracts shorter than florets. Calyx-setae 2-3 times as long as corona. Corolla distinctly longer in marginal than central florets. 2n = 16. {\i Dry meadows and stony places. S.E. & E.C. Europe, extending westwards to Italy and northwards to Latvia.} Al Au Bu Cz Ge Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Tu [Ga].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Subsp. {\b danubialis} Velen.,{\i  Fl. Bulg.} 243 (1891), and subsp. {\b rhodopea} Velen.,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.}{\b  29}: 16 (1894), are intermediate between {\b 40} and {\b 43}. They are very polymorphic and occur particularly often in regions where the species are in contact.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. S. webbiana} D. Don, {\i Bot. Reg.}{\b  9}: t. 717 (1823). Stem erect, simple or branched, glabrous at base, hirsute above. Leaves of non-flowering rosettes and lower cauline leaves ovate, dentate, lyrate or 1-pinnatifid, densely lanate; upper cauline leaves 2-pinnatifid or lyrate. Involucral bracts shorter than florets, densely white-hirsute. Calyx-setae 3-4 times as long as corona. Corolla slightly longer in marginal than central florets.{\i  Dry, stony places and alpine meadows. Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. S. fumarioides} Vis. & Pancic, {\i Mem. Ist. Veneto}{\b  12}: 466 (1866). Stem glabrous. Basal leaves oblanceolate, 2- to 3-pinnatisect, shortly pubescent, with linear-lanceolate segments 1-2 mm wide. Involucral bracts 2/3 as long as florets, densely pubescent. Calyx-setae absent or very short. Corolla slightly longer in marginal than central florets.{\i  Dry, stony places. • S. Jugoslavia}. Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. S. triniifolia} Friv.,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}).{\b  18}: 333 (1835) ({\i S. silaifolia} Velen.). Stem glabrous or slightly pubescent. Leaves of
\par 

\par 
73}
\par