{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 non-flowering rosettes and lower cauline leaves 2- to 3-pinnatisect, with narrow, linear, slightly pubescent segments. Involucral bracts as long as florets. Calyx-setae 2-5 times as long as corona. Corolla slightly longer in marginal than central florets. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry, stony places. Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 9.          Tremastelma}             Rafin.
\par    

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By I.K. Ferguson.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Scabiosa} but calyx shortly stipitate, and with 10 plumose setae.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. palaestinum} (L.) Janchen,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  66}: 395 (1916). Annual up to 50 cm. Basal leaves 3·5-8 × 1-3 cm, oblong-oblanceolate, entire to pinnatisect or lyrate with a large, oblanceolate, terminal lobe and 4-6 small linear lateral lobes; cauline leaves smaller, often pinnatisect, with linear or linear-oblong lobes. Capitulum with outer florets radiate. Involucral bracts 9-17 × 3-5 mm, lanceolate. Corolla 9-14 mm, violet. Involucel 5-8 mm, sulcate for about half its length, with a many-veined, scarious corona 2-3 mm. Calyx 8-10 mm, with 10 setae; stalk c. 4 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  S. & W. parts of Balkan peninsula, Aegean region, Istra}. Al Bu Cr Gr ?It Ju Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 10.           Pycnocomon}         Hoffmanns. & Link
\par   

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.M. Moore.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Scabiosa} but involucral bracts connate in the basal half; involucel 4-angled, with 4-lobed limb; capitulum with the outer florets radiate, the calyx with setae only in the central florets.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. rutifolium} (Vahl) Hoffmanns. & Link,{\i  Fl. Port.}{\b  2}: 94 (1825) ({\i Scabiosa rutifolia} Vahl). Glabrous to pubescent perennial; stems up to 1·75 m, erect, usually branched. Basal leaves up to 6·5 cm, linear-oblanceolate to obovate-spathulate, crenately lobed to 1- to 2-pinnatifid with entire to distally crenate-serrate, usually linear to oblong segments up to 8 × 3 mm; cauline leaves 1- to 2-pinnatisect, the uppermost linear and bract-like. Capitulum 5-20 mm in diameter; lobes of the involucre 2-7 mm, triangular-ovate, acute. Involucel with short limb, the lobes unequally denticulate. Corolla pink to yellowish or white. 2n = 18.{\i  Maritime sands. W. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Co Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs36\qc CAMPANULALES
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 168.           CAMPANULACEAE}
\par           

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or very rarely small shrubs, usually with latex. Leaves usually alternate, exstipulate. Flowers hermaphrodite. Calyx 3- to 5-fid. Corolla more or less deeply lobed; lobes valvate. Stamens free or connate. Disc sometimes present. Style 1; stigmas 2-5. Ovary inferior, 2- to 5-locular. Capsule dehiscing by pores, valves or irregularly, rarely indehiscent. Seeds numerous.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers zygomorphic; filaments connate
\par 
2 Corolla-tube split dorsally for at least half its length ................... {\b 14. Lobelia}
\par 
2 Corolla-tube not or scarcely split dorsally ................................ {\b 15. Laurentia}
\par 
1 Flowers actinomorphic; filaments free, though anthers 
\par 
  sometimes connate
\par 
3 Corolla divided nearly to base into linear-lanceolate 
\par 
  or oblong lobes 
\par 
4 Leaves pinnate or pinnatisect ................................................. {\b 7. Petromarula}
\par 
4 Leaves entire, crenate or serrate
\par 
5 Flowers solitary or in small clusters in spicate or 
\par 
  racemose inflorescences
\par 
6 Flowers distinctly pedicellate; capsule dehiscing by 
\par 
  pores near the base .................................................................... {\b 1. Campanula}
\par 
6 Flowers sessile or subsessile; capsule dehiscing by 
\par 
  pores at or above the middle ...................................................... {\b 8. Asyneuma}
\par 
5 Flowers in capitula, dense spikes or umbels
\par 
7 Flowers without bracts; flower-buds straight; capsule
\par 
  dehiscing by 2 apical valves ......................................................... {\b 13. Jasione}
\par 
7 Each flower subtended by a bract; flower-buds usually 
\par 
  curved; capsule dehiscing by pores near the middle
\par 
8 Corolla-lobes becoming free after anthesis; flowers 
\par 
  sessile or subsessile ..................................................................... {\b 9. Phyteuma}
\par 
8 Corolla-lobes remaining coherent at apex; flowers 
\par 
  distinctly pedicellate .............................................................. {\b 10. Physoplexis}
\par 
3 Corolla lobed for not more than ½ its length 
\par 
9 Ovary and capsule cylindrical ..................................................... {\b 5. Legousia} 
\par 
9 Ovary and capsule ovoid, globose or pyriform
\par 
10 Anthers connate in a tube round the style at anthesis ........ {\b 3. Symphyandra}
\par 
10 Anthers free at anthesis
\par 
11 Base of style surrounded by a conspicuous disc
\par 
12 Herb; corolla not constricted in the middle; disc tubular .... {\b 4. Adenophora}
\par 
12 Dwarf shrub; corolla constricted in the middle; disc flat ........... {\b 2. Azorina}
\par 
11 Base of style not surrounded by a conspicuous disc
\par 
13 Corolla-tube not more than 2 mm wide; style much 
\par 
   longer than corolla .................................................................. {\b 6. Trachelium}
\par 
13 Corolla-tube more than 3 mm wide; style not or little
\par 
   longer than corolla
\par 
14 Capsule dehiscing by lateral pores, very rarely indehiscent . {\b 1. Campanula}
\par 
14 Capsule dehiscing by valves or irregularly at apex
\par 
15 Flowers sessile or shortly pedicellate; capsule 
\par 
   dehiscing irregularly ............................................................. {\b 12. Edraianthus}
\par 
15 Flowers with long pedicels; capsule dehiscing by 
\par 
   apical valves ...................................................................... {\b 11. Wahlenbergia}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   Subfam.      {\b CAMPANULOIDEAE}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers actinomorphic. Stamens free or rarely with connate anthers.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.          Campanula}            L.
\par   

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.A. Fedorov (spp. 1-104) & M. Kovanda (spp. 105-143).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs. Inflorescence 1- to many-flowered. Ovary usually obconical or oblong-obconical. Calyx-teeth often longer than the ovary, with or without appendages between the teeth. Corolla campanulate, tubular, infundibuliform or rotate, usually blue, purple or lilac. Ovary 3- to 5-locular. Style without a disc at its base. Capsule pendent or erect, dehiscing by pores or valves, rarely indehiscent.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 The corolla is blue to violet, rarely white, in all species.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   C. alliariifolia Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }{\b 1}: 910 (1798), from the Caucasus and Anatolia, is more or less naturalized in England. It is an erect perennial with broadly triangular-cordate basal leaves, secund racemes of cream or white flowers and appendages between the calyx-teeth.
\par 

\par 
74}
\par