{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: T. W. Böcher, {\i Svensk Bot. Tidskr.}{\b  58}: 1-17 (1964). J. Contandriopoulos, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  113}: 453-474 (1966). J. Damboldt, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  84}: 302-358 (1965); {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  112}: 392-406 (1965);{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  88}: 200 203 (1968). T. W. J. Gadella, {\i Wentia}{\b  11}: 1-104 (1964);{\i  Proc. Koninkl. Nederl. Akad. Wetensch.} ser. C, {\b 65}: 269-278 (1962); {\b 66}: 270-283 (1963);{\b  69}: 502-519 (1966). D. Phitos,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  111}: 208-230 (1964); {\i op. cit.}{\b  112}: 449-498 (1965). D. Podlech & J. Damboldt,{\i  Ber. Deutsch. Bot. Ges.}{\b  76}: 360-369 (1964).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Capsule dehiscing by subapical or lateral pores or valves
\par 2 Ovary and capsule clavate, dark blue, becoming blackish ........... {\b 2. uniflora}
\par 2 Ovary and capsule not clavate, usually green or brown
\par 3 Lower leaves broadly ovate to orbicular
\par 4 Basal leaves sessile ........................................................................ {\b 3. cenisia}
\par 4 Basal leaves petiolate
\par 5 stems decumbent to ascending
\par 6 Basal leaves orbicular-spathulate, sinuate; ovary hirsute ...... {\b 16. decumbens}
\par 6 Basal leaves ovate-cordate, dentate; ovary glabrous to
\par   pubescent ........................................................................................ {\b 6. arvatica}
\par 5 Stems erect
\par 7 Corolla cylindrical, ventricose at the base ....................................... {\b 4. zoysii}
\par 7 Corolla rotate, broadly campanulate or infundibuliform,
\par   not ventricose at the base ............................................................. {\b 5. carpatica} 
\par 3 Lower leaves obovate, spathulate, lanceolate or linear 
\par 8 Stem hispid; lower leaves rugose ........................................... {\b 9. primulifolia}
\par 8 Stem glabrous, pubescent or hirsute; leaves not rugose
\par 9 Ovary and capsule 5-veined; calyx-teeth distinctly 
\par   longer than the corolla after anthesis ........................................... {\b 1. fastigiata}
\par 9 Ovary and capsule usually 10-veined; calyx-teeth shorter
\par   than the corolla
\par 10 Stems 5-10 cm; flowers subsessile, solitary, terminal .................. {\b 7. raineri}
\par 10 Stems 10-100 cm; flowers pedicellate, usually numerous
\par 11 Stem 10-35 cm; pedicels filiform ........................................... {\b 10. lusitanica}
\par 11 Stem (20-)40-100 cm; pedicels usually not filiform
\par 12 Stem stout, sulcate ........................................................................ {\b 8. aizoon}
\par 12 Stem comparatively slender, not sulcate
\par 13 Annual
\par 14 Calyx-teeth subulate .................................................................... {\b 12. sparsa}
\par 14 Calyx-teeth linear to lanceolate
\par 15 Calyx-teeth 3-veined ......................................................... {\b 13. ramosissima}
\par 15 Calyx-teeth 1-veined ................................................................. {\b 11. phrygia}
\par 13 Perennial or biennial
\par 16 Stem simple; corolla 30-40 mm, broadly campanulate ....... {\b 20. persicifolia}
\par 16 Stem usually ± branched; corolla (10-)20-30 mm campanulate 
\par    or infundibuliform 
\par 17 Root thick, napiform
\par 18 Short non-flowering stolons usually present; pedicels
\par    mostly more than 4 cm .............................................................. {\b 14. spatulata}
\par 18 Non-flowering stolons absent; pedicels mostly less
\par    than 1 cm ................................................................................ {\b 19. rapunculus}
\par 17 Roots slender
\par 19 Calyx-teeth not appressed to corolla; inflorescence 
\par    usually many-flowered .................................................................. {\b 15. patula}
\par 19 Calyx-teeth appressed to corolla; inflorescence 1- to
\par    few-flowered
\par 20 Biennial or perennial; rhizome short or absent; inflorescence 
\par    dense .................................................................................... {\b 17. hemschinica}
\par 20 Perennial; rhizome procumbent, more or less stoloniferous; 
\par    inflorescence lax .......................................................................... {\b 18. stevenii} 
\par 1  Capsule dehiscing by basal valves or pores, rarely indehiscent 
\par 21 Capsule 5-locular; stigmas 5 
\par 22 Stems erect or ascending 
\par 23 Basal leaves c. 30 cm, laciniate ............................................... {\b 37. laciniata} 
\par 23 Basal leaves c. 20 cm, not laciniate
\par 24 Corolla broadly tubular-campanulate to campanulate
\par 25 Stems ascending, simple or sparsely branched ................... {\b 32. pelviformis}
\par 25 Stems erect, paniculately branched .......................................... {\b 31. medium}
\par 24 Corolla tubular
\par 26 Petioles of basal leaves not lobulate ........................................ {\b 33. tubulosa}
\par 26 Petioles of basal leaves lobulate ................................................... {\b 35. lyrata}
\par 22 Stems ± pendent or diffuse (S. Greece and Aegean region)
\par 27 Calyx-appendages about as long as ovary
\par 28 Basal leaves usually glabrous
\par 29 Basal leaves 3-5 cm; stems slender; flowers usually solitary .. {\b 34. carpatha}
\par 29 Basal leaves 9-16 cm; stems ± robust; flowers numerous
\par 30 Basal leaves spathulate; corolla tubular ........................... {\b 30. merxmuelleri}
\par 30 Basal leaves sublyrate to ovate; corolla tubular-campanulate 
\par    to infundibuliform ......................................................................... {\b 28. reiseri} 
\par 28 Basal leaves ± pubescent
\par 31 Basal leaves ovate to ovate-spathulate; corolla velutinous ... {\b 29. rechingeri}
\par 31 Basal leaves cordate; corolla sparsely pubescent
\par 32 Stems numerous, sparsely leafy .............................................. {\b 23. lavrensis}
\par 32 Stems few, densely leafy ......................................................... {\b 24. goulimyi}
\par 27 Calyx-appendages much shorter than ovary
\par 33 Basal leaves cordate ................................................................ {\b 22. topaliana}
\par 33 Basal leaves not cordate
\par 34 Leaves coriaceous, sparsely pubescent to glabrous;
\par    stems c. 20 cm ............................................................................ {\b 36. saxatilis}
\par 34 Leaves not coriaceous, pubescent to tomentose; stems
\par    usually c. 30 cm
\par 35 Stems with long branches ...................................................... {\b 21. andrewsii}
\par 35 Stems usually simple or with short branches
\par 36 Leaves softly whitish-tomentose .............................................. {\b 27. euboica}
\par 36 Leaves pubescent or greyish-velutinous
\par 37 Basal leaves 6 cm or more; terminal lobe cordate;
\par    corolla blue ........................................................................... {\b 26. anchusiflora}
\par 37 Basal leaves usually not more than 5 cm; terminal 
\par    lobe not cordate; corolla lilac or blue-lilac ..................................... {\b 25. celsii} 
\par 21 Capsule 3-locular; stigmas 3
\par 38 Calyx with appendages between the teeth
\par 39 Appendages tooth-like, much shorter than the ovary
\par 40 Basal leaves lyrate .................................................................... {\b 43. thessala}
\par 40 Basal leaves entire, denticulate or crenulate
\par 41 Leaves entire
\par 42 Stems rather stout, branched ......................................... {\b 57. calaminthifolia}
\par 42 Stems slender or filiform, simple
\par 43 Plant subglabrous; corolla 6-7 mm ........................................ {\b 59. amorgina}
\par 43 Plant velutinous; corolla 12-15 mm ..................................... {\b 58. hierapetrae}
\par 41 Leaves denticulate or crenulate
\par 44 Leaves subglabrous; corolla pubescent ............................. {\b 60. heterophylla}
\par 44 Leaves pubescent or velutinous; corolla glabrous to 
\par    sparsely hairy
\par 45 Basal leaves sessile, velutinous ................................................... {\b 61. mollis}
\par 45 Basal leaves long-petiolate, not velutinous
\par 46 Plant papillose and rather hispid; corolla papillose 
\par    and slightly hispid ..................................................................... {\b 62. papillosa}
\par 46 Plant pubescent; corolla glabrous or sparsely hairy
\par 47 Calyx-teeth broadly ovate-oblong, obtuse ............................... {\b 64. rupicola}
\par 47 Calyx-teeth lanceolate, subacute ......................................... {\b 63. orphanidea}
\par 39 Appendages about as long as the ovary, or somewhat shorter
\par 48 Basal leaves distinctly petiolate
\par 49 Inflorescence capitate .............................................................. {\b 49. lingulata}
\par 49 Inflorescence not capitate
\par 50 Leaves not lobed; petioles not lobulate
\par 51 Leaves sericeous-tomentose; flowers yellowish-white ............... {\b 53. lanata}
\par 51 Leaves pubescent or hispid; flowers bluish-lilac or violet
\par 52 Leaves pubescent, crenate ......................................................... {\b 51. incurva}
\par 52 Leaves hispid, coarsely 2-serrate ............................................ {\b 52. grossekii}
\par 50 Leaves lobed or with lobulate petioles
\par 53 Basal leaves ovate to obovate-spathulate or elliptical
\par 54 Corolla 50-60 mm ........................................................... {\b 48. formanekiana}
\par 54 Corolla not more than 22 mm
\par 55 Corolla 6-11 mm; basal leaves 2-7 cm, grey-tomentose ..... {\b 40. constantini}
\par 
\par 75}
\par