{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 55 Corolla 16-22 mm; basal leaves 4-10 cm, greenish,
\par 
   pubescent .................................................................................... {\b 41. scopelia}
\par 
53 Basal leaves cordate or lyrate 
\par 
56 Appendages lanceolate to triangular ........................................ {\b 38. rupestris} 
\par 
56 Appendages ovate
\par 
57 Basal leaves cordate; corolla (14-)16-18(-20) mm,
\par 
   infundibuliform ........................................................................... {\b 39. cymaea}
\par 
57 Basal leaves usually lyrate; corolla (17-)20-24 mm,
\par 
   tubular-infundibuliform ............................................................... {\b 42. sciathia}
\par 
48 Basal leaves sessile or subsessile
\par 
58 Annual or biennial, without non-flowering shoots at 
\par 
   anthesis
\par 
59 Annual; stems dichotomously branched ............................... {\b 54. dichotoma}
\par 
59 Biennial; stems not dichotomously branched
\par 
60 Appendages shorter than the calyx-teeth ................................... {\b 50. sibirica}
\par 
60 Appendages as long as the calyx-teeth ........................................ {\b 47. affinis}
\par 
58 Perennial, usually with non-flowering shoots at anthesis
\par 
61 Stem slender, flexuous ............................................................. {\b 56. oreadum}
\par 
61 Stem straight, erect, usually stout
\par 
62 Corolla 30-45 mm, distinctly narrowed at base ....................... {\b 55. alpestris}
\par 
62 Corolla 15-32 mm, rounded at base 
\par 
63 Leaves entire; corolla bearded at the mouth .............................. {\b 44. barbata} 
\par 
63 Leaves crenulate; corolla not bearded at the mouth
\par 
64 Ovary villous ................................................................................ {\b 45. alpina}
\par 
64 Ovary hispid ............................................................................. {\b 46. speciosa}
\par 
38 Calyx without appendages
\par 
65 Flowers sessile
\par 
66 Corolla 3-5 mm; annual ............................................................... {\b 98. erinus}
\par 
66 Corolla at least 10 mm; perennial or biennial
\par 
67 Inflorescence thyrsiform or spicate
\par 
68 Calyx-teeth obtuse ........................................................... {\b 73. macrostachya}
\par 
68 Calyx-teeth acuminate
\par 
69 Corolla bluish-violet; inflorescence long, lax, interrupted 
\par 
   at the base ..................................................................................... {\b 74. spicata}
\par 
69 Corolla yellowish-white; inflorescence ovoid or oblong,
\par 
   usually compact ....................................................................... {\b 75. thyrsoides}
\par 
67 Inflorescence capitate
\par 
70 Inflorescence 2- to 4-flowered
\par 
71 Plant glabrous or sparsely setulose ........................................ {\b 66. tymphaea}
\par 
71 Plant strongly setose-hispid ................................................ {\b 67. stenosiphon}
\par 
70 Inflorescence many-flowered
\par 
72 Lower leaves gradually narrowed at base or abruptly
\par 
   contracted into a winged petiole 
\par 
73 Setose-hispid; stem sulcate .................................................... {\b 72. cervicaria} 
\par 
73 Pubescent; stem ± terete
\par 
74 Corolla 15-25 mm, about twice as long as calyx-teeth,
\par 
   violet .................................................................................. {\b 68. transsilvanica}
\par 
74 Corolla 25-30 mm, more than twice as long as calyx-teeth,
\par 
   blue-lilac ................................................................................... {\b 69. moesiaca}
\par 
72 Lower leaves truncate or cordate at base, with unwinged petiole 
\par 
75 Style exserted; corolla velutinous .............................................. {\b 65. petraea} 
\par 
75 Style included, corolla not velutinous
\par 
76 Leaves broadly elliptical to ovate; calyx-teeth linear ................. {\b 71. foliosa}
\par 
76 Leaves oblong to elliptical; calyx-teeth lanceolate ............... {\b 70. glomerata}
\par 
65 Flowers pedicellate
\par 
77 Annual; branching ± dichotomous
\par 
78 Corolla not more than 1½ times as long as calyx-teeth ......... {\b 97. delicatula}
\par 
78 Corolla at least twice as long as calyx-teeth
\par 
79 Leaves conspicuously dentate ................................................ {\b 96. drabifolia}
\par 
79 Leaves obsoletely repand-dentate to entire
\par 
80 Plant glabrous; corolla c. 10 mm .................................... {\b 94. specularioides}
\par 
80 Plant hispid; corolla 15-25 mm .............................................. {\b 95. scutellata}
\par 
77 Perennial; branching not dichotomous
\par 
81 Calyx-teeth lanceolate, triangular or oblong to ovate
\par 
82 Stem and midrib and margin of leaves retrorsely aculeolate; 
\par 
   corolla 6-8 mm .................................................................... {\b 103. aparinoides}
\par 
82 Stem and midrib and margin of leaves not retrorsely
\par 
   aculeolate; corolla more than 8 mm
\par 
83 Capsule pendent
\par 
84 Leaves greyish-tomentose beneath ................................... {\b 102. bononiensis}
\par 
84 Leaves not greyish-tomentose beneath
\par 
85 Calyx-teeth patent to deflexed at anthesis ..................... {\b 101. rapunculoides}
\par 
85 Calyx-teeth ± erect at anthesis
\par 
86 Cauline leaves linear-lanceolate to linear
\par 
87 Buds pendent; capsule distinctly longer than wide ........... {\b 139. scheuchzeri}
\par 
87 Buds erect; capsule at least as wide as long ....................... {\b 142. giesekiana}
\par 
86 Cauline leaves ovate
\par 
88 Stem sharply angled, hispid; lower leaves deeply
\par 
   cordate at base, hispid .......................................................... {\b 100. trachelium}
\par 
88 Stem obtusely angled, glabrous or pubescent; lower 
\par 
   leaves rounded to cuneate at base, glabrous or pubescent .......... {\b 99. latifolia}
\par 
83 Capsule erect
\par 
89 Flowers 1-2 ........................................................................... {\b 78. morettiana}
\par 
89 Flowers numerous
\par 
90 Stem (20-)30-150 cm, erect
\par 
91 Leaves glandular-dentate .................................................... {\b 76. pyramidalis}
\par 
91 Leaves eglandular-dentate ..................................................... {\b 77. versicolor}
\par 
90 Stem not more than 20(-30) cm, usually decumbent to ascending
\par 
92 Basal leaves oblong .................................................................. {\b 79. radicosa}
\par 
92 Basal leaves broadly ovate to orbicular
\par 
93 Plant velutinous; pedicels as long as calyx ................................ {\b 82. sartorii}
\par 
93 Plant pubescent or glabrous; pedicels longer than calyx
\par 
94 Basal leaves ovate, truncate or weakly cordate at base,
\par 
   serrate .................................................................................. {\b 80. secundiflora}
\par 
94 Basal leaves deeply cordate, usually suborbicular,
\par 
   crenate or sinuate
\par 
95 Stems arising from a slender, subterranean stock ............. {\b 81. hawkinsiana}
\par 
95 Stems arising from a stout stock at or above the 
\par 
   surface of the ground
\par 
96 Corolla infundibuliform-campanulate, lobed for ¼ its
\par 
   length ............................................................................. {\b 90. portenschlagiana}
\par 
96 Corolla rotate to infundibuliform, lobed for ¼-½ its length
\par 
97 Corolla 20-40 mm in diameter; calyx-teeth 8-12 mm
\par 
98 Basal leaves 2-serrate ..................................................... {\b 91. poscharskyana}
\par 
98 Basal leaves crenate-dentate or obtusely dentate
\par 
99 Basal leaves deciduous, shorter than the middle 
\par 
   cauline; non-flowering shoots without rosettes ........................ {\b 86. isophylla}
\par 
99 Basal leaves persistent, somewhat longer than the 
\par 
   middle cauline; non-flowering shoots with rosettes .................... {\b 87. fragilis} 
\par 
97 Corolla 7-20 mm in diameter; calyx-teeth 3-5 mm
\par 
100 Plant without non-flowering shoots
\par 
101 Velutinous; basal leaves oblong ......................................... {\b 88. elatinoides}
\par 
101 More or less pubescent; basal leaves orbicular, cordate ......... {\b 89. elatines}
\par 
100 Plant with non-flowering shoots
\par 
102 Pollen yellow; corolla broadly infundibuliform .................. {\b 92. garganica}
\par 
102 Pollen blue; corolla rotate ................................................ {\b 93. fenestrellata}
\par 
81  Calyx-teeth linear to setaceous
\par 
103 Corolla divided to the base into linear lobes .............. {\b 104. trichocalycina}
\par 
103 Corolla divided for 1/4-1/3 its length into broad lobes
\par 
104 Plant velutinous (N. Italy) ................................................. {\b 88. elatinoides}
\par 
104 Plant not velutinous
\par 
105 Capsule ± erect
\par 

\par 
76}
\par