{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 106 Ovary smooth
\par 
107 Calyx-teeth abruptly bent at base
\par 
108 Rhizome stout, unbranched; cauline leaves narrowly
\par 
    linear to setaceous ................................................................. {\b 109. xylocarpa}
\par 
108 Rhizome elongate, sparsely branched; cauline leaves 
\par 
    linear-lanceolate or wider ....................................................... {\b 112. forsythii}
\par 
107 Calyx-teeth not abruptly bent at base
\par 
109 Calyx-teeth c. ½ as long as corolla; basal leaves 
\par 
    present at anthesis ..................................................................... {\b 83. herminii}
\par 
109 Calyx-teeth c. 1/6 as long as corolla; basal leaves
\par 
    withered at anthesis
\par 
110 Corolla rotate, erect ....................................................... {\b 84. waldsteiniana}
\par 
110 Corolla tubular-campanulate, nodding .......................... {\b 85. tommasiniana}
\par 
106 Ovary papillose
\par 
111 Buds inclined to pendent; calyx-teeth patent to deflexed
\par 
112 Calyx-teeth straight, about as long as or longer than
\par 
    corolla; corolla (18-)22-26(-30) mm ......................................... {\b 107. carnica}
\par 
112 Calyx-teeth abruptly bent at base, much shorter than
\par 
    corolla; corolla 10-22 mm ........................................................ {\b 108. tanfanii}
\par 
111 Buds erect; calyx-teeth appressed to patent
\par 
113 Stem pendent,much-branched ............................................. {\b 110. crassipes}
\par 
113 Stem erect to ascending, branched only in the inflorescence
\par 
114 Calyx-teeth abruptly bent at base
\par 
115 Rhizome slender, much-branched; capsule slightly 
\par 
    narrowed above .................................................................... {\b 111. praesignis}
\par 
115 Rhizome stout, unbranched or sparingly branched;
\par 
    capsule not narrowed above
\par 
116 Rhizome stout, unbranched; cauline leaves narrowly 
\par 
    linear to setaceous ................................................................. {\b 109. xylocarpa}
\par 
116 Rhizome elongate, sparingly branched; cauline leaves
\par 
    linear-lanceolate or wider
\par 
117 Basal leaves incise-serrate; corolla 15-18(-20) mm ............... {\b 106. sabatia}
\par 
117 Basal leaves crenate; corolla 20-26(-30) mm ...................... {\b 112. forsythii}
\par 
114 Calyx-teeth straight
\par 
118 Calyx-teeth at least ½ as long as corolla, patent ............. {\b 122. longisepala}
\par 
118 Calyx-teeth not more than ½ as long as corolla,
\par 
    appressed to patent
\par 
119 Inflorescence secund; corolla 10-12 mm ............................ {\b 119. apennina}
\par 
119 Inflorescence not secund; corolla (12-)14-26 mm
\par 
120 Corolla narrowly tubular ...................................... {\b 126. pseudostenocodon}
\par 
120 Corolla campanulate ........................................................ {\b 105. macrorhiza}
\par 
105 Capsule pendent
\par 
121 Capsule broadly turbinate to pelviform, usually at 
\par 
    least as wide as long (Arctic Europe) .................................. {\b 142. giesekiana}
\par 
121 Capsule conical or nearly cylindrical, distinctly 
\par 
    longer than wide
\par 
122 Corolla narrowed at the mouth
\par 
123 Basal leaves crenate or entire, not decurrent; buds erect; 
\par 
    ovary papillose ................................................................... {\b 120. willkommii}
\par 
123 Basal leaves incise-serrate, decurrent; buds pendent;
\par 
    ovary smooth .......................................................................... {\b 134. cespitosa}
\par 
122 Corolla not narrowed at the mouth
\par 
124 Corolla with a deep, rounded sinus between the
\par 
   lobes (S. Alps) ............................................................................. {\b 136. excisa}
\par 
124 Corolla without a deep, rounded sinus between the lobes
\par 
125 Ovary papillose
\par 
126 Cauline leaves cordate to ovate, like those of the 
\par 
    rosette, all distinctly petiolate ........................................... {\b 115. hercegovina}
\par 
126 Cauline leaves elliptical to setaceous, very different 
\par 
    from those of the rosette, sessile except the lowest
\par 
127 Cauline leaves elliptical to lanceolate
\par 
128 Stem (6-)8-15(-24) cm; cauline leaves ± entire;
\par 
    flowers solitary or 2-3 ................................ {\b 116. albanica}
\par 
128 Stem 12-35 cm; cauline leaves serrate; flowers rarely
\par 
    solitary
\par 
129 Stem erect, densely leafy below, leafless above; cauline
\par 
     leaves obtuse, obtusely serrate; corolla 8-22(-26) mm ........... {\b 121. fritschii}
\par 
129 Stem ascending, sparsely leafy up to the inflorescence; 
\par 
    cauline leaves acute, acutely serrate; corolla 12-18 mm ...... {\b 114. justiniana}
\par 
127 Cauline leaves narrowly lanceolate to setaceous
\par 
130 Corolla 8-14(-16) mm
\par 
131 Rhizome slender; basal leaves suborbicular, reniform
\par 
    or shallowly cordate, crenate; capsule membranous ......... {\b 141. rotundifolia}
\par 
131 Rhizome stout; basal leaves cordate to suborbicular-
\par 
    cordate, serrate; capsule woody
\par 
132 Stem 20-40 cm; middle cauline leaves entire; style
\par 
    exceeding corolla-tube .......................................................... {\b 113. hispanica}
\par 
132 Stem 18-30 cm; middle cauline leaves remotely serrate;
\par 
    style about as long as corolla-tube ......................................... {\b 117. romanica}
\par 
130 Corolla (10-)12-22(-30) mm
\par 
133 Stem densely leafy below, leafless above .......................... {\b 118. moravica}
\par 
133 Stem sparsely leafy up to the inflorescence
\par 
134 Stem 20-40 cm; inflorescence many-flowered
\par 
135 Rhizome stout (up to 6 mm in diameter); stem usually
\par 
    densely hairy throughout ......................................................... {\b 125. bertolae}
\par 
135 Rhizome slender; stem glabrous, at least above
\par 
136 Stem glabrous or hairy on the angles below; inflor-
\par 
    escence dense; capsule woody .......................................... {\b 123. marchesettii}
\par 
136 Stem pubescent below; inflorescence lax; capsule 
\par 
    membranous ...................................................................... {\b 141. rotundifolia}
\par 
134 Stem 8-25 cm; inflorescence 1- to few-flowered
\par 
137 Stem pubescent below; capsule membranous .................. {\b 141. rotundifolia}
\par 
137 Stem almost always glabrous below; capsule woody
\par 
138 Flowers solitary, rarely 2-3; corolla 14-18(-22) mm ........... {\b 116. albanica}
\par 
138 Inflorescence many-flowered; corolla (10-)16-20 mm ...... {\b 124. velebitica} 
\par 
125 Ovary smooth
\par 
139 Rhizome stout
\par 
140 Calyx-teeth abruptly bent at base
\par 
141 Rhizome short, unbranched; cauline leaves narrowly 
\par 
    linear to setaceous; corolla (12-)14-18(-25) mm .................. {\b 109. xylocarpa}
\par 
141 Rhizome long, branched; cauline leaves ovate to 
\par 
    narrowly lanceolate; corolla 20-26(-30) mm .......................... {\b 112. forsythii}
\par 
140 Calyx-teeth straight
\par 
142 Stem pendent, much-branched, glabrous; capsule erect,
\par 
    coriaceous ............................................................................... {\b 110. crassipes}
\par 
142 Stem ascending to erect, unbranched (except in inflorescence),
\par 
    hairy below; capsule pendent, woody ..................................... {\b 13. hispanica}
\par 

\par 
77}
\par