{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 139 Rhizome slender
\par 143 Buds usually inclined
\par 144 Stem pubescent below; lower cauline leaves pubescent;
\par     capsule 4-5(-7) mm ......................................................... {\b 143. baumgartenii}
\par 144 Stem glabrous or hairy on the angles; lower cauline 
\par     leaves glabrous (except on the margin); capsule 
\par     (5-)6-8(-9) mm ........................................................................ {\b 144. beckiana}
\par 143 Buds erect or pendent
\par 145 Buds erect
\par 146 Stem ± terete, pubescent or glabrous
\par 147 Basal leaves crenate; capsule membranous .................... {\b 141. rotundifolia}
\par 147 Basal leaves incise-serrate to lobed; capsule carti-
\par     laginous to woody
\par 148 Flowers solitary, rarely 2-3; corolla 14-18(-22) mm ............ {\b 116. albanica}
\par 148 Inflorescence many-flowered; corolla (10-)16-20 mm ...... {\b 124. velebitica}
\par 146 Stem angular, glabrous or hairy on the angles only
\par 149 Rhizome with napiform tubercles; corolla 12-15 mm ...... {\b 128. cantabrica}
\par 149 Rhizome without napiform tubercles;
\par     corolla (12-)16-24 mm
\par 150 Main root napiform; cauline leaves ovate to broadly
\par     lanceolate ......................................................................... {\b 127. rhomboidalis}
\par 150 Main root slender; cauline leaves lanceolate to 
\par     linear-lanceolate .............................................................. {\b 143. baumgartenii}
\par 145 Buds pendent
\par 151 Stems caespitose or cushion-forming; basal leaves 
\par     present at anthesis
\par 152 Basal leaves incise-serrate; ovary glabrous; corolla
\par     (10-)12-16(-18) mm; capsule conical ............................. {\b 133. cochlearifolia}
\par 152 Basal leaves crenate; ovary pubescent; corolla 
\par     8-12(-14) mm; capsule hemispherical ................................ {\b 135. jaubertiana}
\par 151 Stems solitary or few; basal leaves usually absent at
\par     anthesis
\par 153 Stem ± terete, pubescent below; corolla narrowly
\par     infundibuliform .................................................................. {\b 137. stenocodon}
\par 153 Stem angular, glabrous or hairy on the angles;
\par     corolla campanulate to broadly tubular
\par 154 Middle cauline leaves petiolate ................................................. {\b 138. pulla}
\par 154 Middle cauline leaves sessile or subsessile
\par 155 Main root moniliform; cauline leaves ± amplexicaul ........ {\b 131. precatoria}
\par 155 Main root not moniliform; cauline leaves not amplexicaul
\par 156 Plants without napiform roots or napiform tubercles 
\par     on rhizome ......................................................................... {\b 139. scheuchzeri}
\par 156 Plants with either napiform roots or napiform 
\par     tubercles on rhizome
\par 157 Main root ± cylindrical; tubercles present
\par 158 Stem 8-15 cm; flowers solitary or few; calyx-teeth 
\par     narrowly triangular; corolla 15-18 mm ............................... {\b 140. ficarioides}
\par 158 Stem 25-35 cm; inflorescence many-flowered; calyx-
\par     teeth linear; corolla 12-16 mm ........................................... {\b 132. witasekiana}
\par 157 Main root napiform; tubercles absent
\par 159 Middle cauline leaves entire, obtuse, pubescent;
\par     capsule slightly contracted at the top and abruptly 
\par     narrowed at base ........................................................................... {\b 130. recta}
\par 159 Middle cauline leaves serrate, acute, glabrous;
\par     capsule not contracted at the top and gradually 
\par     narrowed at the base .................................................................. {\b 129. serrata}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. RANUNCULUS Dumort. Capsule dehiscing by lateral or subapical pores or valves. Calyx without appendages.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. fastigiata} Dufour ex A. DC.,{\i  Monogr. Camp.} 340 (1830). Rather succulent and scabrid annual or biennial. Stem 3-5(-8) cm, with fastigiate branches. Leaves very small, pubescent or glabrous; lower ovate, entire, shortly petiolate; middle cauline oblong, cuneate, dentate; upper cauline linear-oblong. Flowers axillary, crowded at the apex of the branches. Calyx-teeth linear-lanceolate, obtuse, erect, equalling or longer than the ovary, distinctly longer than the corolla after anthesis. Corolla c. 1·5 mm, pale blue, obconical. Capsule c. 5 mm, obconical, papillose, 5-veined. {\i Dry places. C.Spain.} Hs. ({\i N. Africa, S.W. & C. Asia}.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. uniflora} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 163 (1753). Perennial. Stems 10-15 cm, simple, 1-flowered, glabrous, erect. Leaves glabrous, entire or crenulate; basal c. 2 cm, oblanceolate, obtuse, very shortly petiolate; middle cauline lanceolate, the upper linear-lanceolate, acute. Flower pendent. Calyx-teeth erect, acute, subglabrous.Ovary long, clavate, rather fistular, distally dark blue or almost black. Corolla 7-9 mm, infundibuliform, about as long as calyx-tube. Capsule c. 15 mm, erect, clavate, dark blue, becoming blackish. 2n = 34.{\i  Stony places; calcicole. Arctic and subarctic Europe southwards to} 62°{\i  N. in Norway.} Fe Is No Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. cenisia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1669 (1763). Laxly caespitose perennial. Stems and non-flowering shoots numerous, 3-5(-10) cm, ascending, slender, 1-flowered. Basal leaves obovate, obtuse, entire, sessile; cauline ovate, obovate or oblong, sessile. Calyx hirsute; teeth linear-lanceolate, half as long as corolla and 11/2 times as long as ovary. Corolla 15 mm, blue, broadly campanulate, with acuminate lobes. Capsule ovoid. 2n = 34, 34+3B.{\i  Moraines and screes. • Alps.} Au Ga He It.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. zoysii} Wulfen in Jacq.,{\i  Collect. Bot.}{\b  2}: 122 (1789). Caespitose, glabrous perennial. Stems 5-10 cm, erect, few-flowered. Leaves entire; basal ovate to obovate, obtuse, petiolate; cauline ovate-lanceolate to linear. Pedicels terminal or axillary. Calyx-teeth linear, subulate, patent. Corolla 15-20 mm, cylindrical, ventricose at the base, 4 times as long as calyx-lobes, contracted at the mouth. Capsule ovoid-globose, angular, suberect. 2n = 34.{\i  Limestone rocks. • S.E.Alps.} Au It Ju.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. carpatica} Jacq.,{\i  Hort. Vindob. }{\b 1}: 22 (1770). with a fibrous, white root. Stems 15-50 cm, erect, glabrous. Basal leaves glabrous, ovate-orbicular, crenate-dentate, long-petiolate; middle cauline ovate, acute, cordate at base, crenate, petiolate; upper cauline small, sessile. Pedicels 10-15 cm, erect. Calyx-teeth lanceolate, entire or with small teeth. Corolla c. 30 mm, broadly infundibuliform-rotate, as long as wide, pale blue, rarely white. Capsule ovoid-cylindrical, dehiscing calcicole.Perennial, branched, cordate, by subapical pores. 2n = 34.{\i  Mountain rocks; calcicole. • Carpathians.} Cz Po Rm Rs (W) [Hu].
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. arvatica} Lag.,{\i  Varied. Ci. Lit. Artes} ({\i Madrid}) {\b 2}({\b 4}):40 (1805) ({\i Wahlenbergia hederacea} sensu Willk. pro parte). Gla-
\par 
\par 78}
\par