{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 brous or pubescent, caespitose perennial. Rhizome thick, irregular, with remains of dead leaves and petioles. Stems up to 20 cm. Leaves up to c. 8 mm, ovate, dentate, petiolate; upper cauline similar but rather smaller, sessile or subsessile. Inflorescence few-flowered. Calyx-teeth linear-subulate. Corolla 12-25 mm, rotate to broadly infundibuliform, pale blue or violet. Capsule 4 mm, turbinate, dehiscing by lateral pores. 2n = 28.{\i  Mountain rocks; calcicole. • N.W. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b arvatica}: Rather sparsely pubescent. Calyx-teeth patent to deflexed. Corolla infundibuliform.{\i  Prov. Oviedo and N. part of Prov. León}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b adsurgens} (Leresche & Levier) Damboldt,{\i  Ber. Deutsch. Bot. Ges.}{\b  79}: 305 (1966): Densely papillose-pubescent. Calyx-teeth erect. Corolla rotate. {\i S.W. part of Prov. León.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. raineri} Perpenti, {\i Bibliot. Ital.}{\b  5}: 134 (1817). Perennial. Stems 5-10 cm, almost erect, branched. Branches 1- to 3-flowered. Basal leaves ovate to obovate, remotely serrate, subsessile; cauline oblong-ovate, crenate-serrate. Calyx-teeth broadly lanceolate to ovate, serrate, acuminate, ½ as long as corolla. Corolla 30-40 mm, broadly infundibuliform. 2n = 32.{\i  Limestone rocks. • S.E. Alps.} It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. aizoon} Boiss. & Spruner in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 4}): 34 (1844). Glabrous biennial. Root thick, napiform. Stem 15-30 cm, branched, rather stout, sulcate. Basal leaves rosulate, spathulate, mucronate, with cartilaginous margin; cauline acute, triangular, sessile. Flowers pedicellate, numerous. Inflorescence much-branched, thyrsiform. Calyx-teeth triangular, as long as the ovary. Corolla pale blue, longer than the calyx-teeth. Capsule erect, angular, rounded. 2n = 16.{\i  Rocky places. • Greece, Kriti.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b aizoon}: Calyx-teeth ¼ as long as corolla. Corolla 20-30 mm, campanulate. {\i Greece}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b aizoides} (Zaffran) Fedorov, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  67}: 281 (1973) ({\i C. aizoides} Zaffran): Calyx-teeth ½ as long as corolla. Corolla 12-15 mm, tubular-campanulate.{\i  Limestone rocks, }c. 1800 {\i m. W. Kriti} ({\i Levca Ori}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. primulifolia} Brot.,{\i  Phyt. Lusit.} 9 (1800). Perennial. Stem 40-70 cm, hispid, simple, erect. Leaves hirsute, irregularly 2-crenate, rugose; basal oblong-lanceolate, subobtuse, with narrowly winged petiole; cauline ovate-oblong, acute. Flowers in axillary clusters of 1-3 in a branched inflorescence. Ovary obconical, hirsute; calyx-teeth acuminate, widened at the base, denticulate. Corolla c. 20 mm, campanulate-rotate, whitish at the base, twice as long as calyx-teeth. Capsule obconic-oblong. 2n = 36.{\i  Damp or shady places. • Portugal.} Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. lusitanica} L. in Loefl.,{\i  Iter. Hisp.} 111 (1758). Glabrous or pubescent annual. Stem 10-35 cm, more or less branched. Leaves crenate, the uppermost entire or slightly serrate, ovate-oblong to ovate-lanceolate. Inflorescence divaricately branched or simple, few- to many-flowered; pedicels filiform. Calyx-teeth linear, 3-4 times as long as tube. Corolla 10-20 mm, infundibuliform-campanulate; lobes elongate, blue, paler at the base. Capsule erect. 2n = 18. {\i Sandy soils. Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b lusitanica}: Stem simple to much-branched, flexuous, erect.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b transtagana} (R. Fernandes) Fedorov, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  67}: 281 (1973) ({\i C. transtagana} R. Fernandes): Stem never simple, decumbent or ascending. •{\i  S. & S.C. Portugal}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b C. pyrenaica} A. DC.,{\i  Monogr. Camp.} 324 (1830), from the Pyrenees, appears to have been collected once only and is imperfectly known. It is somewhat hirsute, with a simple, erect, 1-flowered stem, patent, entire, subulate calyx-teeth and corolla a little longer than the calyx. A record from Islas Baleares is an error.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. phrygia} Jaub. & Spach,{\i  Ill. Pl. Or.}{\b  3}: 42 (1848). Moderately papillose-pubescent annual. Stem 10-15 cm, slender, dichotomously branched from the base, flexuous. Leaves small; basal crenate, obovate, obtuse, subsessile; upper lanceolate or linear. Flowers terminal, long-pedicellate. Calyx-teeth lanceolate-subulate, 1-veined, sometimes denticulate at the base, twice as long as ovary. Corolla 6-7 mm, shortly obconical, twice as long as calyx; lobes patent. Capsule deeply sulcate. 2n = 16.{\i  Grassy places. • Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. sparsa} Friv., {\i Magyar Tudós Társaság Évkönyvei} ({\i Budapest}) {\b 1836-38}: 201 (1840). Annual. Stem 20 40 cm or more, hirsute, branched. Leaves hirsute or glabrous, oblong-lanceolate, crenate, sessile, the upper acuminate, linear. Inflorescence branched. Pedicels filiform. Calyx-teeth subulate, denticulate at the base, longer than the ovary. Corolla campanulate. Capsule obconical,long.{\i  Woods and scrub. • Balkan peninsula}. Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla c. 30 mm ......................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b frivaldskyi}
\par 
1 Corolla 12-23 mm
\par 
2 Corolla (16-)18-23 mm ...................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b sparsa}
\par 
2 Corolla 12-18 mm .................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b sphaerothrix}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sparsa}: Calyx-teeth more or less patent. Corolla (16-)18-23 mm. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b frivaldskyi} (Steudel) Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 547 (1930) ({\i C. expansa} Friv., non J. H. Rudolph): Calyx-teeth erecto-patent. Corolla c. 30 mm. 2n = 20.{\i  Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, Jugoslavia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b sphaerothrix} (Griseb.) Hayek,{\i  loc. cit.} (1930): Calyx-teeth patent. Corolla 12-16 mm. 2n = 20.{\i  Bulgaria, Greece, Jugoslavia}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. C. ramosissima} Sibth. & Sm., {\i Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 137 (1806). Annual. Stem 20 40 cm, erect, simple or branched, angular, many-flowered, hirsute. Leaves sparsely hirsute, ovate-lanceolate to spathulate, crenate; basal obtuse, petiolate; upper acute, sessile. Flowers long-pedicellate. Ovary obconical, hirsute or hispid. Calyx-teeth narrowly lanceolate, 3-veined, acuminate, entire, hirsute, mostly shorter than the wide, violet corolla. Corolla 10-30 mm. Capsule obconical, hirsute, sulcate. 2n = 20.{\i  Grassy and stony places on mountains. • W. part of Balkan peninsula; Italy.} Al Gr It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. C. spatulata} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1806). Perennial. Root usually napiform. Stolons short. Stems (5-)20-30(-50) cm, erect, 1- to 5-flowered. Leaves papillose or smooth, more or less crenate; basal oblanceolate, petiolate; cauline sessile or subsessile, lanceolate, acuminate. Calyx-teeth lanceolate, subulate, weakly carinate, with 2-4 small glandular teeth. Ovary long narrowly obconical. Corolla blue, broadly infundibuliform, longer than the calyx-lobes.{\i  Capsule obconical, sulcate. Subalpine meadows. • S. part of Balkan peninsula, Kriti.} Al Bu Cr Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Middle cauline leaves usually lanceolate; calyx-
\par 
  teeth 3-6 times as long as ovary ................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b sprunerana}
\par 
1 Middle cauline leaves oblong-elliptical to ovate or 
\par 
  obovate; calyx-teeth 2-3 times as long as ovary
\par 
2 Middle cauline leaves sessile or subsessile .................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b spatulata}
\par 
2 Middle cauline leaves ± petiolate ................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b filicaulis}
\par 

\par 
79}
\par