{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 the lobes; fruit 2-3 mm.{\i  Alpine zone. • Mountains of N. Greece and S. W. Bulgaria.} Bu Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. gussonii} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 2}({\b 10}): 63 (1849). Shoots densely pulvinate, glaucous-pruinose, glabrous. Stems 3-9 cm; internodes shorter than the leaves. Leaves 4-9 × 1-1·8 mm, narrowly elliptical to broadly linear, often weakly incurved, thickish, shortly acute; midrib robust, but usually comprising less than ¾ of the width of leaf; margin flat or weakly revolute. Inflorescence compact, few-flowered, usually with a solitary, terminal cluster of 6-15 shortly pedicellate flowers; bracts leaflike. Corolla 6-7 mm, hypocrateriform to narrowly infundibuliform, reddish, glabrous, smooth; tube 2-3 times as long as lobes; lobes obscurely appendiculate. Fruit 1·2-2 mm, finely papillose, glabrous.{\i  Alpine zone. • N. Sicilia }({\i Madonie}). ?It Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. A. pumila} Moris, {\i Mem. Acad. Sci.} ({\i Turin}){\b  38}: 26 (1835). Like {\b 12} but shoots green, with more or less sparse, patent hairs up to 0·3 mm; internodes of flowering stems sometimes slightly longer than the leaves; leaves thin, with distinct hyaline apex up to 0·3 mm; midrib usually comprising c. ¾ of width of leaf; flowers usually sessile; corolla-tube 3-3½ times as long as lobes; fruit sparsely hairy.{\i  Calcareous mountain rocks. • Sardegna }({\i near Oliena}). Sa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. oetaea} (Boiss.) Heldr. ex Halácsy, {\i Consp. Fl. Graec.}{\b  1}: 739 (1901). Stems 5-26 cm, laxly caespitose, procumbent to ascending, slender and more or less herbaceous, with hairs less than 0·1 mm especially at the base, glabrous above; lower internodes more or less short, the middle ones 3-5 times as long as the leaves. Leaves (7-)10-25 × (0·6-)0·8-1·8 mm, lanceolate to linear, usually blackish when dry, more or less glabrous, with a hyaline awn 0·3-0·8 mm; midrib comprising less than ¾ of width of leaf; margin more or less flat, usually shortly ciliate. Inflorescence usually unbranched and elongate, with 3 (rarely more) more or less capitate flower-clusters; bracts distinctly longer than fruits, lanceolate. Corolla 5·7-6·9 mm, hypocrateriform to narrowly infundibuliform, pink, glabrous and smooth; tube 2-2½ times as long as lobes; lobes distinctly appendiculate. Fruit papillose, glabrous.{\i  Damp places in the subalpine zone. • S. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. A. nitida} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr. }{\b 1}: 89 (1806). Densely caespitose to pulvinate; young shoots green, usually conspicuously falcate-incurved. Stems 6-25 cm, usually with patent hairs up to 0·1 mm; lower internodes short, the upper (1-)2-3 times as long as the leaves. Leaves (5-)10-15 × 0·5-0·9 mm, narrowly lanceolate to acicular, straight or falcate, usually blackish when dry, with hyaline awn up to 1 mm; midrib comprising less than ¾ of width of leaf; margin weakly revolute, usually with distinct cilia c. 0·1 mm. Inflorescence compact or slightly elongate, with (2-)3-4(-10) flower-clusters; bracts usually ciliate. Corolla 5·5-8 mm, hypocrateriform to narrowly infundibuliform, pale purplish, glabrous and smooth; tube 2-3 times as long as lobes; lobes distinctly appendiculate. Fruit c. 2 mm, papillose, glabrous. {\i Alpine calcareous and siliceous soils. Mountains of C. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. A. lutea} Sibth. & Sm., {\i op. cit. }88 (1806). Stems 8-48 cm, caespitose to laxly pulvinate, erect or ascending, usually woody at base, usually with hairs 0·05-0·3 mm below, more or less subglabrous above; basal internodes very short, the middle ones 3-5 times as long as the leaves. Leaves 7-24 × 0·3-0·7 mm, with hyaline apex 0·3-1 mm. Inflorescence elongate, laxly spicate with 3-many more or less capitate flower-clusters. Corolla hypocrateriform; tube (1½-)2-3½ times as long as lobes; lobes distinctly appendiculate. •{\i  S. & S.C. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Subsp. ({\b a}) and subsp. ({\b b}) are connected with {\b 18} by intermediates, possibly of hybrid origin.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves 5-15 mm, rigid, linear to acicular; hairs on stem 0·1-0·3 mm
\par 
2 Bracts connate for c. ½ their length; hairs on stem 
\par 
  often more than 0·2 mm ........................................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b lutea}
\par 
2 Bracts free or only slightly connate; hairs on stem not
\par 
  more than 0·2 mm ............................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b rigidula} 
\par 
1 Leaves 10-24 mm, thin, acicular; hairs on stem not more than 0·1 mm
\par 
3 Leaves ± falcate, patent or recurved; flowers yellowish;
\par 
  fruit 2-2·5 mm .................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b euboea}
\par 
3 Leaves ± straight and appressed; flowers pink;
\par 
  fruit 1-2 mm .................................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b mungieri}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b lutea}: Stems 12-30 cm. Leaves somewhat falcate, with more or less dense, patent hairs up to 0·3 mm, or glabrous, with awn up to 1 mm; midrib comprising less than ¾ of width of leaf; margin more or less weakly revolute. Inflorescence usually unbranched. Corolla 3·5-4 mm, yellowish to reddish, glabrous, rarely with sparse, short hairs. Fruit c. 2 mm, papillose, glabrous.{\i  Montane to subalpine zones. S.C. Greece}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b rigidula} (Halácsy) Ehrend.,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  80}: 402 (1961): Stems 18-45 cm, robust, with short, stiff hairs 0·1-0·2 mm, particularly towards base. Leaves robust, rigidly patent, more or less shortly hairy to glabrous, with awn c. 0·5 mm; midrib comprising more than ¾ of width of leaf; margin distinctly revolute. Inflorescence more or less branched. Corolla 3·5-5·5 mm, usually yellowish, glabrous or hairy. Fruit 1·5-2·5 mm, papillose, glabrous (rarely hairy).{\i  Mediterranean zone, on calcareous and siliceous soils. S.E. Greece, Evvoia.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b euboea} Ehrend.,{\i  op. cit.} 403 (1961): Stems 8-20 cm, slender, with some short hairs (up to 0·1 mm) at base. Leaves distinctly patent-falcate, glabrous or shortly hairy, with awn c. 0·5 mm; midrib comprising more than ¾ of width of leaf; margin distinctly revolute. Inflorescence scarcely branched. Corolla (3·5-)4-7 mm, dirty yellow, glabrous or weakly hairy. Fruit 2-2·5 mm, coarsely papillose, glabrous or hairy.{\i  Calcareous rocks in montane zone. Evvoia}.
\par 
 ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b mungieri} (Boiss. & Heldr.){\i  Ehrend. & Krendl, Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  68}: 269 (1974) ({\i A. mungieri} Boiss. & Heldr.): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but stems 15-48 cm; leaves more or less straight and appressed; corolla (3-)4-8 mm, pink; fruit 1-2 mm, glabrous.{\i  Montane to subalpine zones. S. Greece}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. A. abbreviata} (Halácsy) Rech. fil., {\i Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}){\b  105}({\b 2, 1}): 132 (1943). Shoots green, straight. Stems 2-10 cm, pulvinate, with curved hairs up to 0·3 mm or glabrous; middle internodes 1-2(-3) times as long as the leaves. Leaves 7-15 × 0·5-0·8 mm, linear to acicular, more or less weakly patent-falcate, shortly hairy, sometimes glabrescent, with awn up to 0·6 mm; midrib comprising more than ¾ of width of leaf; margin distinctly revolute. Inflorescence unbranched, compactly spicate, with (1-)2(-3) clusters each of 3-5(-9) flowers. Corolla 3·5-4·5 mm, broadly hypocrateriform to narrowly infundibuliform, ?yellow, glabrous; tube 2-3 times as long as lobes; lobes shortly appendiculate. Fruit c. 1·5 mm, papillose, glabrous. •{\i  Mountains of the Kikladhes }({\i Naxos, Amorgos}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. A. pulvinaris} (Boiss.) Heldr. ex Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or., Suppl.} 281 (1888). Like {\b 17} but hairs on stems patent; internodes usually shorter than the leaves; leaves 5-10 × 0·5-0·8 mm, densely hairy, the midrib comprising less than ¾ of width of leaf and the margin weakly revolute; inflorescence with 1-2(-3) clusters each of (1-)2-4 flowers; corolla pink, usually densely patent-hairy, lobes
\par 

\par 
8}
\par