{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b spatulata} ({\i C. sibthorpiana} Halácsy): Stems 5-25 cm, usually 1-flowered, not filiform and flexuous. Middle cauline leaves usually oblong-elliptical or obovate, sessile or subsessile. Corolla 12-25 mm. Calyx-teeth 2-3 times as long as ovary. 2n = 20.{\i  Mountain grassland. S.W. Greece, S. Jugoslavia.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sprunerana} (Hampe) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 545 (1930): Stems 15-50 cm, 1- to 5-flowered, not filiform and flexuous. Middle cauline leaves usually lanceolate, sessile. Corolla 25-30 mm. Calyx-teeth 3-6 times as long as ovary. 2n = 20.{\i  Scrub, mainly lowland. Throughout the range of the species, except Kriti.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b filicaulis} (Halácsy) Phitos, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  103-104}: 228 (1964): Stems 5-50 cm, 1-flowered, filiform, flexuous. Middle cauline leaves ovate or elliptical, more or less petiolate. Corolla c. 10 mm. Calyx-teeth 2-3 times as long as ovary.{\i  Screes. Kriti}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. C. patula} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 163 (1753). Glabrous or more or less pubescent. Stems up to 70 cm, erect. Basal leaves obovate petiolate; upper few, linear-lanceolate, sessile. Flowers in a more or less branched inflorescence, numerous or few, rarely solitary. Calyx-teeth acute, more or less patent, usually twice as long as capsule. Corolla (17-)20-25(-35) mm, infundibuliform, violet to pale blue or rarely white. Capsule erect, ovoid-cylindrical, with 10 prominent veins.{\i  Grassy places, woods and scrub. Most of Europe, but local in the north-west and south.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Sa [Da No Su].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perennial, with non-flowering stolons ......................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b abietina} 
\par 
1 Biennial, without stolons
\par 
2 Calyx-teeth entire; stem glabrous ................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b epigaea}
\par 
2 Calyx-teeth dentate or serrate; stem ± pubescent
\par 
3 Calyx-teeth with 1-2 teeth at the base; stem slender ....... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b patula} 
\par 
3 Calyx-teeth serrate; stem robust ...................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b costae}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b patula}: Biennial, without stolons. Stem erect or ascending, comparatively slender, more or less pubescent. Calyx-teeth a little longer than the ovary, with 1-2 teeth at the base. 2n = 20, 40.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b costae} (Willk.) Fedorov, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  67}: 281 (1973) ({\i C. costae} Willk.): Biennial, without stolons. Stem erect, robust, branched from the base, more or less pubescent. Calyx-teeth serrate, 4 times as long as ovary.{\i  Woods. • E. Pyrenees} ({\i Valle d'Aran}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b epigaea} (Janka) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 546 (1930): Biennial without stolons. Stem simple or sparingly branched, glabrous; branches long, 1-flowered. Basal leaves shortly petiolate or almost sessile. Calyx-teeth entire, narrowly lanceolate. 2n = 20.{\i  Mountain meadows. • Jugoslavia, Bulgaria.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b abietina} (Griseb.) Simonkai,{\i  Enum. Fl. Transs.} 383 (1887) ({\i C. abietina} Griseb.): Perennial. Stem 15-40 cm. Stem and leaves glabrous, with slender non-flowering stolons. Flowers 3-5. Calyx-teeth entire. 2n = 40.{\i  Mountain grassland. • E. & S. Carpathians, and mountains of Transsylvania and N. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Var. {\i vajdae} (Pénzes) Fedorov ({\i C. vajdae} Pénzes) is a dwarf mountain variant of subsp. ({\b d}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. C. decumbens} A. DC.,{\i  Monogr. Camp.} 334 (1830). Pubescent or glabrous. Stem decumbent, almost simple, few-flowered. Pedicels axillary, longer than the leaves. Basal leaves orbicular-spathulate, petiolate, sinuate; cauline-obovate, crenate-dentate, the upper sessile, lanceolate. Ovary ovoid, hirsute; calyx-teeth linear-lanceolate, erect, entire, acuminate, shorter than the campanulate corolla. Capsule subglobose. •{\i  C. Spain }({\i near Aranjuez}). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Perhaps best regarded as a subspecies or even variety of {\b 15} ({\i C. patula} var.{\i  decumbens} (A. DC.) Cuatrec.), but the taxon is incompletely known and further investigation is required.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. C. hemschinica} C. Koch,{\i  Linnaea }{\b 23}: 644 (1851). Biennial or perennial. Stems 30-50 cm, erect, angular. Basal and lower cauline leaves oblong-ovate, petiolate; middle cauline oblong-lanceolate, sessile; uppermost acute, crenulate. Flowers in a compact terminal corymbose inflorescence. Calyx-teeth erect 1/4-1/3 as long as the blue corolla. Capsule obconical.{\i  Mountain woods and meadows. • Balkan peninsula.} Bu Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. C. stevenii} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3}: 138 (1819). Perennial. Rhizome procumbent, more or less stoloniferous. Stem 20-50 cm, erect, simple or with few branches, usually 1(to 4)-flowered. Basal leaves oblong-spathulate, acute or obtuse, petiolate; cauline oblong-lanceolate, petiolate, the upper linear-lanceolate, almost sessile. Flowers in a lax inflorescence. Calyx-teeth linear-lanceolate, as long as or longer than ovary. Corolla c. 25 mm, infundibuliform, twice as long as calyx-teeth.{\i  S. part of U.S.S.R.} Rs (C, W, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b wolgensis} (P. Smirnov) Fedorov,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  67}: 281 (1973) ({\i C. wolgensis }P. Smirnov): Calyx-teeth longer than the ovary, flat. Corolla violet. {\i E. Russia} ({\i middle Volga}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b altaica} (Ledeb.) Fedorov, {\i loc. cit.} (1973) ({\i C. altaica} Ledeb.): Calyx-teeth naviculiform, not flat. Corolla pale blue.{\i  S.C. Russia and E. Ukraine}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Subsp.{\i  stevenii} occurs in the Caucasus and Anatolia.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. C. rapunculus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 164 (1753). Biennial. Root napiform. Stem up to 100 cm, erect, simple, glabrous to slightly hirsute. Basal leaves obovate, obtuse to acuminate, petiolate; cauline linear-lanceolate. Flowers sessile or pedicellate, in a branched inflorescence. Calyx-teeth very long, erect, setiform. Corolla 10-20 mm, white or pale blue, infundibuliform, a little longer than the calyx-teeth. Capsule obconical. 2n = 20. {\i Forest margins, meadows and waste places. Europe, southwards from the Netherlands and S.C. Russia, but absent from most of the islands; formerly cultivated as a vegetable and naturalized in parts of the north.} Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu [Br Da Su].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable. Infraspecific taxa have been described by many authors but do not seem worth recognition.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  C. lactiflora} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 153 (1808), from the Caucasus and W. Asia, is more or less naturalized in Czechoslovakia and Britain (Aberdeenshire). It is a perennial up to 150 cm, with large, lax inflorescence and numerous white or pale blue flowers.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. C. persicifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 164 (1753). Glabrous perennial. Stem up to 70 cm, simple, erect. Basal leaves lanceolate to obovate, crenulate; cauline linear-lanceolate, crenulate. Flowers terminal or axillary, pedicellate. Pedicels comparatively short. Ovary glabrous, hispid or with transparent setulae. Calyx-teeth acuminate, broad at the base, entire, half as long as the broadly campanulate corolla. Corolla 30-40 mm. Capsule sulcate. 2n = 16.{\i  Meadows and open woods. Europe, except the extreme north, the islands, and parts of the west.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Sa Su Tu [Br].
\par 

\par 
80}
\par