{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ovary usually glabrous ............................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b persicifolia}
\par 
1 Ovary hispid or setulose
\par 
2 Flowers almost sessile .............................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b sessiliflora}
\par 
2 Flowers ± pedicellate ............................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b subpyrenaica}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b persicifolia}: {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sessiliflora} (C. Koch) Velen., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  42}: 16 (1892). • {\i Balkan peninsula}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b subpyrenaica} (Timb.-Lagr.) Fedorov,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  67}: 281 (1973) ({\i C. subpyrenaica }Timb.-Lagr.). • Pyrenees.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. CAMPANULA. Capsule dehiscing by basal pores or valves. Calyx with or without appendages.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  (a) Stigmas 5. Ovary 5-locular.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. C. andrewsii} A. DC., Monogr. Camp. 220 (1830). Biennial. Stems 20-30 cm, numerous. Basal leaves rosulate, pubescent or tomentose, more or less lyrate; lower cauline leaves similar, with an ovate, serrate terminal lobe, obtuse or rounded at apex and more or less cordate at base; upper cauline obovate to elliptical. Flowers axillary or terminal. Calyx-teeth ovate to triangular-lanceolate, usually more than half as long as corolla; appendages triangular-lanceolate. Corolla tubular, glabrous or pubescent, violet. 2n = 34.{\i  Limestone rock-crevices. • S. Greece} ({\i E. Peloponnisos}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b andrewsii}: Appendages as long as ovary. Calyx pubescent. Corolla 15-23 mm.{\i  N.E. Peloponnisos}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b hirsutula} Phitos,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  112}: 455 (1965): Appendages very short, acuminate. Calyx hirsute. Corolla (12-)14-16(-19) mm. {\i S.E. Peloponnisos}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. C. topaliana} Beauverd,{\i  Candollea}{\b  7}: 268 (1937). Stems 20-40 cm, numerous, pubescent, simple or branched. Basal leaves rosulate, sericeous, hirsute or tomentose, lyrate or lobed, cordate, serrate, acute or sometimes obtuse, with lobulate petioles; lower cauline similar, the upper ovate to elliptical, serrate. Flowers axillary or terminal. Calyx-teeth ovate, acuminate; appendages pubescent or ciliate, nearly or quite as long as the ovary. Corolla tubular, pubescent; lobes erect to somewhat patent. 2n = 34. {\i Limestone rocks. • S. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Basal leaves lyrate, the terminal lobe ovate; corolla 
\par 
  (6-)8-10(-12) mm ............................................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b topaliana} 
\par 
1 Basal leaves cordate or somewhat lyrate; corolla 10-19 mm
\par 
2 Greenish-grey; corolla (12-)13-15(-19) mm ................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b cordifolia} 
\par 
2 Greyish-sericeous; corolla 10-12 mm ............................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b delphica}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b topaliana}:Stems usually simple. Calyx-teeth usually remotely dentate.{\i  N. Peloponnisos.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cordifolia} Phitos,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  112}: 458 (1965): Stems simple or branched. Calyx-teeth dentate or entire.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b delphica} Phitos, {\i op. cit.} 459 (1965): Stems racemosely or paniculately branched; branches long. Calyx-teeth entire.{\i  Fokis prov.} ({\i near Dhelfoi}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. C. lavrensis} (Tocl & Rohlena) Phitos,{\i  op. cit.} 460 (1965). Greenish or greyish. Stems 20-40 cm, simple or branched, pubescent. Basal and lower cauline leaves suborbicular-cordate or triangular, crenate-serrate, with lobulate petioles; upper cauline sessile. Flowers terminal or axillary. Calyx-teeth acuminate, triangular-lanceolate; appendages ovate. Corolla (12-)15-18 mm, tubular, pubescent. 2n = 34. {\i Limestone rocks. N.E. Greece} ({\i Athos, Sithonia}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. C. goulimyi} Turrill,{\i  Kew Bull. }{\b 10}: 354 (1955).Pubescent. Stems c. 40 cm, branched. Basal leaves rosulate, ovate-cordate, with lobulate petioles; lower cauline similar; upper cauline numerous, comparatively large, ovate to spathulate, rounded at the apex, sessile. Flowers in a branched inflorescence. Calyx-teeth large, broadly ovate to lanceolate, acuminate, pubescent, half as long as corolla-tube. Corolla c. 13 mm, tubular, pubescent; lobes erect to slightly patent. 2n = 34.{\i  Limestone rocks. • E. Greece }({\i N. Evvoia}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. C. celsii} A. DC., {\i Monogr. Camp.} 217 (1830). Velutinous biennial. Stem 20-30 cm, ascending, branched, flexuous. Basal leaves irregularly lobed, with crenate, ovate, acute terminal lobes; upper cauline sessile, obovate, crenate. Flowers erect, terminal and axillary. Calyx-teeth triangular to lanceolate, acuminate; appendages very small, tooth-like. Corolla 18-30 mm, tubular, velutinous, lilac or blue-lilac; lobes 4 times as long as calyx. Capsule obconical, ribbed. 2n = 34.{\i  Rocks. • S.E. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Basal leaves spathulate; petioles not or scarcely lobulate
\par 
2 Basal leaves spathulate, crenulate, tomentose, greyish;
\par 
  petioles without lobules .............................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b spathulifolia}
\par 
2 Basal leaves ovate-spathulate, serrate-crenate,
\par 
  greenish, pubescent; petioles sparsely lobulate ................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b parnesia} 
\par 
1 Basal leaves sublyrate; petioles usually lobulate
\par 
3 Basal leaves sublyrate, incise-crenate, lanate; calyx-
\par 
  teeth lanceolate ................................................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b carystea}
\par 
3 Basal leaves spathulate or sublyrate, crenate to 
\par 
  denticulate, scabrid-pubescent; calyx-teeth triangular
\par 
  to ovate .................................................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b celsii}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b celsii}: Basal leaves green, pubescent, rather scabrid. Calyx-teeth ovate, acuminate.{\i  Hills around Athinai.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b parnesia} Phitos,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  112}: 464 (1965): Basal leaves green, sparsely pubescent. Calyx-teeth lanceolate, acute.{\i  Parnis Oros}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b spathulifolia} (Turrill) Phitos,{\i  loc. cit.} (1965): Basal leaves greyish-tomentose. Calyx-teeth triangular-lanceolate, acuminate.{\i  Kithairon Oros}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b carystea} Phitos, {\i op. cit.} 465 (1965): Basal leaves green, softly pubescent. Calyx-teeth lanceolate, acute, long.{\i  Evvoia}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. C. anchusiflora} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 141 (1806). Shortly pubescent biennial, the central stem very long, robust, erect, the lateral stems diffuse, branched. Basal leaves rosulate, large, lyrate, serrate, petiolate, with cordate, ovate terminal lobe; lower cauline similar; upper cauline obovate to elliptical, sessile. Flowers in a branched inflorescence. Calyx-teeth triangular-lanceolate, acute; appendages very small. Corolla 12-15 mm, tubular, slightly pubescent, blue. 2n = 34.{\i  Limestone rocks. • E. Greece, ?Kikladhes.} Gr.
\par 

\par 
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 27. C. euboica} Phitos, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  112}: 467 (1965). Softly whitish-tomentose biennial or perennial. Stems simple or with short branches. Basal leaves rosulate, ovate-elliptical to subspathulate, crenate-serrate; cauline similar but smaller. Flowers axillary and terminal. Calyx-teeth lanceolate-ovate; appendages very short, ovate, ciliate. Ovary ribbed. Corolla c. 13 mm, narrowly tubular; lobes oblong, erecto-patent. 2n = 34.{\i  Limestone rocks. • E. Greece }({\i Evvoia}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. C. reiseri} Halácsy,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  46}: 15 (1896). Pubescent or glabrous. Stems 15-45 cm, mostly simple or somewhat branched. Basal leaves sublyrate to ovate, obtuse or rounded at the apex, serrate or incise-crenate, with very long, lobulate petiole; cauline oblong-spathulate, the uppermost sessile. Flowers axillary and terminal. Calyx-teeth triangular, rather short; appendages ovate to suborbicular, ciliate, as long as the ovary.
\par 

\par 
81}
\par