{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Corolla 18-20 mm, tubular to narrowly infundibuliform, slightly pubescent. 2n = 34.{\i  Limestone rocks. • Islands of W. Aegean region.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. C. rechingeri} Phitos,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  112}: 470 (1965). Sparsely pubescent biennial or perennial. Stems numerous, simple or somewhat branched, diffuse, flexuous. Basal leaves rosulate, ovate to ovate-spathulate, serrate-crenate, with long, lobulate petiole; cauline similar but the uppermost sessile, elliptical. Flowers numerous, axillary and terminal. Calyx-teeth triangular, acuminate, greyish-pubescent; appendages ovate, softly hairy, ciliate, as long as or longer than the ovary. Corolla 9-11 mm, narrowly infundibuliform or tubular, greyish-velutinous; lobes lanceolate-obovate, patent. 2n = 34.{\i  Limestone rock-crevices. • C. Aegean region }({\i Piperi}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. C. merxmuelleri} Phitos, {\i Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm. (München)} {\b 5}: 121 (1963). Glabrous perennial. Stems numerous, slender, diffuse, simple or somewhat branched. Basal leaves 9-16 cm, spathulate or elliptical, acutely dentate; lower cauline spathulate to obovate, petiolate, the uppermost sessile, orbicular to elliptical. Flowers terminal and axillary. Calyx-teeth triangular; appendages oblong-elliptical to ovate, pubescent, as long as or longer than the ovary. Corolla c. 14 mm, tubular, somewhat pubescent; lobes elliptic-ovate, suberect. 2n = 34.{\i  Limestone rocks and sandy places. • C. Aegean region} ({\i Skiros}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. C. medium} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 167 (1753). Biennial. Stem up to 60 cm, erect, more or less branched, hispid. Leaves hirsute, crenate-dentate or serrate; basal ovate-oblong, petiolate; middle and upper cauline sessile, lanceolate. Flowers solitary, terminal or axillary in a lax inflorescence. Calyx-teeth lanceolate-ovate, acuminate, shorter than the corolla; appendages broadly ovate, obtuse, deflexed, longer than the ovary and as long as or shorter than the teeth. Corolla 30-40 mm, campanulate, ventricose in the middle, blue-lilac or whitish. 2n = 34.{\i  Dry, open habitats. • N. & C. Italy, S.E. France; cultivated for ornament and frequently naturalized elsewhere.} Ga It [Au Br Ge Hs Hu Rm].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. C. pelviformis} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 586 (1785) ({\i C. corymbosa} Desf.). Biennial. Stem 20-30 cm, ascending, simple or somewhat branched, hispid. Leaves hispid, ovate, acute, serrate, the basal petiolate, the cauline sessile. Calyx-teeth oblong-ovate, acuminate, 3 times as long as ovary; appendages ovate-orbicular, almost as long as teeth, deflexed. Corolla c. 30 mm, broadly campanulate, ventricose, blue-lilac, sometimes white. 2n = 34.{\i  Stony slopes and thickets. • C. & E. Kriti.} Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. C. tubulosa} Lam., {\i loc. cit.} (1785). Hirsute biennial. Stem dichotomously branched, ascending, pubescent. Leaves hirsute; basal and middle cauline oblong-ovate, crenate-dentate, long-petiolate; upper cauline ovate-lanceolate, serrate-dentate, sessile. Flowers few, axillary or terminal. Calyx-teeth ovate-lanceolate, twice as long as ovary; appendages shortly hirsute, ovate-orbicular, longer than the ovary. Corolla c. 20 mm, tubular, blue-lilac, velutinous, twice as long as calyx. 2n = 34.{\i  Damp rock-crevices. • W. Kriti.} Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. C. carpatha} Halácsy, {\i Consp. Fl. Graec.}{\b  2}: 252 (1902). Pubescent to subglabrous. Stems numerous, slender, usually simple, ascending or decumbent. Basal leaves 3-5 cm, elliptical to ovate, serrate, petiolate; cauline similar but sessile. Flowers terminal or sometimes axillary, usually solitary. Calyx-teeth triangular, acute, ciliate; appendages ovate to elliptical, sericeous, as long as or longer than the ovary. Corolla 15-17 mm, tubular; lobes erecto-patent. 2n = 34. {\i Shady rocks. • Karpathos.} Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. C. lyrata} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 588 (1785). Hispid biennial. Stems erect, more or less branched. Basal leaves ovate, acute, irregularly lobed, crenate, with winged petiole and acute lobules; cauline sessile, ovate-lanceolate, serrate-dentate, acute. Inflorescence lax, elongate, many-flowered. Flowers sessile. Calyx-teeth acute, lanceolate, twice as long as ovary; appendages ovate, obtuse, longer than the ovary. Corolla 13-15 mm, twice as long as calyx-teeth, tubular, blue, pubescent on the veins. 2n = 34.{\i  Dry hillsides. Turkey-in-Europe.} Tu. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. C. saxatilis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 167 (1753). Perennial. Rhizome thick. Stems c. 20 cm, erect or ascending, very flexuous, fragile, simple or branched. Basal leaves rosulate, spathulate to oblanceolate, coriaceous, glabrous or sparsely pubescent, crenate-serrate or entire, petiolate; cauline similar but the uppermost sessile. Flowers few, inflorescence short. Calyx-teeth acuminate; appendages very short. Corolla (10-)14-19(-23) mm, tubular, velutinous; lobes erecto-patent. 2n = 34. {\i Limestone rock crevices. • S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b saxatilis}: Basal leaves usually spathulate. Corolla narrowly tubular. Calyx-teeth triangular-lanceolate.{\i  W. Kriti}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cytherea} Rech. fil. & Phitos,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 112}: 483 (1965): Basal leaves usually oblanceolate. Corolla broadly tubular. Calyx-teeth almost obovate.{\i  Kithira and Andikithira}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. C. laciniata} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }165 (1753) ({\i C. erucifolia} Feer). Pubescent, greenish perennial. Stock very thick, rugose. Stem 20-60 cm, erect, simple or somewhat branched. Basal leaves c. 30 cm, ovate, laciniate and dentate; cauline ovate, slightly laciniate or dentate, sessile or subsessile. Inflorescence many-flowered. Calyx-teeth triangular, acute; appendages ovate, rounded, deflexed, as long as the ovary. Corolla 40-50 mm wide, 3 times as long as calyx-lobes, broadly campanulate, velutinous; lobes broadly ovate, acute, erecto-patent. 2n = 34. {\i Limestone rocks. • S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 (b) Stigmas 3. Ovary 3-locular.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 (i) Calyx with appendages between the teeth.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. C. rupestris} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 142 (1806). Biennial. Stems ascending or procumbent, branched, pubescent or villous. Leaves greyish-tomentose or -velutinous; basal lyrate or ovate, petiolate, with orbicular terminal lobe; cauline sessile, orbicular-ovate, dentate. Flowers numerous, in a paniculate or racemose inflorescence. Calyx-teeth triangular-lanceolate, 2-4 times as long as the ovary; appendages lanceolate to triangular, as long as the ovary, hispid. Corolla (12-)13-15(-16) mm, 3 times as long as calyx, blue-lilac, velutinous. 2n = 34. {\i Limestone rocks. • S.C. Greece} ({\i near Levadhia}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. C. cymaea} Phitos,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  111}: 212 (1964). Greenish biennial or perennial. Stems slender, diffuse, simple or somewhat branched, pubescent, flexuous. Basal leaves tomentose, cordate, crenate or serrate-crenate, sometimes undulate, the long petioles with narrow, oblong lobules; lower cauline petiolate, broadly ovate, the upper cauline sessile, oblong-ovate. Flowers numerous, terminal or axillary. Calyx-teeth triangular-lanceolate, acuminate, half as long as corolla-tube; appendages ovate, pubescent, deflexed, longer than the tube. Corolla (14-)16-18(-20) mm, infundibuliform, lilac; lobes elliptical, patent. 2n = 34. {\i Limestone rocks. • E. Greece} ({\i Evvoia}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. C. constantini} Beauverd & Top.,{\i  Candollea}{\b  7}: 266 (1937). Greyish-tomentose perennial. Stems numerous, diffuse, simple or somewhat branched, usually decumbent. Basal leaves 2-7 cm,
\par 

\par 
82}
\par