{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 ovate to ovate-elliptical, crenate-serrate, with lobulate petioles; upper cauline sessile. Flowers terminal or axillary; inflorescence branched. Calyx-teeth triangular to ovate, acuminate, shorter than the corolla-tube; appendages elliptic-ovate, pubescent or tomentose, longer than the ovary. Corolla 6-11 mm, tubular, widened at the base, pubescent, pale blue; lobes elliptic-lanceolate, suberect. 2n = 34. •{\i  E. Greece} ({\i Evvoia}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. C. scopelia} Phitos,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 111}: 214 (1964). Greenish-pubescent perennial. Stems slender, diffuse, simple or branched, flexuous, ascending. Basal leaves 4-10 cm, ovate to ovate-spathulate, very rarely weakly cordate, rounded at the apex, serrate-crenate, with lobulate petioles; lower cauline spathulate, petiolate; upper cauline sessile, elliptical to oblanceolate. Flowers terminal or axillary, numerous. Calyx-teeth narrowly lanceolate, acuminate, half as long as corolla; appendages oblong-ovate, pubescent, longer than the ovary. Corolla 16-22 mm, narrowly tubular, pubescent, pale violet; lobes elliptical, patent. 2n = 34.{\i  Rocks. • W. Aegean region} ({\i Skopelos}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. C. sciathia} Phitos,{\i  op. cit. }215 (1964). Greenish-pubescent biennial or perennial. Stems usually long, very diffuse, simple or somewhat branched, erecto-patent or flexuous. Basal leaves usually lyrate, with large, triangular, serrate-crenate terminal lobe, which is sometimes cordate at base, oblong, obtuse lateral lobes and long petioles; lower cauline petiolate, oblong-spathulate, the upper sessile, ovate, serrate. Flowers numerous; inflorescence branched. Calyx-teeth oblong-lanceolate, half as long as corolla; appendages broadly ovate, deflexed, hairy, as long as or longer than the ovary. Corolla (17-)20-24 mm, tubular-infundibuliform, pubescent, lilac; lobes almost elliptical, patent. 2n = 34.{\i  Limestone rocks. • W. Aegean region} ({\i Skiathos}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. C. thessala} Maire,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  68}: 376 (1921). Greyish-tomentose or lanate perennial. Stems numerous, diffuse, flexuous, simple or somewhat branched; branches slender, 1-flowered. Basal leaves irregularly lyrate, with large, ovate or ovate-cordate, serrate or 2-serrate terminal lobe and suborbicular lateral lobes; cauline subsessile. Flowers terminal or axillary, pedicellate. Calyx-teeth triangular-lanceolate, irregularly serrate or entire, usually longer than the corolla; appendages absent or very short and acute. Corolla 15-22 mm, tubular or infundibuliform, slightly pubescent, pale violet; lobes elliptic-ovate. 2n = 34. {\i Rocks. • C. Greece} ({\i Thessalia}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. C. barbata} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 926 (1759). Perennial. Rhizome stout, with stolons. Stem 10-30 cm, erect, almost simple, hirsute. Basal leaves rosulate, lanceolate to oblong, entire, narrowed at the base, hispid; cauline few, liguliform. Inflorescence few-flowered. Flowers usually pendent. Calyx-teeth acute, 1/3 as long as corolla; appendages ovate, obtuse, shorter than the teeth. Corolla 20-30 mm, tubular-campanulate, bearded inside; lobes short. 2n = 34.{\i  Grassland and scrub; calcifuge. • Alps; E. Sudeten mountains; one small area in S.Norway.} Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju No Po.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. C. alpina} Jacq.,{\i  Enum. Stirp. Vindob.} 36 (1762). Perennial. Rhizome stout, without stolons. Stem (5-)10-20 cm, erect, simple or somewhat branched, sulcate. Leaves linear-lanceolate, crenulate, lanate; basal rosulate, narrowed at the base; cauline liguliform. Flowers numerous or few, sometimes solitary. Ovary villous. Calyx-teeth long-acuminate, villous, distinctly shorter than the corolla; appendages ovate, acute, lanate, shorter than the ovary and the calyx-teeth. Corolla 15-20 mm, campanulate. 2n = 34. •{\i  E. Alps, Carpathians, and mountains of Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Bu Cz Ge It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alpina}: Flowers several. Stem 10-20 cm.{\i  E. Alps and Carpathians}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b orbelica} (Pancic) Urum., {\i Spis. Balg. Akad. Nauk.}{\b  28}: 147 (1923) ({\i C. orbelica} Pancic): Flowers solitary. Stem very short.{\i  Balkan peninsula}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. C. speciosa} Pourret,{\i  Mém. Acad. Sci. Toulouse}{\b  3}: 309 (1788). Perennial. Rhizome stout. Stem erect, angular, fistular, hispid, leafy. Leaves 5-10 cm, crenulate, hispid; basal linear-lanceolate, crowded, attenuate at the base; cauline linear. Inflorescence usually pyramidal. Ovary hispid. Calyx-teeth acute; appendages ovate-triangular, ciliate, shorter than the teeth. Corolla 15-32 mm, cylindric-campanulate; lobes very short. 2n = 34.{\i  Limestone rocks. • C. & E. Pyrenees, Corbieres, Cevennes.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. C. affinis} Schultes in Roemer & Schultes, {\i Syst. Veg.} {\b 5}: 140 (1819). Biennial. Stem simple, erect, rather robust, setose-hispid, leafy. Leaves 10-15 cm, linear-lanceolate, subglabrous above, with setose-ciliate margin; basal attenuate at the base, sessile; cauline sessile, sometimes semiamplexicaul. Flowers violet, axillary and terminal. Pedicels setose-hispid. Calyx-teeth half as long as corolla; appendages deflexed, as long as the teeth and ovary. Corolla 20-40 mm, broadly campanulate; lobes rather short. • {\i Mountains of E. Spain. }Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b affinis}: Stem erect, not flexuous. Corolla broadly campanulate.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b bolosii} (Vayr.) Fedorov,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  67}: 281 (1973) ({\i C. bolosii }Vayr.): Stem somewhat flexuous but robust. Corolla inflated-campanulate, setose-ciliate. Montserrat.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    Very like {\b 31} but the ovary and capsule are 3-locutar.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. C. formanekiana} Degen & Dörfler,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 54}: 728 (1899). More or less pubescent biennial. Stem 10-20 cm, erect, branched from the base. Leaves with winged, dentate petiole; basal ovate-spathulate, crenate-dentate; cauline spathulate. Flowers terminal. Calyx-teeth triangular-ovate, denticulate, 3 times as long as the ovary. Corolla 50-60 mm, broadly campanulate, white or blue-lilac, sparsely pubescent outside, glabrous inside. 2n = 24.{\i  Rock-crevices. • Macedonia.} Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. C. lingulata} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung. }{\b 1}: 65 (1801). Hispid biennial. Stems 1 to numerous, 20-30 cm, simple. Basal leaves crenate-serrate, oblong-spathulate, narrowed at the base, petiolate; upper oblong to lanceolate, crenate-serrate, sessile. Inflorescence capitate, terminal, sometimes with some axillary clusters, with lanceolate involucral leaves. Flowers sessile. Calyx-teeth oblong, obtuse; appendages ovate, longer than the ovary. Corolla 20-25 mm, tubular-infundibuliform, violet. 2n = 34.{\i  Grassy places and scrub. • Balkan peninsula, S.W. Romania; S. Italy.} Al Bu Gr It Ju Rm Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. C. sibirica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 167 (1753). Hirsute biennial. Stems 1 to numerous, 20-50 cm, erect, simple, branched at the apex, many-flowered. Inflorescence paniculate. Leaves crenulate; lower obovate, obtuse, petiolate; cauline sessile, lanceolate, acuminate. Calyx setose; teeth long-acuminate, setose-ciliate; appendages as long as or shorter than the ovary and shorter than the teeth. Corolla infundibuliform, more or less hairy inside; lobes 2-4 times as long as calyx. 2n = 34.{\i  From N.E. Germany and N.W. Russia southwards to C. Italy, S. Bulgaria and Krym.} Al Au Bu Cz Ge Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E).
\par 

\par 
83}
\par