{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   A very variable species in which the following subspecies can be recognized:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Appendages of the calyx lanceolate, usually shorter 
\par 
  than the ovary; corolla 15-25 mm
\par 
2 Appendages reticulate and ciliate ...................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b sibirica}
\par 
2 Appendages not reticulate .................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b taurica}
\par 
1 Appendages of the calyx broadly lanceolate, as long as
\par 
  or longer than the ovary; corolla (20-)30-40 mm
\par 
3 Stem 5-10(-20) cm .............................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b talievii}
\par 
3 Stem (20-)30-60 cm
\par 
4 Stem 15-20 mm in diameter ....................................... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b charkeviczii}
\par 
4 Stem 3-5 mm in diameter
\par 
5 Corolla (20-)30-40 mm ........................................ ({\b e}) subsp. {\b divergentiformis}
\par 
5 Corolla 20-30 mm ............................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b elatior}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sibirica}: Stems simple, solitary, branched at the apex. Appendages lanceolate, reticulate and ciliate, usually shorter than the ovary. Corolla 17-25 mm. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b taurica} (Juz.) Fedorov,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  67}: 281 (1973) ({\i C. taurica} Juz.): Stems numerous, the central thicker and more robust than the others. Appendages lanceolate, not reticulate, usually shorter than the ovary. Corolla 15-20 mm.{\i  Krym}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b talievii} (Juz.) Fedorov,{\i  loc. cit.} (1973) ({\i C. talievii} Juz.): Stems 5-10(-20) cm, ascending. Appendages broadly lanceolate, as long as or longer than the ovary. Corolla c. 30 mm.{\i  • Mountains of Krym.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b elatior} (Fomin) Fedorov, {\i loc. cit.} (1973) ({\i C. sibirica} f.{\i  elatior} Fomin): Stem 30-60 cm, simple, solitary, 3-5 mm in diameter, setose-hairy. Appendages broadly lanceolate, as long as or longer than the ovary. Corolla 20-30 mm, tubular-infundibuliform.{\i  Ukraine and S. Russia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b divergentiformis} (Jáv.) Domin,{\i  Preslia}{\b  13-15}: 222 (1936): stem C. 60 cm, hairy, 3-5 mm in diameter. Appendages broadly lanceolate, as long as or longer than the ovary. Corolla 20-40 mm, campanulate. •{\i  Balkan peninsula, Italy, Hungary, Czechoslovakia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b charkeviczii} (Fedorov) Fedorov,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  67}: 281 (1973) ({\i C. charkeviczii} Fedorov): stems numerous, 20-40 cm, 15-20 mm in diameter, hairy, striate, purple. Appendages broadly lanceolate, as long as or longer than the ovary. Corolla c. 30 mm. •{\i  Mountains of Krym.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. C. incurva} Aucher ex A. DC. in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  7}: 464 (1839). Biennial. Stem erect, pubescent, usually paniculately branched. Leaves pubescent, ovate or ovate-oblong, crenate; basal cordate at the base, petiolate; cauline shortly petiolate, the uppermost sessile. Calyx-teeth broadly triangular-ovate. Appendages ovate, as long as the ovary. Corolla up to 40 mm, pale blue-lilac. 2n = 32.{\i  Scrub and rocky places. • E. Greece. }Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. C. grossekii} Heuffel,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  16}: 353 (1833). Hispid perennial. Stem up to 70 cm, simple or sometimes branched, angular. Basal leaves cordate, triangular, coarsely 2-serrate, long-petiolate; cauline shortly petiolate, narrower, the uppermost lanceolate, rounded at the base, sessile. Flowers pedicellate in a paniculately branched inflorescence. Calyx-teeth setose-ciliate, lanceolate; appendages lanceolate, shorter than the teeth. Corolla 20-30 mm, hirsute, campanulate, violet, 2-3 times as long as calyx-teeth. {\i Rocky places in woods. • C. part of Balkan peninsula and S. Romania.} Bu Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Very like {\b 100} but the appendages of the calyx are clearly developed.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. C. lanata} Friv.,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 19}: 434 (1836). Biennial.Stems numerous, 30-70 cm, villous, erect or flexuous, branched from the base. Leaves broadly ovate-cordate, serrate, sericeous-tomentose; basal subacute, long-petiolate; upper cauline very small, almost sessile. Flowers subsessile in a many-flowered inflorescence. Calyx-teeth wide, triangular, acuminate; appendages as long as the ovary. Corolla 20-25 mm, broadly campanulate, yellowish-white. Corolla-lobes bearded inside, about twice as long as calyx.{\i  Mountain rocks. • W. & C. Bulgaria, S.E. Jugoslavia.} Bu Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. C. dichotoma} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl.}{\b  2}: 10 (1756). Patent-hispid annual. Stem c. 10-15 cm, erect, dichotomously branched. Leaves oblong to ovate, acute, denticulate or entire, sessile. Flowers axillary, solitary. Pedicels short. Calyx-teeth triangular-lanceolate, acuminate, widened at the base, longer than the ovary; appendages lanceolate, longer than the ovary. Corolla c. 20 mm, tubular-campanulate, subglabrous, blue-lilac, twice as long as calyx.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Bl ?Gr Hs It Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. C. alpestris} All.,{\i  Auct. Syn. Stirp. Horti Taur. }11 (1773) ({\i C. allionii} Vill.). Perennial. Stem simple, usually 1-flowered, sparsely hairy. Basal leaves rosulate, ciliate, linear-lanceolate, subentire, obtuse; cauline linear. Calyx-teeth linear, acuminate, half as long as corolla; appendages ovate, acute, ciliate, 1/3 as long as the teeth. Corolla 30-45 mm, campanulate, distinctly narrowed at base; lobes short, suborbicular, shortly acuminate. 2n = 34.{\i  Stony places. • S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. C. oreadum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 3}): 107 (1856). Caespitose, appressed-hispid, greyish perennial. Stem c. 10 cm, slender, flexuous, fragile, 1-flowered or sparsely branched and 2- to 5-flowered. Basal leaves oblong-spathulate, entire, obtuse, petiolate; cauline oblong-linear, sessile, acute. Flowers long-pedicellate. Calyx-teeth velutinous, lanceolate, acute; appendages very short. Corolla 20-35 mm, blue, narrowly campanulate, hirsute on the veins, 3 times as long as calyx. 2n = 34.{\i  Mountain rocks. • E. Greece} ({\i Olimbos}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. C. calaminthifolia} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 585 (1785). Shortly appressed-pubescent, greyish perennial. Rhizome stout. Stems 10-15 cm, decumbent, numerous, leafy, 3- to 5-flowered, simple, or shortly branched from the middle; branches 1- to 3-flowered. Leaves somewhat succulent; basal rosulate, oblong-spathulate, obtuse, subentire, shortly petiolate; cauline subsessile, ovate-orbicular, usually weakly undulate and obsoletely crenate-dentate. Leaves of the branches very small, elliptical. Flowers shortly pedicellate. Calyx-teeth triangular, subacute; appendages triangular, acute, 1/3 as long as the ovary. Corolla c. 10 mm, blue, tomentose, tubular-infundibuliform, 2½ times as long as calyx. Style exserted. •{\i   Aegean region.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. C. hierapetrae} Rech. fil.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  84}: 170 (1935). Velutinous perennial. Stock stout. Stems c. 5-10 cm, ascending or decumbent, filiform, leafy. Basal leaves 8-10 mm, ovate-spathulate, petiolate; cauline ovate or suborbicular, shortly petiolate. Flowers 1-4. Calyx-teeth triangular, twice as long as the ovary; appendages very short. Corolla 12-15 mm, 2-3 times as long as calyx, infundibuliform. Style exserted.{\i  Rocks. • E. Kriti.} Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. C. amorgina} Rech. fil.,{\i  Beih. Bot. Centr. }{\b 54}({\b B}): 646 (1936). Almost glabrous perennial. Stock stout. Stems 3-10 cm, slender, ascending or decumbent, leafy. Leaves 4-6 mm, obovate, shortly petiolate or sessile. Flowers few, terminal. Calyx-teeth triangular, acute, twice as long as the obconical, ribbed ovary; appendages very short. Corolla 6-7 mm, tubular-infundibuliform, 3-4 times as long as calyx. Style exserted.{\i  Limestone rock-crevices. • Kikladhes} ({\i Amorgos}). Gr.
\par 

\par 
84}
\par