{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. C. heterophylla} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} [1231] (1753). Subglabrous perennial. Rhizome thick, vertical. Stems numerous, c. 10-20 cm, leafy, simple, decumbent, slender. Basal leaves oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, shortly petiolate; cauline almost sessile, suborbicular. Flowers axillary, shortly pedicellate, solitary or 2-3 together. Calyx-teeth triangular-lanceolate, subacute; appendages very short. Corolla 10-15 mm, twice as long as calyx, pubescent, blue, tubular-infundibuliform; lobes weakly deflexed. Style exserted.{\i  Rock-crevices. • Kikladhes. }Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. C. mollis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 237 (1762). Velutinous, greyish perennial. Stem ascending. Leaves sessile, subentire; basal obovate to spathulate; cauline ovate to suborbicular, patent. Flowers few, terminal or axillary. Calyx-teeth lanceolate, erect, shorter than the campanulate, subglabrous corolla; appendages acute, shorter than the ovary. Corolla 15-25 mm. 2n = 26. {\i Limestone rock-crevices. S. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. C. papillosa} Halácsy, {\i Consp. Fl. Graec., Suppl.} 70 (1908). Dwarf, caespitose perennial, papillose and rather hispid. Rhizome stout, woody, branched. Stems with leaf-rosettes. Leaves oblong-spathulate, crenate, shortly petiolate. Flowers subsessile in the centre of the leaf-rosettes. Calyx-teeth oblong, obtuse, about as long as the ovary; appendages very small. Corolla 12-14 mm, papillose and slightly hispid, twice as long as calyx.{\i  Limestone mountain rocks. • S. Greece} ({\i Taïyetos}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 63. C. orphanidea} Boiss., {\i Fl. Or.}{\b  3}: 897 (1875). Biennial. Pale green, translucent, appressed-hirsute. Root vertical. Stems short, rather thick, procumbent and ascending, 1-flowered or sometimes with 3- to 9-flowered branches. Basal leaves rosulate, oblong, obtuse, obsoletely repand-crenate, truncate or rounded at the base, with petioles longer than the lamina; cauline small, elliptical, subsessile. Pedicels rather shorter than the calyx, with linear bracts. Calyx-teeth lanceolate, subacute, 1½ times as long as the obconical, retrorse-setulose ovary, patent after flowering; appendages setulose, very small. Corolla 20-25 mm, violet, narrowly campanulate, almost 3 times as long as calyx. Capsule pendent.{\i  Rocks. • S. Bulgaria and N.E. Greece.} Bu Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. C. rupicola} Boiss. & Spruner in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 7}): 17 (1846). Pubescent, greyish perennial. Stems c. 10 cm, slender, ascending or decumbent, fragile, somewhat branched, 1- to 3-flowered. Basal leaves ovate, denticulate, cuneate at the base, long-petiolate; cauline small, oblong-rhombic, subsessile, the uppermost linear-lanceolate, shorter than the pedicels. Calyx-teeth broadly ovate-oblong, obtuse, ciliate and more or less distinctly denticulate. Corolla c. 30 mm, bluish-purple, narrowly campanulate, glabrous, 4 times as long as calyx. Appendages very short, deflexed, obtuse. 2n = 32.{\i  Rocks. • Mountains of S.C. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 (ii) Calyx without appendages between the teeth.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. C. petraea} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 926 (1759). Sparsely pubescent perennial. Stem 10-45 cm, almost woody, simple or somewhat branched. Leaves crenulate-sinuate or sinuate-serrate, tomentose beneath; lower ovate-lanceolate, petiolate; upper cauline sessile, oblong-lanceolate. Inflorescence compact, capitate, at the apex of the stem or branches. Calyx villous; teeth linear, obtuse, ½ as long as the corolla. Corolla c. 12 mm, campanulate, velutinous. 2n = 34.{\i  Limestone rocks. • S. Alps} ({\i very local}). Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 66. C. tymphaea} Hausskn.,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver.}{\b  5}: 87 (1887). Glabrous or sparsely setulose perennial. Stems 10-35 cm, leafy. Basal leaves rosulate, oblong-spathulate, crenulate, petiolate; cauline oblong to ovate-lanceolate, sessile. Flowers axillary or terminal. Inflorescence 4- to 7-flowered. Calyx-teeth ciliate, a little longer than the ovary. Corolla c. 10 mm, infundibuliform, violet, glabrous, 2-3 times as long as calyx-teeth. 2n = 34.{\i  Mountain meadows. • Albania and N. Greece.} Al Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 67. C. stenosiphon} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 7}): 18 (1846). Setose-hispid perennial. Stems 15-30 cm, numerous, erect or ascending. Basal leaves oblong to lanceolate, petiolate; upper cauline oblong-ovate, cordate at the base, sessile. Inflorescence capitate, 2- to 7-flowered. Axillary inflorescences 2- to 3-flowered. Calyx-teeth lanceolate. Corolla c. 20 mm, violet, twice as long as calyx and a little longer than the uppermost leaves. 2n = 34.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S. Greece} ({\i Peloponnisos}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 68. C. transsilvanica} Schur ex Andrae,{\i  Bot. Zeit.}{\b  13}: 328 (1855). Lanate biennial. Stem 20-40 cm, erect, simple, leafy to the apex. Basal leaves oblong-spathulate, serrate, petiolate; cauline lanceolate, sessile, the uppermost cordate at the base. Inflorescence terminal, capitate, many-flowered. Calyx-teeth lanceolate, ciliate. Corolla 15-25 mm, about twice as long as calyx, violet. {\i Alpine meadows and pastures. • E. & S. Carpathians and mountains of S.W. Bulgaria.} Bu Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 69. C. moesiaca} Velen.,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ({\i Math.Nat. Kl}.) {\b 1892}: 385 (1893). Hairy biennial. Stem up to 40 cm, erect. Basal leaves serrate, oblong, petiolate; cauline leaves lanceolate, shortly petiolate, the uppermost lanceolate-acuminate, cordate at the base, sessile. Inflorescences capitate, the terminal many-flowered, the axillary 2- to 4-flowered. Calyx-teeth broadly triangular-lanceolate. Corolla c. 30 mm, blue-lilac, much longer than calyx-teeth.{\i  Mountain meadows. • C. & N.W. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 70. C. glomerata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 166 (1753). Pubescent, hispid or subglabrous perennial. Stem 15-80 cm, erect, simple or somewhat branched, obsoletely angular, reddish. Leaves crenulate; basal and lower cauline ovate-lanceolate or oblong to elliptical, cordate or rounded at the base, acuminate to obtuse, long-petiolate; upper cauline sessile. Flowers in a dense capitulum or fascicles, numerous. Calyx-teeth lanceolate, acuminate, 1/4-1/3 as long as the glabrous or pubescent, violet corolla. Corolla up to 25(-40) mm; lobes acuminate or obtuse, 1/3 as long as tube. 2n = 30.{\i  Meadows, scrub and forest-margins. Most of Europe, except the extreme north, the extreme south and many of the islands.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su [No].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem 2-8(-15) cm; inflorescence capitate; lower leaves
\par 
  not much shorter than the decumbent stem ....................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b serotina}
\par 
1 Stem 20-40(-80) cm; lower leaves much shorter than the
\par 
  erect stem
\par 
2 Inflorescence mostly terminal, capitate
\par 
3 Leaves tomentose and greyish beneath ............................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b farinosa}
\par 
3 Leaves hirsute, pubescent beneath or glabrous
\par 
4 Capitula many-flowered ................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b elliptica}
\par 
4 Capitula few-flowered ................................................. ({\b e}) subsp. {\b subcapitata}
\par 
2 Inflorescence interrupted, the branches with fascicles
\par 
  of flowers at the apex
\par 
5 Pubescent or hirsute ....................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b glomerata}
\par 
5 Hispid or setose
\par 
6 Leaves lanceolate .................................................... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b cervicarioides}
\par 
6 Leaves ovate ...................................................................... ({\b g}) subsp. {\b hispida}
\par 


\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b glomerata}: Stem 20 40(-80) cm. Lower leaves much shorter than the erect stem, pubescent or hirsute. Inflorescence interrupted, the branches with fascicles of flowers at the apex. {\i Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\par 
85}
\par