{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b serotina} (Wettst.) O. Schwarz,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ges. }{\b 1}({\b 1}): 118 (1949): stem 2-8(-15) cm. Lower leaves not much shorter than the decumbent stem. Inflorescence capitate. Alps and Balkan peninsula.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b farinosa} (Rochel) Kirschleger, {\i Fl. Alsace }{\b 1}: 378 (1852) ({\i C. farinosa }(Rochel) Andrz.): stem 20-40(-80) cm. Lower leaves usually oblong, much shorter than the erect stem tomentose and greyish beneath. Inflorescence mostly terminal, capitate. 2n = 30.{\i  E. & E.C. Europe, extending locally westwards to Italy and W. Switzerland.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b elliptica} (Kit. ex Schultes) O. Schwarz, {\i Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ges.}{\b  1}({\b 1}): 118 (1949): Like ({\b c}) but leaves hirsute, pubescent beneath or glabrous; capitula many-flowered. •{\i  From the Carpathians to C. Italy and C. Jugoslavia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b subcapitata} (M. Popov) Fedorov,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  67}: 281 (1973) ({\i C. subcapitata} M. Popov): Like ({\b c}) but leaves hirsute, pubescent beneath or glabrous; capitula few-flowered. •{\i  Carpathians.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b cervicarioides} (Schultes) P. Fourn.,{\i  Quatre Fl. Fr.} 914 (1939): Like ({\b c}) but leaves lanceolate, hispid or setose; inflorescence interrupted, the branches with fascicles of flowers at the apex. •{\i  S. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b g}) Subsp. {\b hispida} (Witasek) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 532 (1930): Like ({\b c}) but leaves ovate, hispid or setose; inflorescence interrupted, the branches with fascicles of flowers at the apex.{\i  Balkan peninsula}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 71. C. foliosa} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  1},{\i  Prodr}.: 16 (1811). Perennial. Stem 30-50 cm, erect, simple, terete, pubescent below. Leaves more or less pubescent; basal broadly ovate, cordate or rounded at the base, with long, narrowly winged petioles; cauline usually contracted at the base, elliptic-ovate, serrate, as long as the flowers, shortly petiolate, the uppermost almost sessile. Inflorescence capitate, terminal. Calyx-teeth narrowly linear, ciliate, shorter than the tubular corolla. Corolla 20-35 mm. 2n = 34.{\i  Mountain meadows and woods. •  Balkan peninsula from C. Jugoslavia to C. Greece; C. & S. Appennini.} Al ?Bu Gr It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 72. C. cervicaria} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 167 (1753). Biennial. Stem solitary, up to 70 cm or more, erect, simple, sulcate, setose-hispid. Leaves setose; basal oblong, withered at anthesis, more or less obtuse; cauline oblong-lanceolate, petiolate, the uppermost oblong, widened at the base, sessile. Flowers in a usually terminal, capitate inflorescence. Calyx-teeth ovate, obtuse, shorter than the infundibuliform corolla. Corolla 13-16 mm, pale blue-lilac, hispid. 2n = 34.{\i  Meadows and woods. Much of Europe northwards to} c. 64°{\i  N. in Fennoscandia, but absent from the islands and rare in the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He ?Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 73. C. macrostachya} Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Horti Berol. }213 (1809) ({\i C. multiflora} Waldst. & Kit.). Setose-hispid biennial. Stem up to 70 cm, erect, simple, striate. Basal leaves crenate or entire, withered at anthesis; cauline lanceolate, sessile, the uppermost ovate-lanceolate, cordate. Flowers in clusters of 3-5. Inflorescence branched, interrupted-spicate. Calyx-teeth lanceolate, 1/3 as long as corolla. Corolla 15-20 mm, violet, infundibuliform. 2n = 18.{\i  Thickets, rocky places. E.C. Europe and Balkan peninsula, extending locally eastwards to E. Ukraine.} Al Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (W, E) Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 74. C. spicata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 166 (1753). Hairy biennial. Stem up to 70 cm or more, erect, striate. Basal leaves entire, linear-lanceolate; cauline linear, acuminate. Inflorescence long, interrupted at the base, many-flowered. Calyx-teeth ovate-acuminate, c. 1/3 as long as the infundibuliform corolla. Corolla 17-22 mm. 2n = 34. •{\i   Alps,extending southwards to C. Italy and Crna Gora}. Au Ga He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable in size and shape of leaves.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 75. C. thyrsoides} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 167 (1753). Hispid biennial. Stem 30-50 cm or more, sulcate, erect, simple. Leaves entire, rather undulate; basal oblong-lanceolate, cuneate; cauline linear-lanceolate to lingulate, acute. Inflorescence compact, unbranched, ovoid to oblong, dense. Calyx-teeth setose, linear. Corolla 17-22 mm, lanate, yellowish-white, tubular-campanulate. 2n = 34.{\i  Meadows. • Jura, Alps and mountains of Balkan peninsula.} Au Bu Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b thyrsoides}: stem 30-40 cm. Inflorescence compact, ovoid or oblong, dense. Bracts as long as flowers.{\i  Subalpine limestone rocks and meadows. • Jura, Alps and mountains of Balkan peninsula.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b carniolica} (Sund.) Podl.,{\i  Ber. Bayer. Bot. Ges.}{\b  37}: 111 (1964): Stem 40-100 cm. Inflorescence up to 60 cm, lax. Bracts twice as long as flowers.{\i  Forest-margins, scrub. • E. Alps, mountains of Jugoslavia.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 76. C. pyramidalis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 164 (1753). Glabrous perennial. Stem up to 150 cm. Basal leaves glandular-dentate, petiolate, ovate-oblong, subcordate; cauline sessile, ovate-lanceolate. Inflorescence pyramidal, many-flowered. Calyx-teeth acuminate, patent, ½ as long as the broadly campanulate corolla. Corolla up to 30 mm in diameter. Capsule subglobose, sulcate. 2n = 34.{\i  Rocks and walls. N. Italy and N.W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 77. C. versicolor} Andrews, {\i Bot. Reposit.}{\b  6}: t. 396 (1804). Usually glabrous perennial. Stem 20-40 cm or more, stout, ascending or erect, paniculately branched above or sometimes simple. Basal leaves coriaceous, crenate or dentate, ovate to cordate-ovate, petiolate; uppermost cauline almost sessile, cuneate at the base. Flowers fasciculate. Inflorescence branched, terminal. Calyx-teeth narrowly lanceolate. Corolla 15-25 mm, pale lilac or pale blue, violet inside. 2n = 34.{\i  Rocky places. • Balkan peninsula, S.E. Italy.} Al Bu Gr It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable. It is impossible to enumerate any infraspecific taxa without further investigation.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 78. C. morettiana} Reichenb.,{\i  Pl. Crit.}{\b  4}: 18 (1826). Perennial. Rhizome branched, with remains of dead petioles. Stems short, ascending, slender, 1- to 2-flowered. Basal leaves broadly ovate dentate, pubescent, long-petiolate; cauline ovate, cuneate at the base, petiolate, the uppermost sessile. Calyx-teeth lanceolate, patent, 1/5-1/4 as long as corolla. Ovary obconical, short. Corolla 20-30 mm, infundibuliform. Capsule indehiscent. 2n = 34. {\i Rock-crevices. • Alpi Dolomitiche.} It.
\par

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 79. C. radicosa} Bory & Chaub.,{\i  Nouv. Fl. Pélop. }14 (1838). Slightly pubescent or glabrous perennial. Stems 5-10 cm, numerous, short, decumbent, leafy. Basal leaves rosulate, oblong, obtuse, crenate-serrate, long-attenuate at the base, more or less petiolate; cauline very small, subsessile, elliptic-oblong. Flowers small, axillary, pendent. Calyx almost glabrous or hairy; teeth lanceolate, subacute, as long as the ovary. Corolla c. 5 mm, violet, almost glabrous, obconical, twice as long as the calyx. 2n = 34.{\i  Alpine pastures. • S. & C. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 80. C. secundiflora} Vis. & Pancic,{\i  Mem. Ist. Veneto }{\b 10}: 442 (1863). Glabrous perennial. Stems 15-20 cm, numerous, lax.
\par 

\par 
86}
\par