{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Basal leaves ovate, serrate, truncate to subcordate at the base, long-petiolate; cauline ovate to lanceolate, serrate, shortly petiolate, the uppermost sessile. Inflorescence branched; flowers long-pedicellate. Corolla c. 30 mm in diameter, rotate, violet.{\i  Mountain rocks. • E. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 81. C. hawkinsiana} Hausskn. & Heldr.,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver.}{\b  5}: 87 (1887). Perennial. Stems 10-20 cm, numerous, arising from a slender, subterranean stock, decumbent or ascending, flexuous, leafy, simple or branched, glabrous or sometimes more or less papillose. Basal leaves suborbicular to ovate, entire to crenulate, glabrous, petiolate; upper cauline sessile. Flowers with long, slender pedicels. Calyx-teeth lanceolate, erecto-patent, c. 3 times as long as the papillose ovary. Corolla 10-12 mm, almost rotate, glabrous, blue-violet; lobes ovate, 2-3 times as long as the calyx. 2n = 22.{\i  Crevices in serpentine rocks. • Mountains of N. Greece and Albania.} Al Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 82. C. sartorii} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  3}: 919 (1875). Velutinous,fragile perennial. Rhizome stout,fleshy. Stems 10-15 cm, procumbent, flexuous, laxly branched, leafy. Leaves small, orbicular, subcordate, obtuse and with 5-7 wide crenations, basal with petioles as long as lamina; cauline shortly petiolate. Pedicels as long as ovary; calyx-teeth lanceolate, ½ as long as the hemispherical ovary. Corolla c. 10 mm, white, hairy, infundibuliform-campanulate, 4 times as long as calyx. Style somewhat exserted. 2n = 34. {\i Mountain rocks. • Kikladhes} ({\i Andros}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 83. C. herminii} Hoffmanns. & Link,{\i  Fl. Port.}{\b  2}: 9 (1820). Laxly caespitose, subglabrous perennial. Rhizome woody, creeping. Stems erect or ascending, simple or with few branches, 1- to few-flowered. Basal leaves rosulate, suborbicular to ovate, cuneate at the base, obsoletely crenate to entire, present at anthesis, long-petiolate; cauline lanceolate to linear, subentire. Calyx-teeth linear-subulate, patent, c. ½ as long as corolla, entire, 3-4 times as long as the ovary. Corolla 10-20 mm, infundibular-campanulate; lobes patent, broadly ovate, mucronate. 2n = 32.{\i  Damp alpine meadows. •  Mountains of C. & S. Spain and C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 84. C. waldsteiniana} Schultes in Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  5}: 99 (1819). Perennial. Rhizome short or creeping. Stems 20-30 cm, numerous. Basal leaves very small, orbicular-ovate, sometimes obscurely cordate, withered at anthesis; cauline elliptical to rhombic or ovate, denticulate, petiolate, the upper small, lanceolate, sessile. Flowers in a few- to many-flowered inflorescence. Calyx-teeth linear, patent to deflexed, c. 1/6 as long as corolla. Corolla 20 mm in diameter, blue, rotate. Capsule erect, turbinate, opening by two pores. 2n = 34.{\i  Limestone rocks. • Mountains of W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 85. C. tommasiniana} Koch in F. W. Schultz,{\i  Arch. Fl. Fr. Allem.} 229 (1852). Like {\b 84} but corolla tubular-campanulate. 2n = 34.{\i  Rocky} Fagus-{\i woods. • N.W.Jugoslavia }({\i Istra: Mala Ucka}). Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 86. C. isophylla} Moretti,{\i  Gior. Fis.} ({\i Brugnat}.) ser. 2,{\b  7}: 44 (1824). Perennial. Stems 10-15 cm, procumbent to ascending; non-flowering shoots without rosettes. Leaves suborbicular, cordate, crenate-dentate, petiolate, the basal deciduous. Flowers in a corymb. Calyx-teeth acuminate, ½ as long as the corolla. Corolla 15-20 mm, broadly campanulate to infundibuliform. Style exserted. Capsule ovoid. 2n = 32.{\i  Limestone rock-crevices. • N.W. Italy} ({\i a small strip of coast S.W. of Savona}). It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 87. C. fragilis} Cyr.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Neap.}{\b  1}: 32 (1788). Perennial. Stems 7-15 cm, diffuse-ascending; non-flowering shoots with rosettes. Basal leaves suborbicular to cordate, obtusely dentate to crenate-lobed, long-petiolate, persistent, the cauline smaller, ovate to lanceolate. Inflorescence lax, corymbose. Calyx-teeth linear-lanceolate, acuminate, patent, half as long as the broadly campanulate to rotate corolla. 2n = 32.{\i  Limestone rocks. • C. & S. Italy.} It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b fragilis}: Basal leaves usually suborbicular, crenate. Calyx-teeth 9-12 mm, lanceolate. Corolla 35-40 mm in diameter. {\i Coastal region}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cavolinii} (Ten.) Damboldt,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  84}: 331 (1965): Basal leaves usually cordate, ovate, serrate. Calyx-teeth 8-15 mm, lanceolate. Corolla 25-30 mm in diameter.{\i  Appennini.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 88. C. elatinoides} Moretti, {\i Gior. Fis.} ({\i Brugnat}.) ser. 2, {\b 5}: 110 (1822). Velutinous perennial. Stem 10-15 cm, almost erect, simple. Leaves acutely dentate, petiolate; basal oblong; cauline ovate, acute. Inflorescence dense. Ovary obconical. Calyx-teeth linear-subulate, patent, as long as the rotate, deeply lobed corolla. Corolla c.8 mm; lobes pubescent. 2n = 34.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • Italy }({\i mountains between Lago di Como and Lago di Garda}). It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 89. C. elatines} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2}: 927 (1759). More or less pubescent perennial. Stem 10-15 cm, ascending. Leaves cordate, acutely dentate; basal orbicular; cauline ovate, acute. Inflorescence lax. Ovary globose. Calyx-teeth patent, linear-lanceolate, shorter than to almost as long as corolla. Corolla 8-10 mm, blue or sometimes white; lobes patent or deflexed. 2n = 34. {\i Shady rocks and walls. • N.W. Italy}. It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 90. C. portenschlagiana} Schultes in Roemer & Schultes, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  5}: 93 (1819). Sparsely pubescent perennial. Stems 15-20 cm, lax, numerous, ascending, procumbent or pendent. Leaves pubescent to subglabrous, orbicular-cordate, sinuate-crenate, petiolate. Flowers numerous, in a branched, lax inflorescence. Pedicels rather long. Calyx-teeth lanceolate, much shorter than the corolla. Corolla c. 20 mm, infundibuliform-campanulate, blue-lilac. 2n = 34.{\i  Mountain rocks. • W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 91. C. poscharskyana} Degen,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  7}: 103 (1908). Appressed-pubescent perennial. Stems usually numerous 15-20(-30) cm, lax. Leaves densely grey-hispid at first, glabrescent; basal cordate-ovate, 2-serrate, petiolate; cauline serrate or entire, shortly petiolate. Flowers long-pedicellate, in a lax, branched inflorescence. Calyx-teeth lanceolate, setose-ciliate, 4 times as long as the ovary. Corolla 20-25 mm, violet, broadly infundibuliform. 2n = 34.{\i  Rocks and stony places. • W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 92. C. garganica} Ten.,{\i  Cat. Sem. Horti Nap.} (1827). Slightly pubescent to subglabrous perennial. Stems 10-15 cm, diffuse. Basal leaves orbicular, cordate, crenate-dentate; upper ovate, acute, dentate. Inflorescence lax; branches 1- to 2-flowered. Ovary globose. Calyx-teeth patent, lanceolate, subequal, 1/3 as long as the subglabrous corolla. Corolla 10-20 mm. Pollen yellow. 2n = 34.{\i  Shady rocks. • S.E.Italy} ({\i Monte Gargano}){\i  W. Greece} ({\i Kephallinia}). ?Al Gr It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx-teeth erect; corolla divided for 1/2-2/3 ............... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b acarnanica} 
\par 
1 Calyx-teeth patent to deflexed; corolla divided for 2/3-3/4
\par 
2 Calyx-teeth 1 mm wide; base of filaments with long,
\par 
  acute hairs; seeds 0·7 × 0·4 mm ................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b cephallenica}
\par 
2 Calyx-teeth more than 1 mm wide; base of filaments with
\par 
  short, obtuse hairs; seeds 0·5 × 0·45 mm .......................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b garganica}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b garganica}: Slightly pubescent or glabrous. Basal leaves serrate.{\i  Monte Gargano}.
\par 

\par 
87}
\par