{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min1}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min3}{\version2}{\edmins2}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1044}{\nofchars5953}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28   (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 cephallenica}{\fs28  (Feer) Hayek,}{\i\fs28  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 534 (1930) (}{\i\fs28 C. cephallenica}{\fs28  Feer): More or less pubescent. Basal leaves serrate. }{\i\fs28 Kephallinia}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 acarnanica}{\fs28  (Damboldt) Damboldt,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b\fs28  84}{\fs28 : 358 (1965) (}{\i\fs28 C. acarnanica }{\fs28 Damboldt): Tomentose. Basal leaves serrate-crenate.}{\i\fs28  Kephallinia}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 93. C. fenestrellata}{\fs28  Feer,}{\i\fs28  Jour. Bot.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 London}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  28}{\fs28 : 272 (1890) (}{\i\fs28 C. garganica}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  fenestrellata}{\fs28  (Feer) Hayek). Perennial. Stems 15-20 cm, ascending or pendent. Rhizome usually branched. Basal leaves cordate, serrate or dentate, petiolate; cauline similar but smaller, with shorter petioles. Flowers numerous. Corolla 12-20 mm, rotate. Pollen blue.}{\i\fs28  Limestone rock-crevices. \bullet  W. Jugoslavia and E. Albania.}{\fs28  Al Ju.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Calyx-teeth deflexed ......................... (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 debarensis}{\fs28  
\par 1.Calyx-teeth usually erect
\par 2 Plant glabrous, rarely pubescent above;   corolla 15 mm ............................................................ (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 fenestrellata}{\fs28 
\par 2 Plant tomentose; corolla 20 mm ....... (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 istriaca}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28   (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 fenestrellata}{\fs28 : Plant glabrous, rarely pubescent above. Basal leaves 2-serrate or -dentate.}{\i\fs28  N.W. Jugoslavia}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 istriaca}{\fs28  (Feer) Fedorov,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  70}{\fs28 : 17 (1975) (}{\i\fs28 C. istriaca }{\fs28 Feer): Plant tomentose. Basal leaves serrate. N.W. Jugoslavia and adjacent islands.
\par   (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 debarensis}{\fs28  (Rech. fil.) Damboldt,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b\fs28  84}{\fs28 : 358 (1965) (}{\i\fs28 C. debarensis}{\fs28  Rech. fil.): Plant more or less pubescent. Basal leaves 2-serrate or -dentate. 2n = 34. }{\i\fs28 W. Makedonija and E. Albania}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 94. C. specularioides}{\fs28  Cosson,}{\i\fs28  Not. Pl. Crit.}{\fs28  41 (1849). Glabrous annual. Stem 10-20 cm, flexuous, slender, subdichotomously branched. Leaves ovate, acuminate or obtuse, repand-sinuate, sessile or shortly petiolate. Flowers shortly pedicellate. Calyx-teeth broadly lanceolate, acuminate, erect or somewhat patent, twice as long as the ovary and distinctly shorter than the corolla. Corolla c. 10 mm, broadly campanulate.}{\i\fs28  Limestone rocks. \bullet  Mountains of S. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 95. C. scutellata}{\fs28  Griseb.,}{\i\fs28  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 282 (1846). Hispid annual. Stem 10-15 cm, dichotomously branched above or from the base. Basal leaves oblong-lanceolate, entire, subacute, cuneate at the base, sessile; upper cauline similar but distinctly smaller. Flowers with rather short, patent pedicels. Inflorescence lax, cymose. Calyx-teeth triangular-lanceolate-acuminate, patent, much longer than the ovary. Corolla 15-25 mm, almost rotate, lilac-blue, twice as long as calyx. Capsule obconical, with persistent, widened and elongated stellate-patent calyx-teeth at apex. 2n = 14. }{\i\fs28 Shady places. \bullet  Balkan peninsula, from S.C. Jugoslavia to C. Greece.}{\fs28  Bu Gr Ju.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 96. C. drabifolia}{\fs28  Sibth. & Sm.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 142 (1806). Hispid-strigose annual. Stems dichotomously and divaricately branched. Leaves dentate, oblong; basal shortly petiolate; cauline small, sessile, more deeply dentate or 3-fid. Flowers shortly pedicellate. Calyx hispid; teeth lanceolate, acute, much longer than the obconical ovary, accrescent and usually stellate-patent after anthesis. Corolla blue, twice as long as calyx. Capsule pendent. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  S. Greece and Aegean region.}{\fs28  Cr Gr.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Calyx-teeth convergent in fruit ......................... (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 pinatzii}{\fs28  
\par 1 Calyx-teeth patent in fruit
\par 2 Corolla 10-16 mm; calyx-teeth in fruit 3-4 times as 
\par   long as wide ...................................................... (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 drabifolia}{\fs28 
\par 2 Corolla c. 8 mm; calyx-teeth in fruit c. twice as long
\par   as wide .............................................................. (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 creutzburgii}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 drabifolia}{\fs28 : Ovary long-setose. Sinus between the calyx-teeth acute. Corolla infundibuliform-campanulate.}{\i\fs28  S. & E. Greece}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 creutzburgii}{\fs28  (W. Greuter) Fedorov,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  67}{\fs28 : 281 (1973) (}{\i\fs28 C. creutzburgii}{\fs28  W. Greuter): Ovary shortly subappressed-setose. Sinus between the calyx-teeth acute. Corolla narrowly tubular-campanulate. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Kriti}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 pinatzii}{\fs28  (W. Greuter & Phitos) Fedorov, }{\i\fs28 loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1973) (}{\i\fs28 C. pinatzii }{\fs28 W. Greuter & Phitos): Ovary hirsute. Sinus between the calyx-teeth rounded. Corolla more or less ventricose campanulate. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Karpathos and adjacent islets}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 97. C. delicatula}{\fs28  Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 11}{\fs28 ): 67 (1849). Canescent, patent-hispid annual. Stems 5-10 cm, filiform, slender, dichotomously branched, flexuous. Leaves ovate, obtuse, attenuate at the base, entire or obsoletely repand-dentate, the uppermost very small, elliptical, acute, entire. Flowers terminal, shortly pedicellate. Ovary hispid. Calyx-teeth lanceolate, acute, 4 times as long as the ovary, accrescent and patent after anthesis. Corolla c. 10 mm, bluish, hirsute outside, scarcely longer than the calyx. Capsule pendent.}{\i\fs28  N.E. Greece; S. Aegean region.}{\fs28  Cr Gr. (}{\i\fs28 Anatolia, Cyprus.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 98. C. erinus}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  169 (1753). Hispid annual. Stem 3-10(-30) cm, dichotomously branched, weakly angular and striate. Leaves 1-2 cm, alternate or opposite, setose, ovate or obovate, crenate-dentate, sometimes slightly lobed, sessile. Flowers terminal and axillary, sessile. Calyx-teeth erect, acute, patent after anthesis, shorter than the pale blue corolla. Corolla 3-5 mm. Capsule urceolate, pendent. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  Dry places. S. Europe.}{\fs28  Al Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 99. C. latifolia}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  165 (1753). Perennial. Stem up to 100 cm or more, erect, simple, obtusely angled, glabrous or somewhat pubescent. Leaves 7-12 \'d7 3-6 cm, glabrous, sometimes rather scabrid, irregularly 2-serrate; basal ovate-oblong, cordate, strongly serrate, long-petiolate; lower cauline ovate, shortly petiolate; the upper almost entire, sessile. Flowers axillary, numerous. Calyx-teeth long-acuminate, usually serrate, shorter than the corolla. Corolla 40-55 mm, infundibuliform-campanulate, blue, rarely white, hirsute inside. Capsule ovoid, pendent. 2n = 34, 34 + 5B. }{\i\fs28 Woods, river-banks and mountain meadows. Most of Europe, but absent from parts of the north, much of the south-west and most of the Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  Au Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su [Be Ho].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 100. C. trachelium}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  166 (1753). Perennial. Stem up to 100 cm or more, erect, simple or branched, sharply angled, reddish, hispid. Leaves scabrid, pale beneath, acuminate, dentate or doubly dentate or 2-crenate; lower leaves 8-10 \'d7 6-7 cm, ovate-cordate, petiolate; upper sessile. Flowers 1-4 at the apex of branches. Pedicels short, recurved or erect. Calyx-teeth triangular, acuminate, \'bd as long as the bluish-violet or pale blue corolla. Capsule pendent, ovoid. 2n = 34. }{\i\fs28 Woods and scrub. Europe northwards to}{\fs28  c. 62\'b0 30' }{\i\fs28 in Sweden, but absent from most of the islands.}{\fs28  Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Si Su Tu.
\par 
\par    (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 trachelium}{\fs28 : Flowers shortly pedicellate. Corolla 30-50 mm, pubescent inside. }{\i\fs28 Throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par    (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 athoa}{\fs28  (Boiss. & Heldr.) Hayek, }{\i\fs28 Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 541 (1930): Flowers subsessile. Corolla 15-20 mm, glabrous.}{\i\fs28  Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28 
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 101. C. rapunculoides}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  165 (1753). Perennial. Root stout, branched, sometimes with long stolons. Stem 30-100 cm,
\par 
\par 88}
\par }