{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 simple, erect, somewhat striate, glabrous or hirsute, scabrid. Basal and lower cauline leaves cordate, ovate to oblong-ovate, dentate, long-petiolate; middle cauline ovate; upper lanceolate, sessile, dentate. Inflorescence branched, racemose, secund. Pedicels short, recurved. Calyx-teeth oblong to triangular-lanceolate, deflexed at anthesis, much shorter than the corolla. Corolla 20-30 mm, infundibuliform-campanulate, ciliate, bluish-violet. 2n = 68, 102.{\i  Forest-margins, meadows, rocky places and cultivated ground. Most of Europe, except the arctic and the islands.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su [Br Hb].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 102. C. bononiensis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 165 (1753). Perennial. Stem up to 70 cm, erect, scabrid and pubescent, simple or somewhat branched. Leaves ovate, acuminate, greyish-tomentose beneath, serrate; basal petiolate; cauline sessile. Flowers pendent; pedicels very short. Inflorescence long, spike-like, sometimes sparingly branched. Calyx-teeth scabrid, triangular-lanceolate, patent, much shorter than the corolla. Corolla pendent, globose. 2n = 34.{\i  Meadows, scrub and forest-margins. C. & E. Europe, extending westwards to S.E. France and southwards to Albania.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, C, W, K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 103. C. aparinoides} Pursh,{\i  Fl. Amer. Sept.}{\b  1}: 159 (1814). Perennial, with slender subterranean runners. Stems 20-60 cm, slender, more or less 3-angled, retrorsely aculeolate on the angles. Leaves linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, dentate, retrorsely aculeolate on midrib and margin, sessile. Flowers mostly terminal on divaricate, leafy branches; pedicels 0·3-3·5 cm. Calyx-teeth triangular-lanceolate, about as long as the ovary. Corolla 5-9 mm, broadly campanulate, whitish. Capsule pendent, subglobose.{\i  Damp places. Naturalized in Finland.} [Fe.] ({\i North America}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 104. C. trichocalycina} Ten., {\i Fl. Nap.}{\b  1,}{\b  Prodr}.: 15 (1811) ({\i Asyneuma trichocalycinum} (Ten.) K. Malý). Subglabrous perennial. Stems slender, long, leafy, simple or sparingly branched. Leaves ovate to oblong, irregularly acutely serrate-dentate, subsessile. Inflorescence racemose, short, usually terminal. Pedicels slender, recurved, with linear or setiform bracts. Calyx-teeth linear, patent or deflexed, 3 times as long as the ovoid ovary. Corolla c. 15 mm, divided to the base into linear lobes, twice as long as the calyx-teeth. Capsule ovoid, pendent, sulcate. 2n = 32.{\i  Woods; calcicole. C. & S. Italy, Sicilia, Balkan peninsula, Kriti}. Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 105. C. macrorhiza} Gay ex A. DC., {\i Monogr. Camp.} 301 (1830). Perennial. Rhizome stout, woody, with few branches. Stems (10-)15-30 cm, ascending to erect, glabrous (rarely pubescent in the lower part), sparsely leafy up to the inflorescence. Basal leaves cordate, incise-serrate, usually absent at anthesis; cauline elliptical to narrowly lanceolate, remotely serrate to entire. Inflorescence usually with several flowers. Buds erect. Ovary papillose. Calyx-teeth linear, patent to deflexed. Corolla (12-)16-22(-26) mm, campanulate. Capsule 4-6 mm, turbinate erect to inclined, woody. 2n = 34.{\i  Limestone rock-crevices. • S.E. France, Corse, N.W. Italy.} Co Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  C. gracillima} Podl., {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  71}: 78 (1965), from S. France (Mt. Lozère) is like {\b 105} but has a slender rhizome, shorter stems and the corolla only 8-15 mm. It is also a diploid with 2n = 34.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 106. C. sabatia} De Not., {\i Prosp. Fl. Ligust.} 52 (1846). Rhizome stout, short, sparingly branched. Stems 20-40(-50) cm, ascending to erect, glabrous, leafy up to the inflorescence. Basal leaves cordate, incise-serrate, usually absent at anthesis; cauline linear-lanceolate to linear, remotely serrate to entire. Inflorescence few-flowered, lax. Buds erect. Ovary papillose. Calyx-teeth linear, abruptly bent at the base. Corolla 15-18(-20) mm. Capsule 4-5 mm, hemispherical, erect to slightly inclined, woody. 2n = 34.{\i  Limestone rock-crevices. • N.W. Italy} ({\i around Alassio}). It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 107. C. carnica} Schiede ex Mert. & Koch in Röhling,{\i  Deutschl. Fl.} ed. 3,{\b  2}: 158 (1826) ({\i C. linifolia }Scop., non L.). Rhizome stout, woody, with few branches. Stems (12-)20-35 cm, ascending, glabrous, rarely hairy. Basal leaves cordate, incise-serrate, usually absent at anthesis; cauline narrowly lanceolate to linear, serrate to entire. Inflorescence few-flowered. Buds inclined to pendent. Ovary papillose. Calyx-teeth linear-triangular, about as long as or longer than corolla, deflexed. Corolla (18-)22-26(-30) mm, broadly campanulate. Capsule 5-6(-7) mm, turbinate, erect, woody. 2n = 34.{\i  Limestone rock-crevices. • S. Alps, westwards to} 9° 30' {\i E.} Au It Ju.
\par                                                                                                              

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b carnica}: Stems glabrous, rarely hairy on the angles.{\i  From Lago d'Idro eastwards}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b puberula} Podl.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  71}: 95 (1965): Stems densely hairy below. {\i Alpi Bergamasche}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. kladniana} (Schur) Witasek, {\i Abh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien }{\b 1}({\b 3}): 39 (1902), which occurs in the S. Carpathians, is probably identical with this species.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 108. C. tanfanii} Podl.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  71}: 95 (1965). Like {\b 107} but flowers mostly solitary; calyx-teeth abruptly bent at base, much shorter than the corolla; corolla 10-22 mm. 2n = 34. •{\i  C. Appennini.} It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 109. C. xylocarpa} Kovanda, {\i Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}) {\b 1}: 183 (1966). Perennial. Rhizome stout, woody, short, unbranched or rarely with 1 or 2 short branches. Stems 20-35(-50) cm, erect, glabrous, leafy up to the inflorescence. Basal leaves cordate to cordate-reniform, serrate to lobed, absent at anthesis; cauline narrowly linear to setaceous, entire, the lower linear-lanceolate, remotely serrate. Inflorescence many-flowered, with lower branches from the leaf-axils. Buds erect. Ovary sparsely papillose to more or less smooth. Calyx-teeth linear, appressed to patent, abruptly bent at base. Corolla (12-)14-18(-25) mm. Capsule 3-5(-6) mm, turbinate, narrowing abruptly at the base, erect to slightly inclined, woody. 2n = 34. {\i Limestone rock crevices. • E. Czechoslovakia, from} 19° 30' {\i E. to }21° 15' {\i E.} Cz.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 110. C. crassipes} Heuffel,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  8}: 27 (1858). Perennial. Rhizome stout, short, unbranched. Stems (20-)30-50(-70) cm, pendent, glabrous, branched and leafy up to the inflorescence. Basal leaves cordate, serrate, absent at anthesis; cauline linear-lanceolate to linear, remotely serrate to entire. Inflorescence many-flowered, lax. Buds erect. Ovary papillose, rarely smooth. Calyx-teeth linear to setaceous. Corolla (10-)12-16(-20) mm. Capsule 4-6 mm, turbinate, erect, coriaceous. 2n = 34.{\i  Limestone rock-crevices. • By the Danube at the Iron Gates} ({\i 22° 15' E}.){\i  and immediately adjoining parts of S.W. Romania and E. Jugoslavia.} Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 111. C. praesignis} G. Beck,{\i  Fl. Nieder-Österr.}{\b  2}({\b 2}): 1105 (1893). Perennial. Rhizome slender, much-branched. Stems (15-)20-35 cm, ascending to erect, hairy below, leafy up to the inflorescence. Basal leaves cordate, serrate, absent at anthesis; cauline linear-lanceolate to linear, entire. Flowers in a lax, more or less branched inflorescence. Buds erect. Ovary papillose.
\par 

\par 
89}
\par