{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 with appendages up to 0·3 mm; fruit papillose and patent-hairy.{\i  Subalpine zone. • Mountains of S. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  In areas of contact with {\i A. lutea}, intermediate populations occur.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. A. boissieri} Heldr. ex Boiss., {\i loc. cit.} (1888). Like {\b 17} but young shoots and leaves glaucous-pruinose; stems up to 16 cm, glabrous; internodes scarcely longer than the leaves; leaves 4-10 × 0·5-0·7 mm, with awn (0·3-)0·7-1 mm; midrib comprising less than ¾ of width of leaf; margin weakly revolute; inflorescence with 1-2 clusters each of (1-)2-4(-6) flowers; corolla 3·7-5(-8) mm, pink. 2n = 22. {\i Alpine zone. • Mountains of S. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 20-24}).{\b  A. pyrenaica} group. More or less densely caespitose. Stems 2-20(-30) cm, weak, herbaceous throughout. Midrib usually comprising less than ¾ of width of leaf; lower leaves ovate or obovate, densely crowded. Inflorescence corymbiform. Corolla pink; tube usually 1-1½ times as long as lobes.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  A probably related group of disjunct mountain species. The delimitation of {\b 23} and {\b 24} is difficult, as is also the separation of both from {\b 1}({\b d}) and (particularly) {\b 31} in areas of contact.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla-tube glabrous and smooth outside
\par 
2 Cauline leaves in pairs above; corolla broadly
\par 
  infundibuliform ........................................................................  {\b 20. neilreichii}
\par 
2 Cauline leaves in whorls of 4 throughout; corolla 
\par 
  narrowly infundibuliform ..........................................................  {\b 21. beckiana}
\par 
1 Corolla-tube usually shortly hairy or papillose outside
\par 
3 Cauline leaves lanceolate to oblanceolate; fruit 
\par 
  1-1·5 mm, hairy or papillose ....................................................... {\b 22. neglecta}
\par 
3 Cauline leaves broadly linear to acicular; fruit 
\par 
  usually more than 1·5 mm, papillose
\par 
4 Corolla 4-5 mm; leaves 20-30 × 1-1·5 mm; stems usually
\par 
  glabrous ....................................................................................... {\b 23. rupicola}
\par 
4 Corolla 2·8-4 mm; leaves 8-16 × 0·3-1·3 mm; stems 
\par 
  usually shortly hairy below ....................................................... {\b 24. pyrenaica}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. A. neilreichii} G. Beck, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  32}: 182 (1883). Shoots green. Stems (5-)7-20(-30) cm, glabrous; lower internodes very short, the middle ones shorter than or up to twice as long as leaves. Cauline leaves 10-20 × 1-1·5(-2) mm, in pairs above, lanceolate, acute, thickish, glabrous; margin flat or only slightly revolute; lower leaves very shiny above. Inflorescence rather lax, with broadly lanceolate, more or less free bracts; pedicels 0-2 mm. Corolla 3-4(-4·5) mm, broadly infundibuliform, glabrous and smooth outside; tube 1-1½ times as long as lobes; lobes distinctly appendiculate. Fruit 1·5-2 mm, papillose. 2n = 20. {\i Subalpine zone. • N.E. Alps; Carpathians.} Au Cz ?Rm ?Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. A. beckiana} Degen,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  7}: 105 (1908). Like {\b 20} but leaves 8-22 × 0·8-2 mm, in whorls of 4 throughout, oblanceolate to linear, glabrous or shortly papillose-hairy beneath, scarcely shining; corolla hypocrateriform to narrowly infundibuliform. {\i Bare, calcareous places in the subalpine zone. • Mountains S W. Jugoslavia}. Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sometimes difficult to distinguish from glabrescent variants of {\b 2} (with longer corolla-tube).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. A. neglecta} Guss., {\i Pl. Rar}. 69 (1826). Young non-flowering shoots green. Stems 2-7(-10) cm, more or less hairy, sometimes subglabrous; lower internodes very short, the middle ones shorter than or scarcely longer than the leaves. Cauline leaves 5-20 × 1·3-1·5 mm, oblanceolate to lanceolate, acute, rather thin, shortly hairy or glabrous; margin weakly revolute; lower leaves rather coriaceous. Inflorescence with capitate partial inflorescences; bracts broadly lanceolate, free or slightly connate; pedicels 0-1 mm. Corolla 3-3·5 mm, narrowly infundibuliform, shortly hairy or glabrous outside; tube 1 1/3-1 2/5 as long as lobes. Fruit 1-1·5 mm, patent-hairy or papillose.{\i  Alpine zone. • C. & S. Appennini.} It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Glabrous variants ({\b A. nitens} Guss., {\i op. cit. }70 (1826)) frequently occur.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. A. rupicola} Jordan, {\i Pug. Pl. Nov.} 76 (1852). Shoots green or glaucous-pruinose. Stems (5-)10-15(-20) cm, ascending, more or less glabrous; lower internodes short, the middle ones shorter than or only slightly longer than the leaves. Cauline leaves 20-30 × 1-1·5 mm, linear, subacute, more or less glabrous; margin revolute. Inflorescence rather lax, with more or less capitate partial inflorescences; bracts usually broadly lanceolate, free. Corolla 4-5 mm, externally rough with papillae; tube 1½-2 times as long as lobes. Fruit c. 2 mm, coarsely papillose. •{\i  Subalpine zone. S.W. Alps}. Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. A. pyrenaica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 104 (1753). Like {\b 23} but stems 3-20(-30) cm, usually shortly papillose-hairy below, often glabrescent above; middle internodes 1-2(-3) times as long as the leaves; leaves 8-16 × 0·3-1·3 mm, the midrib often comprising more than ¾ of width of leaf, the margin weakly revolute, often shortly ciliate; bracts narrowly lanceolate; corolla 2·8-4 mm, the tube 1-1½(-2) times as long as lobes.{\i  Upper montane to alpine zones. • Pyrenees. }Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 25-29}). {\b A. cretacea} group. Densely caespitose, woody at base. Stems 3-35 cm. Leaves rigid, linear to subulate (rarely narrowly oblanceolate), acute; midrib comprising more than of width of leaf; margin distinctly revolute. Corolla 2-4(-5) mm, infundibuliform, sometimes narrowly so, white to pale purplish; tube 1-2 times as long as lobes; lobes distinctly appendiculate. Fruit papillose.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla-tube at least 1½ times as long as lobes ........................ {\b 25. cretacea} 
\par 
1 Corolla-tube about as long as lobes
\par 
2 Flowers ± sessile, in dense capitula, surrounded by ± 
\par 
  dentate bracts 0·7-1·2 mm wide ..................................................... {\b 26. supina}
\par 
2 At least some flowers shortly pedicellate, the partial
\par 
  inflorescences scarcely capitate; bracts not more than
\par 
  1 mm wide, mostly entire
\par 
3 Corolla rough outside; fruit 1·7-2 mm .................................. {\b 27. tephrocarpa}
\par 
3 Corolla smooth outside; fruit 2-4 mm
\par 
4 Stems ± rough with short hairs throughout; leaves dark green,
\par 
  the margins mostly rough ........................................................ {\b 28. exasperata}
\par 
4 Stems smooth, or rough only below; leaves shining 
\par 
  green, at least the upper with smooth margins .............................. {\b 29. petraea}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. A. cretacea} Willd. in Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  3}: 529 (1818) (Ser. {\i Vestitae} Klokov; incl.{\i  A. vestita} V. Krecz., {\i A. cimmerica} V. Krecz. ex Klokov,{\i  A. praepilosa }V. Krecz. ex Klokov,{\i  A. praevestita} Klokov,{\i  A. kotovii} Klokov, {\i A. infracta} Klokov, {\i A. aemulans} V. Krecz. ex Klokov). Shoots grey-green. Stems (4-)7-35 cm, shortly hairy at least below; middle internodes 2-8 times as long as the leaves. Leaves 3·5-21 × 0·3-1·2 mm, more or less rough with short hairs. Inflorescence ovoid; partial inflorescences more or less capitate; bracts 0·2-1 mm wide, narrowly lanceolate; flowers more or less sessile. Corolla rough outside; tube 1½-2 times as long as lobes. Fruit 1·2-2·5 mm. {\i Stony slopes, maritime sands and saline steppes. Krym}. Rs (K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. A. supina} Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 101 (1808) (Ser.{\i  Supinae} Klokov; incl.{\i  A. caespitans }Juz., {\i A. tranzshelii} Klokov). Shoots green. Stems 10-20(-26) cm, more or less shortly hairy to glabrous;
\par 

\par 
9}
\par