{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Calyx-teeth linear, patent to deflexed, abruptly bent at base. Corolla (10-)12-16(-20) mm. Capsule 4-5 mm, broadly turbinate, slightly narrowed above, erect, woody. 2n = 34.{\i  Limestone rocks. • N.E. Alps and adjacent foothills. }Au.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 112. C. forsythii} (Arcangeli) Podl., {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  71}: 81 (1965). Perennial. Rhizome stout, woody, with few branches. Stems 10-30 cm, glabrous. Basal leaves rounded to cordate crenate, absent at anthesis; cauline ovate to narrowly lanceolate remotely serrate to entire. Flowers solitary or few. Buds erect. Ovary papillose, rarely smooth. Calyx-teeth linear, patent to deflexed, abruptly bent at base. Corolla 20-26(-30) mm. Capsule 4-5 mm, turbinate, woody. 2n = 34.{\i  Limestone rocks. • Sardegna.} Sa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 113. C. hispanica} Willk. in Willk. & Lange, {\i Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  2}: 291 (1868). Perennial. Rhizome usually stout, with few branches. Stems (15-)20-40(-75) cm, ascending to erect, hairy below. Basal leaves cordate, serrate, absent at anthesis; cauline narrowly lanceolate to linear, usually crowded in the lower part of stem, the lower serrate, the others entire. Inflorescence lax or contracted, rather few-flowered. Buds erect. Ovary papillose, rarely smooth. Calyx-teeth linear, appressed. Corolla (8-)10-14(-16) mm, infundibuliform. Capsule 5-7 mm, turbinate to conical, pendent, woody. {\i Rocks and stony or sandy places. • N., C. & E. Spain, just extending into France.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b hispanica}: Stems not more than 40 cm. Inflorescence more or less contracted. 2n = 34.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b catalanica} Podl., {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  71}: 70 (1965): Stems up to 75 cm. Inflorescence lax.{\i  E. Pyrenees}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b C. ruscinonensis} Timb.-Lagr.,{\i  Mem. Acad. Sci. Toulouse} ser. 7,{\b  5}: 275 (1873), from the E. Pyrenees, resembles {\b 113} but has stems only 10-20 cm, in dense tufts and leafy up to the inflorescence, and the ovary is smooth. It has 2n = 34.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 114. C. justiniana} Witasek,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  5}: 245 (1906). Perennial. Rhizome usually slender, creeping, branched. Stems 12-20(-25) cm, ascending, angular, glabrous. Basal leaves cordate, serrate, absent at anthesis; cauline ovate-lanceolate to narrowly lanceolate, acute, remotely and acutely serrate, more or less distinctly petiolate. Inflorescence few-flowered. Buds erect. Ovary papillose. Calyx-teeth linear to setaceous, patent to deflexed. Corolla 12-18 mm. Capsule 4-5 mm, turbinate, pendent, woody. 2n = 34.{\i  Limestone rocks. • W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 115. C. hercegovina} Degen & Fiala,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  44}: 303 (1894). Perennial. Rhizome stout, woody, with few branches. Stems (8-)12-20(-40) cm, branched, ascending to pendent, angular, ciliate to hairy in the lower part. Basal leaves cordate to ovate, incise-serrate, absent at anthesis; cauline rhombic to ovate serrate to entire, petiolate. Inflorescence more or less branched. Buds erect. Ovary papillose. Calyx-teeth linear to setaceous. Corolla (14-)16-20(-22) mm. Capsule turbinate, pendent, woody. 2n = 34.{\i  Limestone rock-crevices. • S.W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 116. C. albanica} Witasek, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok }{\b 5}: 246 (1906). Perennial. Rhizome slender, with few branches. Stems (6-)8-15(-24) cm, ascending to erect, glabrous. Basal leaves cordate serrate, absent at anthesis; cauline narrowly elliptical to linear, more or less entire, obtuse to acute. Flowers solitary, rarely 2-3. Buds erect. Ovary papillose, rarely smooth. Calyx-teeth narrowly triangular to linear. Corolla 14-18(-22) mm. Capsule (6-)7-8 mm, turbinate, pendent, woody.{\i  Rocks and stony places. • S. & W. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b albanica}: Cauline leaves narrowly lanceolate to linear, mostly acute. Calyx-teeth up to 12 mm. 2n = 34.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sancta} (Hayek) Podl., {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  71}: 85 (1965): Cauline leaves narrowly elliptical to narrowly lanceolate, mostly obtuse. Calyx-teeth up to 7 mm. 2n = 34.{\i  N.E. Greece} ({\i Athos}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 117. C. romanica} Savul.,{\i  Teze Fac. Sti. Bucuresti}{\b  11}({\b 1}): 60 (1916). Perennial. Rhizome stout, woody, with few branches. Stems (10-)18-30( 40) cm, erect to ascending, pubescent in the lower part. Basal leaves cordate to suborbicular-cordate, serrate absent at anthesis; cauline linear-lanceolate to linear, remotely serrate, the uppermost entire. Inflorescence more or less branched. Buds erect. Ovary papillose. Calyx-teeth linear to setaceous, appressed. Corolla 8-10(-14) mm, narrowly campanulate. Capsule 4-7 mm, conical, pendent, coriaceous.{\i  Rock crevices. • S.E. Romania} ({\i Dobrogea}). Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 118. C. moravica} (Spitzner) Kovanda,{\i  Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}) {\b 3}: 409 (1968). Perennial. Rhizome stout, woody, with few branches. Stems (15-)25-45(-70) cm, ascending, stiff, hairy below or glabrous. Basal leaves cordate, incise-serrate to lobed absent at anthesis; cauline crowded in the lower part of stem linear-lanceolate to linear or setaceous, entire. Inflorescence many-flowered, more or less contracted. Buds erect. Ovary papillose. Calyx-teeth linear to setaceous. Corolla (14-)16-22(-25) mm. Capsule 4-8 mm, turbinate to conical, pendent, woody. {\i Rocks, stony places and dry pastures. •  C. Europe, from C. Czechoslovakia to N.W. Romania.} Au Cz Hu Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b moravica}: Rhizome c.6-10 mm in diameter. Pollen grains 33-39 µm in diameter. 2n = 68. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b xylorrhiza} (O. Schwarz) Kovanda,{\i  op. cit.} 410 (1968): Rhizome up to 15 mm in diameter. Pollen-grains 36-42(-45)µm in diameter. 2n = 102.{\i  S.C. Czechoslovakia, E. Austria, N.W. Jugoslavia and probably elsewhere}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b C. gentilis} Kovanda,{\i  op. cit.} 407 (1968), from W. Czechoslovakia and S.E. Germany, is a closely related diploid. It has a slender rhizome, shorter stems, corolla 12-18 mm, pollen-grains 30-36 µm in diameter and a cartilaginous capsule 3-5 mm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 119. C. appennina} (Podl.) Podl.,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} (München){\b  8}: 216 (1970). Perennial. Rhizome stout. Stems 40-60 cm, erect to ascending, glabrous, densely leafy up to the inflorescence. Basal leaves cordate, incise-serrate, absent at anthesis; cauline narrowly lanceolate to linear, entire. Inflorescence more or less branched, secund. Pedicels very slender. Buds erect. Ovary papillose. Calyx-teeth setaceous. Corolla 10-12 mm. Capsule 5-6 mm, turbinate, erect, woody. 2n = 34. •{\i  C. Appennini.} It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 120. C. willkommii} Witasek, {\i Abh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien }{\b 1}({\b 3}): 75 (1902). Perennial. Rhizome slender to stout, creeping, branched. Stems (5-)8-15(-25) cm, glabrous or hairy below. Basal leaves suborbicular to ovate, crenate to entire; cauline elliptical to narrowly lanceolate, mostly crowded in the lower part of the stem, entire, obtuse. Inflorescence few-flowered. Buds erect. Ovary papillose. Calyx-teeth narrowly triangular, appressed. Corolla (10-)12-15 mm, narrowed at the mouth. Capsule broadly turbinate to almost hemispherical, pendent. 2n = 68.{\i  Limestone rocks. • S. Spain }({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 121. C. fritschii} Witasek, {\i op. cit.} 90 (1902). Perennial. Rhizome slender, creeping, branched. Stems (12-)20-35 cm, erect densely hairy below, glabrous and leafless above. Basal leaves
\par 

\par 
90}
\par