{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 cordate, serrate, absent at anthesis; cauline elliptical to narrowly lanceolate, obtuse, obtusely serrate, hairy beneath. Inflorescence with few branches. Buds erect. Ovary papillose. Calyx-teeth narrowly triangular. Corolla 18-22(-26) mm. Capsule turbinate to conical, pendent. 2n = 68.{\i  Stony slopes. • S.E. France} ({\i Alpes de Provence}). Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 122. C. longisepala} Podl.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  71}: 97 (1965). Perennial. Rhizome slender, branched. Stems 30-40 cm, ascending, glabrous, sparsely leafy. Basal leaves reniform, incise-serrate; cauline lanceolate to narrowly lanceolate, remotely serrate to entire. Inflorescence few-flowered. Buds erect. Ovary papillose. Calyx-teeth at least half as long as corolla, linear to setaceous, patent. Corolla 22-25 mm. 2n = 34, 68. •{\i  S.E. France} ({\i Mt. Ventoux}). Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 123. C. marchesettii} Witasek,{\i  Abh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien} {\b 1}({\b 3}): 32 (1902). Perennial. Rhizome slender, branched. Stems (15-)20-40(-60) cm, ascending to erect, stiff, angular, glabrous or hairy on the angles below, leafy up to the inflorescence. Basal leaves cordate to rounded, serrate, absent at anthesis; cauline narrowly linear to setaceous, entire. Inflorescence more or less branched. Buds erect. Ovary papillose. Calyx-teeth setaceous, usually appressed. Corolla 12-18(-20) mm. Capsule 4-6 mm, turbinate, pendent, woody. 2n = 68.{\i  Rocks and stony places. • N.W. Jugoslavia; C. Appennini.} It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 124. C. velebitica} Borbás, {\i Math. Term. Értesitö}{\b  1}: 81 (1883). Perennial. Rhizome slender to slightly thickened, creeping, branched. Stems 15-25(-35) cm, ascending to erect, glabrous (rarely hairy below). Basal leaves cordate to reniform, serrate, usually absent at anthesis; cauline lanceolate to linear, remotely serrate to entire, the lower petiolate. Inflorescence lax, many-flowered. Buds erect. Ovary papillose, rarely smooth. Calyx-teeth setaceous, appressed. Corolla (10-)16-20 mm. Capsule 6-8 mm, conical, pendent, woody. {\i Rocks and stony places. • Mountains of N. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  The plants from Bulgaria (C. Stara Planina) have hairy stems and have been separated as {\b C. bulgarica} Witasek,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok }{\b 5}: 244 (1906).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 125. C. bertolae} Colla,{\i  Herb. Pedem.}{\b  4}: 24 (1835). Perennial. Rhizome stout, woody, unbranched. Stems 20-40(-60) cm, stiff, leafy up to the inflorescence and densely hairy throughout (rarely glabrous). Basal leaves cordate, crenate to serrate, absent at anthesis; cauline linear-lanceolate to linear, entire, hairy on both surfaces. Inflorescence paniculate, lax to contracted. Buds erect. Ovary papillose, hairy, rarely glabrous. Calyx-teeth linear. Corolla 12-18(-22) mm. Capsule 5-7 mm, conical, pendent,woody. 2n = 102. •{\i  S.W. Alps}; ?{\i Appennini.} It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 126. C. pseudostenocodon} Lacaita, {\i Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.} nov. ser., {\b 25}: 22 (1918). Perennial. Rhizome stout, with few branches. Stems 15-30 cm, glabrous or hairy below. Basal leaves cordate, serrate to crenate, absent at anthesis; cauline ovate to narrowly lanceolate or linear, crenate to entire. Inflorescence few-flowered. Buds erect. Ovary papillose. Calyx-teeth linear. Corolla 14-18(-22) mm, narrowly tubular, with patent lobes. Capsule 4-6 mm, turbinate to conical, erect, woody. 2n = 102. •{\i  S. Appennini.} It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 127. C. rhomboidalis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 165 (1753). Perennial. Root napiform. Rhizome slender, sparingly branched, without tubercles. Stems (10-)20-40(-60) cm, erect, angular, ciliate or glabrous. Basal leaves suborbicular, serrate, absent at anthesis; cauline ovate to broadly lanceolate, acute, bluntly serrate. Inflorescence few-flowered. Buds erect. Ovary smooth. Calyx-teeth linear. Corolla (12-)16-22(-24) mm. Capsule 6-7 mm, turbinate, pendent, membranous. 2n = 34.{\i  Mountain meadows. • S.W. & C. Alps, Jura; locally naturalized elsewhere.} Ga He It [Au Be Cz Ge Ho].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 128. C. cantabrica} Feer, {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}){\b  28}: 273 (1890). Perennial. Root napiform. Rhizome slender, branched, with small napiform tubercles. Stems 5-15(-20) cm, erect, angular, glabrous, leafless above. Basal leaves rounded to cordate, finely crenate, absent at anthesis; cauline ovate to narrowly lanceolate, remotely crenate to entire. Flowers solitary, rarely 2-3. Buds erect. Ovary smooth. Calyx-teeth narrowly triangular to linear. Corolla 12-15 mm. Capsule 5-6 mm, turbinate, pendent, membranous. 2n = 34. •{\i  N. Spain} ({\i Cordillera Cantabrica}). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 129. C. serrata} (Kit.) Hendrych,{\i  Taxon}{\b  11} : 123 (1962) ({\i C. napuligera} Schur, {\i C. pseudolanceolata }Pant.). Perennial. Root napiform. Rhizome slender, short, unbranched. Stems (10-)20-40(-60) cm, erect, angular, glabrous or ciliate, densely leafy. Basal leaves suborbicular to ovate, crenate, absent at anthesis; cauline ovate to narrowly lanceolate, serrate, glabrous on both surfaces, ciliate at base. Inflorescence few-flowered, contracted. Buds pendent. Ovary smooth. Calyx-teeth linear to narrowly triangular. Corolla (13-)15-22(-25) mm. Capsule (5-)6-8(-10) mm, conical, gradually narrowed at base, pendent, membranous. 2n = 34+0-2B.{\i  Mountain meadows and pastures. • Carpathians.} Cz Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 130. C. recta} Dulac,{\i  Fl. Dép. Hautes-Pyr.} 458 (1867) ({\i C. lanceolata} Lapeyr. pro parte). Like {\b 129} but leaves entire, obtuse, pubescent on both surfaces; capsule slightly contracted at the top and shortly narrowed at base. 2n = 34. •{\i  Pyrenees and mountains of S.C. France.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 131. C. precatoria} Timb.-Lagr.,{\i  Mém. Acad. Sci. Toulouse} ser. 7, {\b 5}: 271(1873). Perennial. Root moniliform. Rhizome slender, branched. Stems (15-)20-40 cm, erect, angular, hairy on the angles below, leafless above. Basal leaves suborbicular, crenate, absent at anthesis; cauline ovate to lanceolate, crenate to entire, amplexicaul or nearly so. Inflorescence few-flowered. Buds pendent. Ovary smooth. Calyx-teeth narrowly triangular, appressed. Corolla 16-20(-24) mm. Capsule pendent.{\i  Mountain meadows and pastures. • E. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 132. C. witasekiana} Vierh.,{\i  Mitt. Naturw. Ver. Univ. Wien}{\b  4}: 72 (1906) (?{\i C. inconcessa} Schott, Nyman & Kotschy). Perennial. Rhizome slender, creeping, branched, with napiform tubercles. Stems (18-)25-35(-50) cm, erect, angular, glabrous or ciliate in the lower part, leafy up to the inflorescence. Basal leaves suborbicular to reniform, crenate, absent at anthesis; cauline narrowly lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, entire. Inflorescence more or less branched. Buds pendent. Ovary smooth. Calyx-teeth narrowly triangular. Corolla (10-)12-16 mm. Capsule 5-7(-9) mm, turbinate, pendent, membranous. 2n = 34.{\i  Mountain meadows. • E. Alps and mountains of N. half of Balkan peninsula.} Au Bu It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 133. C. cochlearifolia} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 578 (1785) ({\i C. pusilla} Haenke). Perennial. Rhizome slender, creeping, branched. Stems (3-)5-10(-20) cm, ascending, hairy or glabrous. Basal leaves cordate to rounded, truncate to shallowly cordate at base, incise-serrate, present at anthesis; cauline elliptical to lanceolate, remotely serrate. Flowers few or solitary. Buds pendent. Ovary smooth. Calyx-teeth linear to narrowly triangular. Corolla (10)13-16(-18) mm, not narrowed at the mouth. Cap-
\par 

\par 
91}
\par