{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 sule 3-6 mm, conical, pendent, coriaceous. 2n = 34.{\i  Rocks, screes and stony ground, mainly in the mountains; somewhat calcicole. • From the Vosges and Carpathians southwards to N. Spain, C. Appennini and S. Bulgaria.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Several microspecies have been described, based mainly on floral characters, but further work is necessary to understand their range and taxonomic status.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 134. C. cespitosa} Scop., {\i Fl. Carn.} ed. 2, {\b 1}: 143 (1771). Like {\b 133} but basal leaves ovate to rhombic, cuneate at base and decurrent on petiole; corolla narrowed at the mouth. 2n = 34.{\i  Limestone rocks and screes. • E. Alps and mountains of N.W. Jugoslavia.} Au It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 135. C. jaubertiana} Timb.-Lagr.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  15}: xcviii (1868). Perennial. Rhizome slender, creeping, branched. Stems (2-)3-6(-8) cm, ascending to erect, densely hairy. Basal leaves suborbicular to elliptical, irregularly crenate, cuneate at base; cauline ovate to elliptical, irregularly crenate to serrate, usually obtuse. Flowers solitary, rarely 2-4. Buds pendent. Ovary smooth, pubescent. Calyx-teeth sublinear to narrowly triangular. Corolla 8-12(-14) mm, narrowly infundibuliform. Capsule 3-4(-5) mm, hemispherical, pendent, coriaceous.{\i  Limestone rocks. • C. & E. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b jaubertiana}: Basal leaves cordate at base. The vein ending in the sinus arising near the base of the calyx-tube. Calyx-teeth sublinear. {\i C. Pyrenees}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b andorrana} (Br.-Bl.) P. Monts. in Losa & P. Monts.,{\i  Aport. Conoc. Fl. Andorra }115 (1950): Basal leaves truncate at base. The vein ending in the sinus arising near the middle of the calyx-tube. Calyx-teeth narrowly triangular.{\i  E. Pyrenees}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 136. C. excisa} Schleicher ex Murith, {\i Guide Bot. Valais} 57 (1810). Perennial. Rhizome slender, creeping, branched. Stems 5-9(-15) cm, ascending to erect, hairy. Basal leaves cordate to suborbicular, serrate, absent at anthesis; cauline linear-lanceolate to linear, entire. Flowers solitary, rarely 2-3. Buds pendent. Ovary smooth. Calyx-teeth linear-triangular. Corolla 10-16(-18) mm, with a deep, rounded sinus between the lobes. Capsule 4-6 mm, broadly turbinate, pendent, coriaceous. 2n = 34.{\i  Mountain rocks and screes; calcifuge. • S.W. & S.C. Alps. }?Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 137. C. stenocodon} Boiss. & Reuter in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 3}): 112 (1856). Perennial. Rhizome slender, creeping, branched. Stems (7-)12-20(-30) cm, ascending, pubescent below. Basal leaves rounded to cordate, serrate, absent at anthesis; cauline linear-lanceolate to linear, remotely serrate to entire. Inflorescence few-flowered, simple or with long divaricate branches. Buds pendent, Ovary smooth. Calyx-teeth linear. Corolla 12-18(-22) mm, narrowly tubular, with patent lobes. Capsule 5-7 mm, turbinate, pendent, coriaceous. 2n = 34.{\i  Mountain rocks and stony places. • S.W. Alps, from }44° {\i to} 45° {\i N}. Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 138. C. pulla} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 163 (1753). Perennial. Rhizome slender, creeping, branched. Stems (5-)7-15(-20) cm, ascending to erect, glabrous or hairy on the angles. Basal leaves suborbicular to ovate, crenate, shortly cuneate at base, absent at anthesis; cauline ovate to elliptical, crenate to obtusely serrate, more or less distinctly petiolate. Flowers solitary. Buds pendent. Ovary smooth. Calyx-teeth narrowly triangular. Corolla (15-)18-24(-28) mm. Capsule 5-7 mm, conical, pendent, coriaceous. 2n = 34. {\i Screes, stony slopes and mountain pastures; somewhat calcicole. • N.E. Alps, westwards to} 12° 45'{\i  E.} Au.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 139. C. scheuchzeri} Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 22 (1779). Perennial. Rhizome slender, creeping, branched. Stems (5-)10-25(-40) cm, erect to ascending, ciliate or glabrous, rarely hairy. Basal leaves suborbicular to cordate, crenate, absent at anthesis; cauline narrowly lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, acute, more or less sessile, ciliate at base. Flowers solitary or few. Buds pendent. Ovary smooth. Calyx-teeth narrowly triangular. Corolla (10-)18-24(-28) mm, campanulate, narrowed at base, with patent lobes. Capsule 5-8(-10) mm, conical, pendent, membranous. 2n = 68, 102.{\i  Mountain  meadows. • C. & S. Europe, from the Pyrenees eastwards to the W. Carpathians and Bulgaria.} Al Au Bu Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. bohemica} Hruby in Domin & Podp.,{\i  Klic Uplne Kvet. Rep. Cesk.} 534 (1928), and {\b C. gelida} Kovanda,{\i  Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}){\b  3}: 408 (1968), are well-marked geographical variants of {\b 139}. They occur in the W. & E. Sudeten Mts. respectively and both have erect buds. The former has the corolla campanulate and rounded at the base and the capsule 6-8(-10) mm, while the latter has a tubular corolla gradually narrowed at the base and the capsule 5-6 mm. Both have 2n = 68.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C. pollinensis} Podl., {\i Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}){\b  8}: 211 (1970), from S. Italy (Prov. Cosenza), resembles {\b 139} but is probably more closely related to spp. {\b 105-126}. It has a papillose ovary and glabrous cauline leaves.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 140. C. ficarioides} Timb.-Lagr.,{\i  Mém. Acad. Sci. Toulouse} ser. 5, {\b 6}: 33 (1862). Like {\b 139} but rhizome with napiform tubercles; stems 8-15 cm; corolla 15-18 mm. 2n = 102.{\i  Mountain meadows. • Pyrenees. }Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 141. C. rotundifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 163 (1753). Perennial. Rhizome slender, creeping, branched. Stems (5-)20-40(-70) cm, shortly ascending to erect (rarely procumbent or pendent), mostly pubescent below, sparsely leafy up to the inflorescence. Basal leaves suborbicular, reniform to shallowly cordate, crenate, sometimes present at anthesis; cauline narrowly lanceolate to linear, the lower petiolate, remotely serrate, the others sessile, entire. Inflorescence more or less branched, lax. Buds erect. Ovary smooth, rarely papillose. Calyx-teeth linear to narrowly triangular. Corolla (10-)12-20(-30) mm. Capsule (2-)3-5(-12) mm, turbinate to conical, pendent, membranous. 2n = 34, 68, 102.{\i  Dry grassland, sand-dunes and rocky ground. Much of Europe, but rare in the south.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho ?Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Extremely variable; in addition to an array of infraspecific taxa, numerous variants have been described as distinct species. However, a great deal of the variation is continuous and there is little correlation between the different characters.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Polyploids differ from the diploids in having larger corolla, capsule, seeds, stomata and pollen grains, but there is considerable intergradation and there does not seem to be any definite geographical pattern, so a clear-cut separation is not possible. The European mountain plants (subsp.{\i  polymorpha} (Witasek) Tacik, subsp.{\i  sudetica} (Hruby) Soó and var. {\i alpicola} Hayek) are tetraploid and have the following features in common: stems (5-)10-15 cm; flowers solitary or few; calyx-teeth narrowly triangular; corolla 10-25(-30) mm; capsule 5-9(-12) mm. Dwarf northern tetraploids, very similar morphologically, are known as{\b  C. groenlandica} Berlin, {\i Öfvers. Kongl. Vet.-Akad. Förhandl.}{\b  41}({\b 7}): 50 (1884).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Variants with a papillose ovary require further study; they are absent in the north but become gradually more common southwards, and at least some of them may in fact be referable to the
\par 

\par 
92}
\par