{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 group of saxicolous species{\b  105-126}, or may have arisen from introgressive hybridization. Many of the records of C. rotundifolia in south Europe are doubtful, and the limits of distribution in the Balkan peninsula and in S. France are not known with any accuracy. Plants from N. Spain have been separated as {\b C. asturica} Podl.,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}) {\b 8}: 213 (1970), and{\b  C. wiedmannii} Podl.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1970).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 142. C. giesekiana} Vest in Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  5}: 89 (1819). Perennial. Rhizome slender, creeping, branched. Stems 5-10(-20) cm, shortly ascending, usually hairy below and leafless above. Basal leaves suborbicular to bluntly cordate, finely crenate to entire; cauline linear-lanceolate to linear, usually obtuse, entire, nearly all more or less distinctly petiolate. Flowers solitary or few. Buds erect. Ovary smooth. Calyx-teeth linear to narrowly triangular. Corolla 12-20 mm, broadly campanulate, hemispherical at base. Capsule 3-4 mm, broadly turbinate to pelviform, pendent, membranous. 2n = 34. {\i Dry grassland and stony or gravelly places. N. Europe.} ?Fe No ?Rs (N) Sb ?Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 143. C. baumgartenii} J. Becker, {\i Fl. Frankfurt} 264 (1828). Perennial. Rhizome slender, branched. Stems (20-)30-50(-70) cm, ascending to erect, angular, pubescent below, leafy up to the inflorescence. Basal leaves suborbicular to reniform, crenate, usually present at anthesis; cauline lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, finely serrate to entire, the lower pubescent. Inflorescence paniculate, many-flowered. Buds erect to inclined. Ovary smooth. Calyx-teeth linear to setaceous. Corolla (12-)10-18(-22) mm. Capsule 4-5(-7) mm, turbinate, pendent, membranous. 2n = 68. {\i Dry grassland. • S.W. Germany and E. France. }Ga Ge.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 144. C. beckiana} Hayek,{\i  Fl. Steierm.}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 455 (1912). Perennial. Rhizome slender, short, with few branches. Stems (15-)30-45(-60) cm, erect, angular, glabrous or hairy on the angles below, leafy up to the inflorescence. Basal leaves suborbicular to cordate, crenate to serrate, absent at anthesis; cauline ovate-lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, remotely serrate to entire, the lower glabrous but ciliate. Inflorescence paniculate, many-flowered. Buds inclined. Ovary smooth. Calyx-teeth linear to setaceous. Corolla 12-16(-18) mm. Capsule 5-9 mm, conical, pendent, membranous. 2n = 68. {\i Meadows and open woods. • N.E. Alps; one station in Slovenija.} Au Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.        Azorina}      Feer
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By Andrey A. Fedorov.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Dwarf shrub. Flowers in a lax, leafless inflorescence. Bracts at the base of the pedicels small. Calyx without appendages between the teeth. Corolla constricted in the middle, ventricose at the base; lobes very short. Stamens 5; filaments broadly triangular at the base. Style with an annular disc at the base; stigmas 3. Ovary 3-locular, broadly obconic-cupuliform. Capsule dehiscing by wide valves. Seeds flat, margined.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. vidalii} (H. C. Watson) Feer,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  12}: 612 (1890). Glabrous, viscid, symmetrical dwarf shrub with a terminal leaf-rosette, below which arises a whorl of axillary branches each ending in a simple or branched inflorescence. Stems up to 200 cm. Leaves 30-80 × 3-8 mm, oblong-cuneate, entire to crenate-dentate, rather succulent and coriaceous. Corolla 2·5-3·5 cm, white, often tinged with pink outside, hirsute inside. Ovary ribbed; calyx-teeth 1/4-1/3 as long as the tube. Capsule erect or slightly nodding. 2n = 56.{\i  Sea-cliffs. • Açores.} Az.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.            Symphyandra}          A. DC.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers in racemes or panicles. Calyx deeply 5-fid. Corolla 5-lobed or -fid, campanulate. Stamens 5; filaments ciliate; anthers connate in a tube. Ovary 3-locular. Style included, hairy; stigmas 3, filiform. Capsule dehiscing by 3 valves near the base.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: D. Phitos,{\i  Ber. Deutsch. Bot. Ges.}{\b  79}: 246-249 (1966).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx with a deflexed appendage in each sinus ........................ {\b 3. hofmannii}
\par 
1 Calyx without a deflexed appendage in each sinus
\par 
2 Basal leaves cordate ........................................................................ {\b 1. cretica}
\par 
2 Basal leaves gradually narrowed below ........................................ {\b 2. wanneri}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. cretica} A. DC.,{\i  Monogr. Camp.} 366 (1830). Glabrous perennial. Lower leaves petiolate; lamina cordate or reniform, crenate; uppermost leaves sessile. Flowers pendent, in a few-flowered, secund raceme. Calyx-lobes c. 15 mm, linear-lanceolate, without a deflexed appendage in each sinus. Corolla c. 30 mm, blue or white. {\i Rocks and walls at low altitudes. • Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx-lobes erect, usually serrate ...................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b cretica}
\par 
1 Calyx-lobes erecto-patent, entire
\par 
2 Bracts lanceolate, as long as or longer than the 
\par 
  pedicel ....................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b samothracica} 
\par 
2 Bracts subulate, shorter than the pedicel ....................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b sporadum}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cretica}: Up to 45 cm. Lamina of basal leaves 3·5-14 cm. Bracts lanceolate, serrate, longer than the pedicel. Calyx-lobes erect, usually serrate. Corolla usually white. 2n = 36. {\i Kriti}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b samothracica} (Degen) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 549 (1930): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but smaller; lamina of basal leaves 2·5-4 cm; calyx-lobes erecto-patent, entire; corolla usually blue. 2n = 36.{\i  Samothraki}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b sporadum} (Halácsy) Hayek,{\i  loc. cit.} (1930): Up to 25 cm. Lamina of basal leaves 1-3 cm. Bracts subulate, usually entire, shorter than the pedicel. Calyx-lobes erecto-patent, entire. Corolla usually blue. 2n = 36.{\i  Voriai Sporadhes.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. wanneri} (Rochel) Heuffel, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien }{\b 8}: 156 (1858). Pubescent perennial 10-40 cm. Leaves 2-11 cm, linear-oblong to lanceolate, gradually narrowed at base, serrate, the lower with a winged petiole, the upper sessile. Flowers in a branched, secund inflorescence. Calyx-lobes 15-20 mm, linear lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, acute, without a deflexed appendage in each sinus. Corolla 20-35 mm, violet.{\i  Shady cliffs and rocks. • Mountains of Bulgaria, Romania and E. Jugoslavia.} Bu Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. hofmannii} Pant.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  31}: 347 (1881). Pubescent biennial. Leaves 5-10 cm, ovate to lanceolate, gradually narrowed at base, coarsely serrate, hairy at least on the veins beneath when young, the lower with a winged petiole, the upper sessile. Flowers pendent, in a branched secund inflorescence. Calyx-lobes 15-20 mm, ovate, obtuse, with a conspicuous, deflexed appendage in each sinus. Corolla 20-30 mm, yellowish-white.{\i  Rocky places. • Jugoslavia} ({\i Bosna}). Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.       Adenophora}       Fischer
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By T. G. Tutin.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers in racemes or panicles. Calyx 5-fid. Corolla 5-fid, campanulate or infundibuliform. Stamens 5; filaments ciliate; anthers free. Ovary 3-locular. Style exserted, pubescent; stigmas
\par 

\par 
93}
\par