{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min3}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min4}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1002}{\nofchars5713}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 3, connate at their base to form a tube or disc; base of style surrounded by a conspicuous tubular disc. Capsule dehiscing by 3 pores near the base.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 Corolla about as wide as long ........................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. lilifolia}{\fs28 
\par Corolla about \'bd as wide as long ........................................................ }{\b\fs28 2. taurica}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. A. lilifolia}{\fs28  (L.) Ledeb. ex A. DC.,}{\i\fs28  Monogr. Camp.}{\fs28  358 (1830). Slightly pubescent, erect perennial. Stems (30-)50-100 cm. Basal leaves suborbicular, cordate, coarsely serrate, long-petiolate, dead at flowering time; cauline leaves lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, cuneate at base, serrate, the lower shortly petiolate, the upper sessile. Flowers usually in a spreading panicle. Calyx-lobes 3-4 mm, lanceolate, erecto-patent. Corolla 12-20 mm, broadly campanulate, about as wide as long, pale blue. Style nearly twice as long as the corolla. Capsule 8-12 mm, recurved. 2n = 34.}{\i\fs28  Woods and damp meadows. E.C.& E.Europe, from E. Austria to C. Romania and N.C. Russia, extending locally southwards to C. Jugoslavia and S. Switzerland.}{\fs28  Au Cz Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. A. taurica}{\fs28  (Suk.) Juz.,}{\i\fs28  Not. Syst.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Leningrad}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 13}{\fs28 : 301 (1950). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but inflorescence with short branches; corolla c. \'bd as wide as long; style not more than 1\'bd times as long as the corolla.}{\i\fs28  Mountain meadows. \bullet  Krym.}{\fs28  Rs (K).
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 5.        Legousia}{\fs28         Durande
\par  (}{\i\fs28 Specularia}{\fs28  A. DC.)
\par }{\fs24 By \'86T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Flowers in racemes or panicles. Calyx 5-fid. Corolla 5-fid, rotate or broadly campanulate. Stamens 5; filaments not or scarcely dilated at base; anthers free. Ovary cylindrical, many times longer than wide. Style puberulent; stigmas 3. Capsule dehiscing by 3 upward-curving valves near the apex.
\par 
\par  All species are found mainly in cultivated fields and other dry, open habitats.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Flowers in a lax spike forming at least \'bd the total length of the stem
\par 2 Calyx-lobes almost as long as the ovary at anthesis;
\par   corolla 1/3 as long as calyx-lobes- plant smooth .............................. }{\b\fs28 1. falcata}{\fs28 
\par 2 Calyx-lobes 1/3-1/2 as long as the ovary at anthesis;
\par   corolla about as long as calyx-lobes; plant scabrid ...................... }{\b\fs28 2. castellana}{\fs28 
\par 1 Flowers in panicles or small, terminal corymbs
\par 3 Corolla about half as long as calyx-lobes; calyx-lobes
\par   \'b1 erect in fruit .................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 3. hybrida}{\fs28 
\par 3 Corolla at least as long as calyx-lobes; calyx-lobes 
\par   patent or recurved in fruit
\par 4 Calyx-lobes almost as long as the ovary at anthesis;
\par   capsule 10-15 mm, narrowed at apex ............................. }{\b\fs28 4. speculum-veneris}{\fs28 
\par 4 Calyx-lobes 1/3-1/2 as long as the ovary at anthesis;
\par   capsule 20-30 mm, not narrowed at apex .................................. }{\b\fs28 5. pentagonia}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. L. falcata}{\fs28  (Ten.) Fritsch, }{\i\fs28 Mitt. Naturw. Ver. Univ. Wien}{\b\fs28  5}{\fs28 : 100 (1907) (}{\i\fs28 Specularia falcata }{\fs28 (Ten.) A. DC.). More or less pubescent annual up to 50 cm. Leaves obovate, weakly undulate, the lower shortly petiolate, the upper sessile. Flowers solitary or in pairs in the leaf-axils, in a lax spike forming at least 1/2 the total length of the stem. Calyx-lobes almost as long as the ovary at anthesis, linear-lanceolate, long-acuminate, patent or recurved. Corolla c. 1/3 as long as calyx-lobes, violet. Capsule 15-20 mm, not narrowed at apex.}{\i\fs28  Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. L. castellana}{\fs28  (Lange) Samp.,}{\i\fs28  Lista Esp. Herb. Port.}{\fs28  127 (1913) (}{\i\fs28 Specularia castellana}{\fs28  Lange). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but very scabrid; calyx-lobes 1/3-1/2 as long as ovary at anthesis, linear, erecto-patent, scarcely curved; corolla about as long as the calyx-lobes. }{\i\fs28 S.W. Europe.}{\fs28  Co Ga Hs Lu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. L. hybrida}{\fs28  (L.) Delarbre,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Auvergne}{\fs28  ed. 2, 47 (1800) (}{\i\fs28 Specularia hybrida}{\fs28  (L.) A. DC.). Shortly hispid annual 10-35 cm. Leaves oblong or oblong-obovate, strongly undulate, the lower petiolate, the upper sessile. Flowers few, sessile, mostly in small terminal clusters. Calyx-lobes c. \'bd as long as the ovary at anthesis, linear-lanceolate, acute or obtuse, erect or erecto-patent. Corolla c. \'bd as long as calyx-lobes, reddish-purple to lilac. Capsule 15-30 mm, narrowed at apex. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  W. & S. Europe; casual in parts of N. & C. Europe.}{\fs28  Al Be Bl Br Co Cr Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. L. speculum-veneris}{\fs28  (L.) Chaix in Vill.,}{\i\fs28  Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 338 (1786) (}{\i\fs28 Specularia speculum-veneris}{\fs28  (L.) A. DC.). More or less pubescent annual 10-40 cm, usually much-branched. Leaves obovate or oblong, scarcely undulate, the lower sometimes petiolate, the upper sessile. Flowers numerous, subsessile, forming an often large panicle. Calyx-lobes somewhat shorter than to about as long as the ovary at anthesis, linear, acuminate, patent. Corolla c. 10 mm, at least as long as the calyx-lobes, violet. Capsule 10-15 mm, narrowed at apex. 2n = 20. }{\i\fs28 \bullet  S.W. & S.C. Europe, northwards to the Netherlands.}{\fs28  Al Au Be Bu Co Cr Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. L. pentagonia}{\fs28  (L.) Druce, }{\i\fs28 List Brit. Pl.}{\fs28  46 (1908) (}{\i\fs28 Specularia pentagonia}{\fs28  (L.) A. DC.). Like }{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28  but calyx-lobes \'bc-\'bd as long as the ovary at anthesis; corolla 15-18 mm; capsule 20-30 mm, not narrowed at apex.}{\i\fs28  Aegean region and E. part of Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28  Bu Cr Gr Tu [Ga Hs].
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 6.          Trachelium}{\fs28            L.
\par (incl. Diosphaera Buser)
\par }{\fs24 By \'86T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Flowers in corymbs, rarely solitary and axillary. Calyx 5-fid. Corolla tubular, with 5 lobes. Stamens 5; filaments glabrous; anthers free. Style long-exserted, thickened towards the apex; stigmas 2-3. Capsule dehiscing by 2-3 pores near the base. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Stems less than 5 cm; flowers 1-5 in the axils of the 
\par   upper leaves ............................................................................ }{\b\fs28 3. asperuloides}{\fs28  
\par 1 Stems more than 5 cm; flowers in corymbs
\par 2 Stems leafless for some distance below the inflorescence;
\par   leaves mostly petiolate ............................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. caeruleum}{\fs28 
\par 2 Stems leafy up to the inflorescence; leaves mostly sessile .......... }{\b\fs28 2. jacquinii}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. T. caeruleum}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl. }{\fs28 171 (1753). Almost glabrous perennial up to 100 cm, woody at base. Leaves 2-serrate, usually ciliolate, all but the uppermost petiolate. Inflorescence a rather lax corymb. Corolla blue, rarely white; tube 4-6 mm, very slender, much longer than the lobes. Capsule broadly pyriform. }{\i\fs28 Damp or shady places. W. Mediterranean region and Portugal; often cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized elsewhere.}{\fs28  Hs It Lu Si [Az Ga].
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 caeruleum}{\fs28 : Leaves ovate to broadly lanceolate, with acute, ciliolate teeth; petioles not winged. 2n = 32.}{\i\fs28  Throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 lanceolatum}{\fs28  (Guss.) Arcangeli,}{\i\fs28  Comp. Fl. Ital.}{\fs28  457 (1882): Leaves narrowly lanceolate, with obtuse, not ciliolate teeth; petioles winged. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Sicilia}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. T. jacquinii}{\fs28  (Sieber) Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Or.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 : 961 (1875) (}{\i\fs28 Diosphaera jacquinii}{\fs28  (Sieber) Buser). Glabrous or shortly hairy perennial
\par 
\par 94}
\par }