{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 with a stout stock. Leaves oblong to ovate, crenulate to serrate, the lowest shortly petiolate, the rest sessile. Inflorescence a dense terminal corymb. Corolla bluish-lilac; tube c. 5 mm, about as long as the lobes. Capsule ovoid-turbinate. {\i Rock-crevices. • S. Bulgaria, Greece and Aegean region.} Bu Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b jacquinii}: Not more than 15 cm; leaves 2·5-5 cm, coriaceous, crenulate or serrate.{\i  Kriti; N.E. Greece} ({\i Athos}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b rumelianum} (Hampe) Tutin,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 71}: 274 (1976) ({\i T. rumelianum} Hampe,{\i  Diosphaera rumeliana} (Hampe) Bornm.): 15-35 cm; leaves scarcely coriaceous, acutely serrate. 2n = 32, 34.{\i  Bulgaria, Greece, Sporadhes.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. T. asperuloides} Boiss. & Orph. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 3}): 117 (1856) ({\i Diosphaera asperuloides }(Boiss. & Orph.) Buser). Pulvinate perennial up to 3 cm, with a stout stock. Leaves up to 5 mm, entire, crowded, suborbicular to ovate-spathulate, shining, sessile. Flowers 1-5 in the axils of the upper leaves. Corolla pink; tube c. 6 mm, about twice as long as the lobes. 2n = 34.{\i  Rock-crevices. • S. Greece} ({\i Aroania Oros, Akhaia}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 7.          Petromarula}         Vent. ex Hedwig fil.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers in panicles. Calyx deeply 5-fid. Corolla infundibuliform, divided nearly to the base into 5 linear lobes. Stamens 5; filaments dilated at base; anthers free. Ovary 3-locular. Style exserted, glabrous; stigma large, capitate. Capsule dehiscing by 3 pores in the middle.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. pinnata} (L.) A. DC.,{\i  Monogr. Camp.} 209 (1830). Robust perennial. Stems glabrous below, puberulent above. Leaves up to 30 cm, glabrous, pinnate or pinnatisect, the lower long-petiolate; segments coarsely dentate or lobed. Flowers in small clusters. Corolla.10 mm, pale blue. 2n = 30.{\i  Rocks. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 8.         Asyneuma}          Griseb. & Schenk 
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Damboldt.
\par 
 
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs with simple leaves. Inflorescence simple or branched. Corolla deeply divided into narrow lobes connate only at the base, blue. Stigmas 3. Capsule cylindrical or ovoid, opening by 3 apical pores.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: J. Bornmuller, {\i Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  38}({\b 2}): 333-351 (1921). J. Damboldt, {\i Boissiera}{\b  17}: 1-128 (1970); {\i Willdenowia}{\b  5}: 35-54 (1968).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves rosulate; stem almost leafless
\par 
2 Pedicels 1-4 mm; calyx-teeth 4-5 mm .................................. {\b 1. anthericoides}
\par 
2 Pedicels absent or rarely up to 1 mm; calyx-teeth
\par 
  1·5-2(-3) mm .......................................................................... {\b 2. limonifolium}
\par 
1 Stem ± leafy throughout
\par 
3 Stem 8-15 cm, flexuous; pedicels 5-6 mm; calyx-teeth 
\par 
  4-5 mm, serrulate ................................................................... {\b 3. comosiforme}
\par 
3 Stem (30-)40-70(-100) cm, erect; pedicels 0(-1) mm;
\par 
  calyx-teeth 2-3(-4) mm, entire .................................................... {\b 4. canescens}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. anthericoides} (Janka) Bornm., {\i Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  38}({\b 2}): 339 (1921) ({\i A. grandiflorum} (Velen.) Bornm.). Stem 25-40 cm, erect, branched. Rosette-leaves 4-6 cm, linear to linear-oblanceolate, narrowed into the petiole; cauline leaves few, small. Flowers in a lax panicle, solitary or in clusters of 2-3; pedicels 1-4 mm. Calyx-teeth 4-5 mm. Corolla-lobes 10-12 mm. Capsule 6-10 mm, cylindrical.{\i  Dry, stony places; usually calcicole. • Bulgaria, extending to S.E. Jugoslavia and S.E. Romania.} ?Al Bu Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. limonifolium} (L.) Janchen, {\i Mitt. Naturw. Ver. Univ. Wien}{\b  4}: 35 (1906) ({\i A. parviflorum} Turrill,{\i  A. tenuifolium} (A. DC.) Bornm.). Stem 10-100 cm, erect, usually simple. Rosette-leaves 3-6 cm, oblong to linear-oblanceolate, undulate. Flowers usually in a rather dense, long inflorescence, solitary or in clusters of 2-4; pedicels 0(-1) mm. Calyx-teeth 1·5-2(-3) mm. Corolla-lobes 8-9 mm. Capsule (3-)5-6(-7) mm, ovoid or oblong. 2n = 24, 24+ B.{\i  Stony slopes and rocky ground; calcicole. Balkan peninsula; S.E. Italy.} Al Bu Gr It Ju Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in the shape and size of the leaves and capsule, and in the development of the inflorescence. Numerous local populations have been given specific rank, but they seem to be no more than ecotypes or edaphic variants.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. comosiforme} Hayek & Janchen,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  70}: 20 (1921). Stem 8-15 cm, flexuous. Cauline leaves 8-15 mm, ovate-rhombic, toothed, glabrous. Flowers in a few-flowered, dense inflorescence; pedicels 5-6 mm. Calyx-teeth 4-5 mm, serrulate.{\i  Rock-crevices. • N.E. Albania} ({\i near Bicaj}). Al.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Since the capsule is unknown, it is not certain that this species is correctly placed in {\i Asyneuma}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. canescens} (Waldst. & Kit.) Griseb. & Schenk,{\i  Arch. Naturgesch}. ({\i Berlin}){\b  18}({\b 1}): 335 (1852). Stem(30-)40-70(-100) cm, erect. Cauline leaves 4-6 cm, usually petiolate, crenate-serrate. Flowers in a long, paniculate inflorescence, in clusters of 2-4; pedicels 0(-1) mm. Calyx-teeth 2-3(-4) mm, entire. Corolla-lobes 7-9 mm. Capsule 5-6 mm, ellipsoid. {\i Steppes and mountain grassland. S.E. Europe, extending northwards to S.E. Czechoslovakia.} Al Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in the shape of the cauline leaves. Two subspecies can be recognized.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b canescens}: Cauline leaves elliptic-obovate, more or less petiolate, crowded in the lower part of the stem, becoming abruptly smaller in the upper part. 2n = 32, 32+B. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cordifolium} (Bornm.) Damboldt,{\i  Boissiera}{\b  17}: 57 (1970) ({\i A. cordifolium} Bornm.): Cauline leaves broadly ovate, sessile, cordate at base, evenly distributed and becoming gradually smaller upwards. •{\i  S. Makedonija} ({\i near Rozden}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Somewhat similar variants, connected by intermediates with subsp. ({\b a}) occur in S. Bosna and S. Bulgaria.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 9.            Phyteuma}              L. 
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Damboldt
\par 
 
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Stock thick, fleshy. Stem simple, leafy. Leaves undivided. Inflorescence solitary, usually densely capitate or spicate, subtended by an involucre of often conspicuous bracts. Flowers sessile or subsessile, (4-)5-merous, solitary in the axils of bracteoles. Corolla deeply lobed; lobes narrowly linear, at first coherent in the upper 1/3, later patent. Filaments greatly widened at base. Stigmas 2-3(-4). Capsule globose, dehiscing by 2-3 pores near the middle.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: R. Schulz, {\i Monographische Bearbeitung der Gattung }Phyteuma. Geisenheim a. Rh. 1904.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers 4-merous .................................................................... {\b 7. tetramerum} 
\par 
1 Flowers 5-merous
\par 
2 Stem flexuous; basal leaves orbicular, rarely reniform;
\par 
  most cauline leaves rounded or cordate at base ......................... {\b 12. cordatum}
\par 
2 Stem usually straight; basal leaves linear to obovate,
\par 
  rarely orbicular; cauline leaves all narrowed at base 
\par 
  or only the lowest cordate
\par 

\par 
95}
\par