{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min4}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min5}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1139}{\nofchars6494}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 3 Flowers in ovoid or cylindrical spikes
\par 4 Corolla nearly straight in bud; basal leaves (2-)3-many
\par   times as long as wide; bracts inconspicuous
\par 5 All or nearly all flowers with 3 stigmas; seeds 
\par   0\'b74 \'d7 0\'b72 mm ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 11. betonicifolium}{\fs28 
\par 5 All or nearly all flowers with 2 stigmas; seeds 
\par   0\'b77 \'d7 0\'b73 mm ............................................................... (}{\b\fs28 8-10}{\fs28 ). }{\b\fs28 michelii}{\fs28  group
\par 4 Corolla curved in bud; basal leaves as long to twice as
\par   long as wide; bracts conspicuous
\par 6 Middle and upper cauline leaves with greatly reduced 
\par   lamina; lower cauline leaves narrowed at base
\par 7 Basal leaves 3-5 cm, present at anthesis; cauline 
\par   leaves not crowded, \'b1 horizontal ..................................................... }{\b\fs28 5. nigrum}{\fs28 
\par 7 Basal leaves 2-2\'b75 cm, mostly absent at anthesis;
\par   cauline leaves crowded, suberect .................................................. }{\b\fs28 6. gallicum}{\fs28 
\par 6 Middle and upper cauline leaves with well-developed 
\par   lamina; lower cauline leaves cordate at base
\par 8 Corolla whitish to pale yellowish-green or blue,
\par   somewhat curved in bud; stigmas yellow, yellowish-brown
\par   or blue ........................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. spicatum}{\fs28 
\par 8 Corolla bluish to violet-black, strongly curved in bud;
\par   stigmas dark brown to violet-brown or blue
\par 9 Basal leaves mostly absent at anthesis; corolla bluish ............ }{\b\fs28 3. pyrenaicum}{\fs28 
\par 9 Basal leaves mostly present at anthesis; corolla 
\par   blackish-violet
\par 10 Basal leaves subobtuse, crenate-serrate; inflorescence
\par    often subglobose ............................................................................. }{\b\fs28 2. vagneri}{\fs28 
\par 10 Basal leaves subacute, serrate; inflorescence ovoid to
\par    cylindrical ....................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 4. ovatum}{\fs28  
\par 3  Flowers in globose capitula
\par 11 Basal and lower cauline leaves about as wide as long,
\par    deeply cordate ................................................................................ }{\b\fs28 2. vagneri}{\fs28 
\par 11 Basal and lower cauline leaves mostly longer than wide,
\par    rarely deeply cordate
\par 12 Basal leaves linear, lingulate or spathulate, cuneately
\par    narrowed at base
\par 13 Leaves widest near the apex
\par 14 Basal leaves \'b1 long-petiolate; all leaves thin ............... }{\b\fs28 19. hemisphaericum}{\fs28 
\par 14 Basal leaves shortly petiolate to sessile; all leaves rather thick
\par 15 Leaves linear to oblong-spathulate, the apex projecting
\par    well beyond the uppermost pair of teeth .................................. }{\b\fs28 24. confusum}{\fs28 
\par 15 Leaves usually obovate to oblanceolate, the apex not
\par    projecting beyond the uppermost pair of teeth, or 
\par    leaves entire ................................................................... }{\b\fs28 22. globulariifolium}{\fs28 
\par 13 Leaves widest near the middle
\par 16 Bracts linear-lanceolate to linear, acute, usually
\par    denticulate ................................................................... }{\b\fs28 20. hedraianthifolium}{\fs28 
\par 16 Bracts ovate to lanceolate, acuminate
\par 17 Bracts long-acuminate, often longer than the inflorescence, 
\par    often serrate at base ....................................................................... }{\b\fs28 21. humile}{\fs28 
\par 17 Bracts shortly acuminate, usually shorter than the
\par    inflorescence, rarely with few, obtuse teeth at base  ......}{\b\fs28 19. hemisphaericum}{\fs28 
\par 12 Basal leaves lanceolate to ovate, usually rounded to 
\par    cordate at base
\par 18 Basal leaves gradually narrowed into the petiole
\par 19 Corolla strongly curved in bud ............................................... }{\b\fs28 13. orbiculare}{\fs28 
\par 19 Corolla nearly straight in bud
\par 20 Bracts lanceolate to ovate, usually not or little 
\par    longer than the inflorescence ...................................................... }{\b\fs28 18. serratum}{\fs28 
\par 20 Bracts linear, one or more usually much longer than 
\par    the inflorescence .................................................................... }{\b\fs28 16. scheuchzeri}{\fs28 
\par 18 At least some basal leaves rounded or cordate at base
\par 21 Bracts lanceolate to linear, usually longer than the 
\par    inflorescence
\par 22 Corolla nearly straight in bud; stigmas 3 ............................ }{\b\fs28 16. scheuchzeri}{\fs28 
\par 22 Corolla distinctly curved in bud; stigmas 2 ............................ }{\b\fs28 17. charmelii}{\fs28 
\par 21 Bracts ovate to lanceolate with a wide base, usually
\par    not longer than the inflorescence
\par 23 Bracts ovate-lanceolate, \'b1 acuminate; cauline leaves
\par    lanceolate ................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 13. orbiculare}{\fs28 
\par 23 Bracts broadly ovate to suborbicular, often cordate at base; 
\par    cauline leaves ovate-lanceolate to ovate or obovate
\par 24 Stems 2-8 cm; inflorescence with 4-6 flowers; cauline
\par    leaves obovate ............................................................................. }{\b\fs28 23. rupicola}{\fs28 
\par 24 Stems (2-)5-50 cm; inflorescence with 5-many flowers;
\par    cauline leaves ovate-lanceolate to ovate
\par 25 Bracts ovate; upper cauline leaves sessile ................................... }{\b\fs28 15. sieberi}{\fs28 
\par 25 Bracts broadly ovate; upper cauline leaves \'b1 petiolate  }{\b\fs28 14. pseudorbiculare}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. P. spicatum}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl. }{\fs28 171 (1753). Stem 30-80(-100) cm, erect, glabrous. Basal and lower cauline leaves usually ovate, deeply cordate, obtuse, 1- to 2-crenate to serrate, long-petiolate; basal leaves present at anthesis. Inflorescence dense, at first ovoid to more or less globose, later up to 6(-20) cm, cylindrical. Bracts linear, usually not longer than the width of the inflorescence, more or less conspicuous. Corolla somewhat curved in bud. Stigmas 2.}{\i\fs28  Meadows and woods. \bullet  From S. Norway and Estonia southwards to N. Spain and Crna Gora.}{\fs28  Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) [Fe Su].
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 spicatum}{\fs28 : Flowers whitish to pale yellowish-green. Style and stigmas yellow to yellowish-brown. 2n = 22+04B. Throughout the range of the species.
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 coeruleum}{\fs28  R. Schulz,}{\i\fs28  Monogr. Phyteuma}{\fs28  69 (1904): Flowers bluish; stigmas yellowish-brown to blue. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  S.C. Europe and N. part of Balkan peninsula}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. P. vagneri}{\fs28  A. Kerner,}{\i\fs28  Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 : 107 (1884). Like }{\b\fs28 1 }{\fs28 but inflorescence shortly ovoid to almost globose, not elongating; bracts linear-lanceolate, as long as or longer than the width of the inflorescence; corolla blackish-violet; stigmas 2-3.}{\i\fs28  Alpine pastures. \bullet  E. & S. Carpathians}{\fs28 . Rm Rs (W).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. P. pyrenaicum}{\fs28  R. Schulz, }{\i\fs28 Monogr. Phyteuma }{\fs28 79 (1904). Like }{\b\fs28 1 }{\fs28 but basal leaves mostly absent at anthesis; lower cauline leaves longer than wide, less toothed; inflorescence ovoid-cylindrical; corolla bluish, very strongly curved in bud; stigmas often 3. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Pyrenees and mountains of N.& C.Spain.}{\fs28  Ga Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. P. ovatum}{\fs28  Honckeny, }{\i\fs28 Vollst. Syst. Verz. }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 653 (1782) (}{\i\fs28 P. halleri}{\fs28  All.). Like }{\b\fs28 1 }{\fs28 but bracts ovate, usually longer than the width of the inflorescence; corolla blackish-violet (rarely nearly white), strongly curved in bud. 2n = 22, ?26.}{\i\fs28  Mountain meadows. \bullet  S. & S.C. Europe, from the Pyrenees to N.W. Jugoslavia.}{\fs28  Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. P. nigrum}{\fs28  F. W. Schmidt,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Bo\'ebm. }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 : 87 (1794). Stem 20-60 cm, erect, glabrous, usually more or less leafless in upper third. Basal leaves 3-5 cm, present at anthesis, usually twice as long as wide, obtuse, cordate, crenate, very rarely serrate; middle and upper cauline leaves with greatly reduced lamina, narrowed at base, not crowded, more or less patent. Inflorescence at first ovoid, later cylindrical. Bracts linear, acute, about as long as the width of the spike, more or less conspicuous. Corolla blackish-violet, rarely blue or white, curved in bud. Stigmas 3, rarely 2. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Mountain meadows and woods. \bullet  From Belgium to E. Austria.}{\fs28  Au Be Cz Ga Ge.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. P. gallicum}{\fs28  R. Schulz,}{\i\fs28  Monogr. Phyteuma}{\fs28  88 (1904). Like }{\b\fs28 5 }{\fs28 but basal leaves 2-2\'b75 cm, mostly absent at anthesis; middle and upper cauline crowded, suberect; corolla sky blue, nearly straight in bud; stigmas 2.}{\i\fs28  Mountain pastures. \bullet  S.C. France.}{\fs28  Ga.
\par 
\par 96}
\par }