{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. tetramerum} Schur,{\i  Sert. Fl. Transs.} 47 (1853). Stem 40 80 cm, erect. Basal leaves up to twice as long as wide, ovate, cordate, long-petiolate; cauline ovate to lanceolate, crenate-serrate. Inflorescence ovoid-cylindrical. Flowers 4-merous. Corolla blue. Stigmas 2.{\i  Meadows and open woods. • E.& S. Carpathians.} Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 8-10}). {\b P. michelii} group. Stem erect, more or less uniformly leafy up to the inflorescence. Basal leaves entire to crenate-serrate, petiolate. Inflorescence cylindrical. Bracts inconspicuous. Corolla nearly straight in bud. Stigmas 2, rarely 3. Seeds 0·7 × 0·3 mm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Basal leaves usually present at anthesis, rounded to
\par 
  shallowly cordate at base; corolla deep blue ....................... {\b 10. zahlbruckneri}
\par 
1 Basal leaves usually absent at anthesis, cuneate at 
\par 
  base; corolla bluish-lilac
\par 
2 Leaves usually ciliate at base; inflorescence dense,
\par 
  usually shortly cylindrical, obtuse .................................................. {\b 8. michelii}
\par 
2 Leaves usually entirely glabrous; inflorescence often
\par 
  lax, cylindrical, acute ....................................................... {\b 9. scorzonerifolium}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. P. michelii} All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem. }{\b 1}: 115 (1785). Stem 25-40(-50) cm. Basal leaves more than twice as long as wide, linear-lanceolate to linear, usually absent at anthesis, shortly petiolate, usually crispate-ciliate near the base; cauline leaves similar. Inflorescence shortly cylindrical, dense, obtuse. Corolla clear bluish-lilac.{\i  Meadows, rarely screes; calcifuge. S. Alps, eastwards to} 9°{\i  E.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 
  Records for Switzerland appear to be erroneous.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. P. scorzonerifolium} Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  2}: 519 (1787). Stem 30-90 cm. Basal leaves usually absent at anthesis, narrowly lanceolate to elliptical, usually narrowed gradually to the petiole; lower cauline leaves up to 15 × 1·5 cm, narrowly lanceolate to linear, few. Inflorescence usually cylindrical and lax, acute. Corolla pale bluish-lilac, rarely white.{\i  Meadows and wood margins. • S.W. & S.C. Alps, N. & C. Appennini.} Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. P. zahlbruckneri} Vest,{\i  Steyerm. Zeitschr.}{\b  3}: 159 (1821) ({\i P. betonicifolium} subsp.{\i  zahlbruckneri }(Vest) Hayek). Stem 25-90 cm. Basal leaves mostly present at anthesis, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, rounded to shallowly cordate at base, long-petiolate; cauline leaves similar, but cuneate at base. Inflorescence cylindrical, rarely ovoid, eventually elongating and lax. Corolla deep blue. 2n = 24.{\i  Meadows and wood margins; calcifuge. • E. Alps and N.W. Jugoslavia.} Au Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. P. betonicifolium} Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  2}: 518 (1787) (incl. {\i P. scaposum} R. Schulz). Stem 20-70 cm, erect, usually nearly leafless in the upper third. Basal leaves ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, usually cordate, 1- to 2-crenate or crenate-serrate, long-petiolate, sometimes rosulate; cauline leaves similar but narrower. Spike cylindrical. Bracts setaceous, rarely lanceolate, inconspicuous. Corolla deep blue, nearly straight in bud. Stigmas 3, sometimes 4, rarely single flowers with 2. Seeds 0·4 × 0·2 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  Meadows and woods. • Alps and mountains of N. Italy.} Au Ga Ge He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. P. cordatum} Balbis, {\i Mém. Acad. Sci.} ({\i Turin}) {\b 16}: 208 (1809) ({\i P. balbisii} A. DC.). Stem 15-25 cm, flexuous. Basal leaves orbicular to reniform, long-petiolate; cauline leaves 4-7, rhombic to cordate-ovate, sharply and remotely serrate. Inflorescence more or less globose to oblong. Bracts very small. Corolla bluish-white. Stigmas 3. 2n = 24.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • Maritime Alps.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. P. orbiculare} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 170 (1753). Stem (5-)10-50 cm, erect, rarely ascending, sparsely leafy. Basal leaves linear-lanceolate to elliptical, rounded to cordate, or narrowed into the petiole, crenate-serrate, petiolate; lower cauline leaves similar, the upper subsessile, serrate to entire. Inflorescence 1-2·5 cm across, more or less globose, with 15-30 flowers. Bracts more or less acuminate, ovate-lanceolate, entire or serrate, shorter to longer than the capitulum. Corolla blue to blue-violet, rarely white, strongly curved in bud. stigmas 2-3. 2n = 22+0-2B.{\i  Dry grassland and rocky ground; somewhat calcicole. • From S. England and Latvia southwards to S. Spain and Albania.} Al Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in size, shape and development of leaves and shape, indumentum and length of bracts. Numerous variants have been described by R. Schulz, but these are connected by many intermediates and lack a clear geographical basis.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Among the more distinct variants are{\b  P. hispanicum} R. Schulz, {\i Monogr. Phyteuma }127 (1904), from S. Spain, with broadly elliptical to suborbicular basal leaves and bracts with regular, straight cilia, and {\b P. tenerum} R. Schulz,{\i  op. cit.} 122 (1904), from W.C. and S.W. Europe, with densely leafy stems, finely and sharply serrate leaves and small, triangular bracts. The taxonomic value of these variants requires further investigation.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. P. pseudorbiculare} Pant., {\i Verh. Ver. Nat. Heilk. Presburg} nov. ser.,{\b  2}: 53 (1874). Like {\b 13} but basal leaves more or less suborbicular, shortly petiolate; cauline broadly elliptical to suborbicular, diminishing in size less rapidly upwards, the upper more or less petiolate; bracts broadly ovate, often cordate at base, not abruptly acuminate, serrate.{\i  Pastures and rocks. • W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. P. sieberi} Sprengel, {\i Pugillus}{\b  1}: 15 (1813). Like {\b 13} but upper cauline leaves sessile, ovate-lanceolate to ovate; bracts ovate, acuminate, acutely serrate; stigmas 3. 2n = 20.{\i  Rocky and stony slopes; calcicole. • S.E. Alps.} Au It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. P. scheuchzeri} All.,{\i  Auct. Syn. Stirp. Horti Taur.} 11 (1773). Stem 12-45 cm, erect or decumbent, glabrous. Basal leaves usually present at anthesis, linear- to ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, deeply cordate to cuneate, long-petiolate, serrate to crenate; cauline leaves petiolate to sessile, linear-lanceolate to linear, remotely serrate to entire; all leaves thick, usually bluish-green. Inflorescence shortly ovoid to globose. Bracts more or less narrowly linear, one or several of the outer usually much longer than the inflorescence. Corolla deep blue, nearly straight in bud. Stigmas 3. 2n = 26.{\i  Rocky slopes. • S. Alps, N. Appennini.} Ga He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b scheuchzeri}: Basal leaves linear-lanceolate, truncate to cuneate at base. Outer bracts often much longer than the inflorescence.{\i  From} c. 6° 45' {\i to} 11°{\i  E.; usually calcifuge}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b columnae} (Gaudin) Becherer, {\i Viert. Naturf Ges. Zürich}{\b  68}: 471 (1923) (subsp. {\i charmelioides} (Biroli) Hayek): Basal leaves ovate-lanceolate, cordate at base. Outer bracts usually not longer than the inflorescence. {\i Throughout the range of the species except the extreme west; usually calcicole}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. P. charmelii} Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  2}: 516 (1787). Like {\b 16} but all leaves thin, bright green; basal leaves usually absent at anthesis; cauline leaves entire to remotely serrate, with long, acute, incurved teeth; corolla curved in bud; stigmas 2. 2n = 26. •{\i  Mountain rocks. Mountains of S.W. Europe, extending eastwards to S.C. Alps; one station in S. Appennini.} Ga Hs It.
\par 

\par 
97}
\par