{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b P. villarsii} R. Schulz, {\i Monogr. Phyteuma} 143 (1904), from rock-crevices in the mountains of S.E. France and N.W. Italy, has slender, decumbent stems and more numerous, grey-green leaves, with deeper, unequal teeth. The middle cauline leaves are truncate or shortly cuneate at base. It has 2n = 26.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. P. serratum} Viv.,{\i  Fl. Cors., App. }{\b 1}: 1 (1825). Stem 2-20 cm, erect. Basal leaves lanceolate or elliptical to more or less linear, weakly serrate to entire, usually petiolate; cauline leaves linear-lanceolate, widest in the middle, finely serrate to subentire, narrowed into a petiole or sessile. Inflorescence depressed globose. Bracts ovate to lanceolate, usually not or little longer than the inflorescence, the outer deflexed. Corolla nearly straight in bud. Stigmas 3. 2n = 28.{\i  Mountain rocks. • Corse. }Co.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. P. hemisphaericum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 170 (1753). Stem (1-)515(-30) cm, erect or ascending, with 0-3 leaves. Basal leaves 1-2 mm wide, linear to lanceolate, rarely widened towards the apex (var.{\i  platyphyllum} R. Schulz, from the Pyrenees), usually entire, very rarely remotely and shallowly serrate; cauline leaves narrowly linear to linear-lanceolate. Inflorescence 1-2 cm in diameter, globose. Bracts ovate, acuminate, shorter than to somewhat longer than the inflorescence, entire, rarely more or less dentate at base, glabrous or ciliate. Corolla dark blue, curved in bud. Stigmas 3. 2n = 28.{\i  Stony mountain pastures and screes; calcifuge. • S. & S.C. Europe, eastwards to E. Austria}. Au Ga Ge He Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Polymorphic. Plants from the Pyrenees with wide upper cauline leaves have been described as{\b  P. serratoides} Chouard,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  99}: 28 (1952) and others with long stems and longer bracts as{\b  P. gaussenii} Chouard, {\i op. cit.} 26 (1952). The taxonomic value of such variants requires further investigation.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. P. hedraianthifolium} R. Schulz,{\i  Monogr. Phyteuma }150 (1904). Stem 2-18 cm, ascending to erect, glabrous, leafy. Basal leaves almost linear, somewhat widened in the middle or towards the apex, usually remotely and shallowly serrate. Inflorescence globose. Bracts linear-lanceolate to narrowly linear, acute, the outer 20-40 × 1·5-3 mm, usually twice as long as the inflorescence, similar to the upper cauline leaves, denticulate, deflexed in fruit. Corolla dark blue-violet, nearly straight in bud. 2n = 28. {\i Rocks and stony pastures. E.C. & E. Alps, eastwards to} c. 12° {\i E.} He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. P. humile} Schleicher ex Gaudin in Murith,{\i  Guide Bot. Valais} 84 (1810). Stem 1-13 cm, erect, glabrous. Basal leaves 10-60 × 2-4 mm, numerous, linear but slightly widened towards the apex, more or less entire; cauline leaves narrowly linear, widened towards the apex, often with a few acute teeth near the base; all leaves glabrous, shiny when dry, the upper reaching or exceeding the inflorescence. Inflorescence 1·5-3 cm in diameter, globose. Outer bracts ovate, often serrate, long-acuminate, as long as or longer than the inflorescence, usually shortly and densely hairy at the margins. Corolla dark blue-violet, strongly curved in bud. Stigmas 3. 2n = 28.{\i  Rocks and stony pastures; calcifuge. • S.W. & W.C. Alps, from} 6° 45' {\i to} 8° {\i E}. ?Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. P. globulariifolium} Sternb. & Hoppe, {\i Denkschr. Bayer. Bot. Ges. Regensb.}{\b  1}({\b 2}): 100 (1818) ({\i P. pauciflorum} auct., non L.). Stock much-branched. Stem 1-12 cm, erect, glabrous, with few or no leaves. Basal leaves numerous, rosulate, obovate to oblanceolate or rarely linear-elliptical, narrowed into the petiole, widest near the apex; cauline leaves similar; all leaves glabrous or ciliate, obscurely crenate-serrate, with the apex not projecting beyond the uppermost pair of teeth, or entire. Inflorescence 2-to 7-(-12)flowered, globose. Outer bracts orbicular to ovate or all, or the inner only, lanceolate, acuminate to obtuse, sometimes crenate at the apex, ciliate, shorter or longer than the inflorescence. Corolla deep blue-violet, curved in bud. Stigmas 3.{\i  Rocks and screes; calcifuge. • Alps and Pyrenees.} Au Ga He Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Polymorphic. The following treatment is only provisional as further study, particularly of subsp.{\i  pedemontanum,} is needed.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b globulariifolium}: stem 1-5 cm; leaves obtuse, often crenate towards the apex. Outer bracts suborbicular, often wider than long, obtuse. 2n = 28.{\i  E. Alps, westwards to} c. 10° 30'{\i  E}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pedemontanum} (R. Schulz) Becherer,{\i  Denkschr. Schweiz. Naturf  Ges.}{\b  81}: 417 (1956) ({\i P. pedemontanum} R. Schulz): stem 5-12 cm; leaves acute, often 3-dentate at apex, longer than in subsp. ({\b a}). Outer bracts more or less lanceolate shortly acuminate. 2n = 28.{\i  Pyrenees and Alps, eastwards to} c. 11° {\b E}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Connected with subsp. ({\b a}) by numerous intermediates in the eastern part of its range. In the S. part of the S.W. Alps variants with longer stems and leaves seem to approach {\i P. hemisphaericum} var. {\i platyphyllum}. They may represent a vicariant taxon of{\b  24}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. P. rupicola} Br.-Bl.,{\i  Commun. Stat. Int. Géobot. Médit. Alp.}{\b  87}: 231 (1945). Like {\b 22}({\b a}) but basal leaves orbicular, abruptly contracted into the petiole; cauline leaves 3-4, obovate; inflorescence 4- to 6-flowered. {\i Granite rocks. • E. Pyrenees}. Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. P. confusum} A. Kerner,{\i  Zeitschr. Ferdinand.} ({\i Innsbruck}) ser. 3, {\b 15}: 247 (1870). Like {\b 22}({\b a}) but stem 1-15 cm; leaves linear to oblong-spathulate, usually more or less abruptly narrowed to the usually regularly serrulate or crenulate, obtuse base and apex, the apex projecting well beyond the uppermost pair of teeth; bracts orbicular to ovate, entire or sometimes with few small teeth in the distal part; corolla dark blue-violet, rarely white. 2n = 28+0-1B.{\i  Rocks and stony pastures; calcifuge. • Mountains of E.C. & S.E. Europe southwards to C. Bulgaria.} Al Au Bu Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 10.          Physoplexis}         (Endl.) Schur
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Damboldt.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Phyteuma} but the flowers distinctly pedicellate; corolla-lobes connate in the upper third and at the base throughout anthesis; filaments linear.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. comosa} (L.) Schur,{\i  Sert. Fl. Transs.} 47 (1853) ({\i Phyteuma comosum} L.). Usually glabrous. Stem 5-15 cm, flexuous. Basal leaves reniform to oblong-elliptical, incise-dentate, long-petiolate; cauline leaves obovate-oblong to elliptical, remotely, irregularly and acutely toothed. Umbel hemispherical, with 8-20 flowers; pedicels 2-5 mm. Corolla 10-20 mm, ventricose and pale pinkish-lilac below, the connate lobes forming a blackish-violet beak. Stigmas 2. 2n = 34.{\i  Rock-crevices; calcicole. • S Alps.} Au It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 11.           Wahlenbergia}           Schrader ex Roth
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers solitary or in lax panicles. Calyx 3- to 5-fid. Corolla 3-to 5-lobed, campanulate or infundibuliform. Stamens 3-5; filaments somewhat dilated at base; anthers free. Ovary (2-)3- to 5-locular. Style included, hairy, especially above; stigmas (2-)3-5, short. Capsule dehiscing by (2-)3-5 apical valves.
\par 

\par 
98}
\par