{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min5}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min6}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1040}{\nofchars5928}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 Slender, procumbent perennial; flowers solitary, axillary ............ }{\b\fs28 1. hederacea}{\fs28 
\par Erect annual; flowers in a lax panicle .......................................... }{\b\fs28 2. nutabunda}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. W. hederacea}{\fs28  (L.) Reichenb.,}{\i\fs28  Pl. Crit.}{\b\fs28  5}{\fs28 : 47 (1827). Slender, glabrous, procumbent perennial. Stems up to 30 cm. Leaves petiolate; lamina 5-15 mm, orbicular-reniform in outline, angled or shallowly lobed. Flowers solitary, axillary; pedicels up to 10 cm, filiform, much exceeding the subtending leaf. Calyx 2-3 mm; lobes subulate, erect. Corolla 6-10 mm, campanulate, pale blue; lobes equalling or shorter than tube, acute. Capsule c. 3 mm, erect.}{\i\fs28  Damp places; calcifuge. W. Europe, northwards to}{\fs28  c. 56\'b0 }{\i\fs28 N. in Scotland.}{\fs28  Be Br Ga Ge Hb \'86Ho Hs Lu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. W. nutabunda}{\fs28  (Guss.) A. DC., }{\i\fs28 Monogr. Camp.}{\fs28  151 (1830). Erect, glabrous annual. Stems up to 50 cm, freely branched. Leaves narrowed at base into a winged petiole; lamina 20-50 mm, oblanceolate to oblong, entire or dentate. Flowers in a large, cymose panicle; pedicels 1-5 cm, subtended by small, linear bracts. Calyx c. 2 mm; lobes narrowly triangular, obtuse, erect. Corolla 2-3 mm, infundibuliform, pale blue, pink or white; lobes longer than tube, obtuse or subacute. Capsule 5-9 mm, erect.}{\i\fs28  Dry places. W. Mediterranean region; very local}{\fs28 . ?Co Hs It Sa Si
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 12.          Edraianthus}{\fs28            A. DC.
\par  (}{\i\fs28 Hedraianthus}{\fs28  auct.)
\par }{\fs24 By B. Kuzmanov.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Like}{\i\fs28  Campanula}{\fs28  but capsule splitting irregularly at the apex; flowers in terminal clusters or solitary, closely subtended by leaf-like bracts.
\par 
\par   All species are found in calcareous, rocky habitats, mainly in the mountains.
\par 
\par   Literature: G. Beck,}{\i\fs28  Wiener Illustr. Gartenzeit.}{\b\fs28  18}{\fs28 : 287-299 (1893). E. Janchen, }{\i\fs28 Mitt. Naturw. Ver. Univ. Wien}{\b\fs28  8}{\fs28 : 1-39 (1910). E. Mayer & V. Blecic,}{\i\fs28  Phyton}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Austria}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 13}{\fs28 : 241-247 (1969). R. Wettstein,}{\i\fs28  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Wien}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 53}{\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 185-212 (1887).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Leaves not ciliate, irregularly crenate; basal oblong-
\par   lanceolate to spathulate, petiolate; cauline narrowly 
\par   lanceolate, sessile ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. parnassicus}{\fs28 
\par 1 Leaves ciliate, not crenate, basal and cauline similar
\par 2 Leaves spathulate .................................................................. }{\b\fs28 6. serpyllifolius}{\fs28 
\par 2 Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate
\par 3 Leaves flat, glabrous or rarely sparsely to densely 
\par   hirsute above ........................................................ (}{\b\fs28 2-5}{\fs28 ).}{\b\fs28  graminifolius}{\fs28  group
\par 3 Leaves with \'b1 involute margins, \'b1 densely appressed
\par   greyish-hirsute above .................................................... (}{\b\fs28 7-9}{\fs28 ). }{\b\fs28 pumilio }{\fs28 group
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. E. parnassicus}{\fs28  (Boiss. & Spruner) Hal\'e1csy,}{\i\fs28  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Wien}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 61}{\fs28 : 247 (1894). Caespitose, shortly pubescent perennial. Rhizome stout, woody, branched. Stems (1\'b75-)10-13(-20) cm, ascending to erect, simple or rarely branched above. Basal leaves 10-40(-60) \'d7 5-10 mm, oblong-lanceolate to obovate-spathulate, petiolate, the cauline smaller, ovate-lanceolate to narrowly lanceolate, sessile, rounded at the base; all irregularly crenate. Flowers (1-)3-4(-5), shortly pedunculate, in terminal globose clusters. Bracts ovate, cuspidate-acuminate, shorter than to as long as the flowers. Ovary densely and shortly pubescent, rarely glabrous; calyx-teeth narrowly lanceolate, twice as long as the ovary. Corolla 10-15(-20) mm, glabrous or rarely sparsely hirsute on the veins, violet. 2n = 32.}{\i\fs28  \bullet  Mountains of S., C. & N.W. Greece.}{\fs28  Gr.
\par 
\par    (}{\b\fs28 2-5}{\fs28 ). }{\b\fs28 E. graminifolius}{\fs28  group. Caespitose perennials. Rhizome stout, woody, branched. Leaves ciliate, more or less flat, glabrous, sparsely and softly hairy, or rarely shortly hirsute above, glabrous or rarely sparsely hairy beneath. Flowers 3-6(-12), rarely solitary.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Calyx-teeth linear to triangular-lanceolate, longer than ovary
\par 2 Calyx-teeth triangular-lanceolate; bracts acuminate to
\par   attenuate, usually shorter than the flowers; leaves 
\par   mostly ciliate only at base ..................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. graminifolius}{\fs28 
\par 2 Calyx-teeth linear; bracts abruptly long-attenuate, equalling
\par    or longer than the flowers; leaves ciliate up to the apex .......... }{\b\fs28 3. tenuifolius}{\fs28 
\par 1 Calyx-teeth broadly triangular, shorter than ovary
\par 3 Bracts long-attenuate, the outer up to twice as long as
\par   the flowers ................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 4. dalmaticus}{\fs28 
\par 3 Bracts shortly acuminate, the outer shorter than to as
\par   long as the flowers ......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 5. serbicus}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 2. E. graminifolius}{\fs28  (L.) A. DC. in DC.,}{\i\fs28  Prodr.}{\b\fs28  7}{\fs28 : 448 (1839). Stems (2-)5-10(-25) cm, ascending to erect, more or less hairy, simple. Basal leaves (1-)3-10(-20) \'d7 0\'b75-4 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, subacute to obtuse, flat, entire, ciliate only at the base; cauline few, smaller, but like the basal. Bracts ovate-acuminate to attenuate, shorter than to as long as the flowers. Flowers (1-)3-6(-8), subsessile, in terminal clusters. Ovary glabrous, rarely sparsely hairy on the veins, or shortly hairy all over; calyx-teeth triangular-lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, about as long to twice as long as the ovary, very rarely with short appendages in the sinus. Corolla 12-20(-35) mm, glabrous or rarely sparsely hirsute on the veins. 2n = 32. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Balkan peninsula, extending to Slovenija and W.C. Romania; S. & C. Italy, Sicilia.}{\fs28  Al Gr It Ju Rm Si.
\par 
\par  Extremely variable in habit, indumentum, shape and length of bracts, colour and length of corolla, and number of flowers. Numerous infraspecific taxa have been described, mostly dwarf variants from the alpine regions. Their ecological and geographical range is not well known and a satisfactory subspecific delimitation is not possible. The following two subspecies can, however, be recognized.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 graminifolius}{\fs28 : stems 10-20 cm; corolla bluish-violet. }{\i\fs28 Throughout the range of the species.}{\fs28 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 niveus}{\fs28  (G. Beck) Janchen, }{\i\fs28 Mitt. Naturw. Ver. Univ. Wien}{\b\fs28  8}{\fs28 : 27 (1910): stems 3-10(-15) cm; corolla white. }{\i\fs28 Mountains of W.C. Jugoslavia}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 S. Bosna}{\fs28 ).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. E. tenuifolius}{\fs28  (Waldst. & Kit.) A. DC. in DC.,}{\i\fs28  Prodr.}{\b\fs28  7}{\fs28 : 449 (1839). Like }{\b\fs28 2 }{\fs28 but leaves 0\'b74-1\'b75 mm wide, narrowly linear, usually ciliate up to the apex; bracts broadly ovate, abruptly long-attenuate, as long as or longer than the flowers; ovary hirsute; calyx-teeth linear; flowers up to 15; corolla c. 20 mm. 2n = 32. \bullet }{\i\fs28  W. half of Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28  Al Gr Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. E. dalmaticus}{\fs28  (A. DC.) A. DC., }{\i\fs28 loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1839). Stems 3-7 cm, ascending to erect, glabrous, simple. Basal leaves (10-)30-50(-100) \'d7 20-30(-40) mm, linear-lanceolate, acute, sessile, subamplexicaul, usually long-ciliate at the base, glabrous; cauline few, like the basal but smaller. Bracts broadly ovate, linear-attenuate, the outer up to twice as long as the flowers, ciliate, glabrous. Flowers (3-)4-6(-10), subsessile. Ovary glabrous, very rarely sparsely hairy; calyx-teeth broadly triangular, ciliate, much shorter than the ovary, not appendiculate. Corolla 15-20 mm, blue-violet, glabrous. \bullet }{\i\fs28  W. Jugoslavia.}{\fs28  Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. E. serbicus}{\fs28  Petrovic, }{\i\fs28 Fl. Agri Nyss.}{\fs28  549 (1882). Like }{\b\fs28 4 }{\fs28 but the stems 12-18 cm, pubescent; leaves 50-90 mm; outer bracts
\par 
\par 99}
\par }