{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs36\qc {\b      HELOBIAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 170.             ALISMATACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aquatic or marsh herbs, usually perennial. Leaves alternate or basal, sheathing at the base. Flowers hermaphrodite or unisexual, usually bracteate and verticillate in pedunculate umbels, racemes or panicles, occasionally long-pedunculate in leaf-axils. Sepals 3. Petals 3, usually larger than the sepals, often fugacious or deciduous. Stamens 3-numerous, with elongated filaments; anthers opening by longitudinal slits. Carpels 3-numerous, spirally arranged or whorled, free or connate at the base; ovules 1-many; styles apical or subventral. Fruit a group of achenes, drupelets or follicles; seeds without endosperm; embryo horseshoe-shaped.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  All European species of this family grow in marshes or in shallow water at the edges of lakes, ponds, canals or slow rivers. Most of them, when growing in water, can produce linear, phyllodal submerged leaves which may or may not persist; these leaves are not mentioned in the keys and descriptions unless they are characteristic of mature flowering plants. When growing in relatively dry habitats the plants are usually dwarfed and may be misleadingly different from plants growing in wetter conditions.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers unisexual; stamens 7- numerous ................................... {\b 1. Sagittaria}
\par
1 Flowers hermaphrodite; stamens 6
\par
2 Carpels connate at the base in a single whorl, 2- to 
\par
  many-ovulate, follicular and stellately radiating in 
\par
  fruit, ± long-beaked ............................................................... {\b 6. Damasonium}
\par
2 Carpels free, 1-ovulate, achenial or drupaceous in 
\par
  fruit, short-beaked
\par
3 Carpels numerous, spirally arranged in a globose head;
\par
  flowers in simple inflorescences of 1-3 whorls, or 
\par
  long-pedunculate in leaf-axils ...................................................... {\b 2. Baldellia}
\par
3 Carpels few or numerous in a single, sometimes irregular
\par
  whorl
\par
4 Stems elongated, rising in the water and bearing floating
\par
  leaves or creeping and rooting at the nodes; flowers
\par
  pedunculate in leaf-axils; carpels 6-15 in an irregular 
\par
  whorl, with apical styles; fruitlets many-ribbed .......................... {\b 3. Luronium}
\par
4 Stems short, the leaves all basal; flowers in panicles,
\par
  racemes or umbels; carpels in a regular whorl, with 
\par
  subventral styles; fruitlets 3- to 5-ribbed or unribbed
\par
5 Carpels 5-10; fruitlets drupaceous, swollen, with woody
\par
  endocarp and spongy exocarp; leaves deeply cordate to 
\par
  subcordate ..................................................................................... {\b 5. Caldesia}
\par
5 Carpels 11-28; fruitlets achenial, laterally compressed;
\par
  leaves not deeply cordate ................................................................ {\b 4. Alisma}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   {\b 1.              Sagittaria}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stock often stoloniferous and tuberiferous. Leaves aerial, floating or submerged. Flowers unisexual or polygamous, in umbels, racemes or panicles with female or hermaphrodite flowers at the base and male flowers above, or occasionally with the flowers all male or all female. Stamens usually numerous. Carpels numerous, spirally arranged, free, each with 1 ovule; styles apical or subventral. Fruitlets achenial, laterally compressed, obliquely obovate, the margins winged, with an apical or ventral beak.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Several species from North America are cultivated for ornament, and two of these have recently become established in Europe. {\b S. subulata} (L.) Buchenau,{\i  Abh. Naturw. Ver. Bremen}{\b  2}: 490 (1871), naturalized in a single locality in S. England, has glabrous dilated filaments, and leaves which are linear and submerged or may terminate in an elliptical to ovate-oblong floating blade. {\b S. platyphylla} (Engelm.) G.E. Sm., {\i Ann. Rep. Missouri Bot. Gard.}{\b  6}: 55 (1895), naturalized in a single locality in N. Italy (Varese prov.), has pubescent, dilated filaments, lanceolate aerial leaves and the pedicels deflexed in fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: K. Rataj,{\i  Annot. Zool. Bot.} ({\i Bratislava}) {\b 76}: 1-31 (1972); {\b 78}: 1-61 (1972).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Filaments of male flowers dilated, pubescent; bracts all ± connate . {\b 4. rigida} 
\par
1 Filaments of male flowers linear, not dilated, glabrous;
\par
  at least the lower bracts free
\par
2 Leaves mostly floating, linear to oblong or ovate-oblong,
\par
  cuneate to rounded at the base or cordate with 2 short 
\par
  obtuse lobes; anthers yellow ............................................................. {\b 2. natans}
\par
2 Leaves mostly aerial and sagittate with 2 long acute basal lobes
\par
3 Fruitlets with a short, erect, apical beak; petals white,
\par
  usually with a purple patch at the base; anthers usually
\par
  purple ......................................................................................... {\b 1. sagittifolia}
\par
3 Fruitlets with a ± elongated, horizontal, ventral beak;
\par
  petals white, without a purple patch; anthers yellow ..................... {\b 3. latifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 1. S. sagittifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 993 (1753). Monoecious. Aerial leaves broadly to narrowly sagittate with 2 long acute basal lobes; floating leaves (if present) lanceolate to ovate. Flowers in racemes or panicles; at least the lower bracts free. Petals 10-15 mm, white, usually with a purple patch at the base. Filaments of stamens linear, glabrous; anthers usually purple, Fruitlets 4-6 mm, with a short, erect, apical beak. 2n = 22. {\i Most of Europe, but rare in the extreme north and extreme south.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Sa Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. trifolia} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 993 (1753), widespread in Asia, has recently been reported from S.E. Russia (where it is believed to be native in the Volga delta) and S. Ukraine (where it is naturalized). It is like {\b 1} but with the basal lobes of the aerial leaves longer in proportion to the rest of the lamina, and with entirely white petals and yellow anthers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  2. S. natans} Pallas, {\i Reise }{\b 3}: 757(1776). Monoecious. Floating (or sometimes aerial) leaves linear to oblong or ovate-oblong, cuneate to rounded at the base or cordate with 2 short obtuse lobes. Flowers in racemes of 2-3 whorls or sometimes umbellate; at least the lower bracts free. Petals 8-10 mm, white. Filaments of stamens linear, glabrous; anthers yellow. Fruitlets 2-3 mm, with a short subventral beak. 2n = 22.{\i  N.E. Europe, extending southwards to} 55°{\i  N. in S. Ural.} Fe Rs (N, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. latifolia} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  4}: 409 (1805) ({\i S. obtusa} Muhl. ex Willd.). Monoecious or dioecious. Aerial leaves broadly to narrowly sagittate with 2 long, acute basal lobes, or some of them ovate to linear without basal lobes. Flowers in racemes or panicles; at least the lower bracts free. Petals 10-20 mm, white.
\par

\par
1}
\par