{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 48 Perianth-segments obtuse ............................................................ {\b 47. anceps} 
\par 48 Perianth-segments acute to cuspidate
\par 49 Penanth-segments acute, equal or subequal .......................... {\b 49. articulatus}
\par 49 Perianth-segments acuminate to cuspidate, the inner
\par   considerably longer than the outer
\par 50 Leaves 5- to 7-angled, collapsing when dried, with obvious 
\par   longitudinal striae; basal sheaths usually absent ........................... {\b 40. atratus}
\par 50 Leaves circular to elliptical in section, remaining terete 
\par   when dried, without or with small and irregular striae;
\par   basal sheaths 2-3 ..................................................................... {\b 42. acutiflorus}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Juncus.} Perennials. Leaves at base of stems, terete, non-septate, pungent, stem-like, with pith of rounded cells and vascular bundles distributed over most of the cross-section; stomata depressed. Auricles absent. Lowest two bracts leaf-like, pungent. Inflorescence usually apparently terminal. Involucral bracteoles absent. Seeds with appendages.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Hybrids occur between {\b 3}, {\b 4} and {\b 5}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. J. maritimus} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  3}: 264 (1789). Plant with a creeping rhizome, sometimes laxly caespitose; intravaginal shoots absent. Stems 50-100 cm, usually 1·5-2 mm in diameter, with 2-4 leaves. Inflorescence many-flowered, usually lax; first bract long, forming an apparent prolongation of the stem, the second usually short. Perianth-segments unequal; outer ovate, more or less boat-shaped, acute, shortly mucronate; inner shorter, narrowly elliptical, obtuse, without auricles. Stamens c. 2/3 as long as perianth; anthers about twice as long as filaments. Capsule 2·5-3·5 mm, trigonous-ovoid, obtuse or subacute, mucronate, equalling or slightly exceeding the perianth. Seeds 0·8-1·2 mm. 2n = 48.{\i  Salt-marshes and saline meadows. Coasts of Europe, northwards to Scotland and S.E. Sweden; locally inland in E.C. Europe and the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Da Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. J. rigidus} Desf., {\i Fl. Atl.}{\b  1}: 312 (1798) ({\i J. arabicus} (Ascherson & Buchenau) Adamson, {\i J. nevskii} V. Krecz. & Gontsch.). Like {\b 1} but stems 75-150 cm, usually 2-5 mm in diameter; anthers 3-4 times as long as filaments; capsule 3·5-5 mm, narrowly trigonous-ovoid, narrowly pyramidal at apex, exceeding the perianth.{\i  Salt-marshes and maritime sands. Italy, Sardegna, Sicilia.} It Sa si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. J. acutus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 325 (1753). Plant densely caespitose; intravaginal shoots present. Stems (15-)50-150 cm, usually 2-4 mm in diameter, rigid, with 2-5 leaves. Inflorescence many-flowered, usually dense, globose, rarely lax and elongated; lowest two bracts well-developed and strongly pungent, usually short. Perianth-segments equal or subequal, oblong, with a wide, scarious margin; outer obtuse or acute; inner wide, with scarious apical auricles. Stamens equalling or slightly shorter than perianth; anthers 1·5-2 mm, several times as long as filaments. Capsule 4-6 mm, much exceeding the perianth, obovoid to ovoid, with a broadly conical to obtuse apex, shortly mucronate. Seeds 80-120, 1·5-2·5 mm; appendages equal. 2n = 48.{\i  Maritime sands; rarely on damp or saline soils inland. Mediterranean region and W. Europe, northwards to Ireland.} Al Az Bl Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hb Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b acutus}: Inflorescence usually dense. Capsule usually 5-6 mm, ovoid, conical at apex, variable in colour. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b leopoldii} (Parl.) Snogerup, {\i Bot. Not. }{\b 131}: 187 (1978) ({\i J. leopoldii} Parl.): Inflorescence more or less lax. Capsule 4-5 mm, usually obovoid, obtuse. dark or reddish-brown.{\i  Açores, Portugal}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. J. littoralis} C. A. Meyer, {\i Verz. Pfl. Cauc.} 34 (1831) ({\i J. tommasinii} Parl., {\i J. tyraicus} (Pacz.) V. Krecz. & Gontsch.). Plant densely caespitose; intravaginal shoots present. Stems 50-100 cm, 2-4 mm in diameter, rigid. Inflorescence many-flowered, dense or with several branches. Basal bracts short or rather long; upper bracts rarely with a small pungent lamina. Flowers dark brown. Perianth-segments 2·5-3 mm, oblong with a wide scarious margin; outer obtuse, mucronate, usually thickened and more or less conspicuously keeled at base; inner usually longer, with wide, scarious apical auricles, usually shortly mucronate. Stamens slightly shorter than perianth; anthers 1·2-1·9 mm, several times as long as filaments. Capsule 2·5-4 mm, globose to trigonous-ovoid, obtuse at apex, mucronate, dark brown; seeds 25-40, 1·5-2 mm; appendages subequal. 2n = 48.{\i  Maritime sands and shores of saline lakes. Mediterranean region and S.E. Europe.} Al Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rm Rs (W, K) Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 5. J. heldreichianus} Marsson ex Parl., {\i Fl. Ital. }{\b 2}: 315 (1857). Like {\b 4} but stems usually 1·5-2·5 mm in diameter; inflorescence lax; lowest bract usually shorter than the inflorescence, the second short, the upper mostly with a small pungent lamina; flowers light brown; perianth-segments equal or subequal; anthers 1·5-2·2 mm; capsule 3-4(-4·5) mm, ovoid, conical to slightly angular at apex, often shortly mucronate, usually light brown; seeds 40-75, 1-1·5 mm; appendages unequal. 2n = 48.{\i  Salt-marshes, maritime sands and damp places inland. Greece and Aegean region.} Cr Gr Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Genuini} Buchenau. Perennials with a strong rhizome producing flowering stems and short shoots bearing one large leaf. Leaves and bracts not pungent. Leaves of adult plants terete, non-septate, stem-like, with pith of stellate cells and with vascular bundles in the subepidermal layer only. Lowest bract usually large, forming an apparent prolongation of the stem. Flowers with involucral bracteoles. Seeds usually without appendages.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. J. jacquinii} L.,{\i  Mantissa }63 (1767). Plant caespitose. Stems 10-40 cm, with 4-5 basal sheaths having a very small lamina and one stem-like cauline leaf near the inflorescence; non-flowering shoots rarely with two leaves. Leaves more or less canaliculate at base. Inflorescence dense, with 5-15 flowers; flowers dark reddish-brown. Perianth-segments 5-6 mm, equal or subequal, lanceolate to narrowly ovate, apiculate. Anthers 21/2-3 times as long as filaments. Capsule trigonous-ovoid to prismatic, obtuse or slightly emarginate, mucronate, equalling perianth. Seeds 2-2·5 mm, fusiform, with two equal, white appendages. 2n = c. 170. {\i Streamsides, damp grassland and screes, }1500-3300 {\i m; calcifuge. Alps, N. Appennini.}• Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. J. filiformis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 326 (1753). Rhizome with short internodes, horizontal. Stems 10-60 cm, the uppermost basal sheath with a short lamina. Non-flowering shoots usually few or absent. Lowest bract (1/3-)1-11/2 times as long as stem; second bract sometimes leaf-like, though short. Inflorescence with 4-10 flowers, dense. Perianth-segments 2·5-3·5 mm, unequal, ovate to narrowly ovate or the inner oblong; outer aristate; inner obtuse. Anthers c. 0·5 mm, 1/3-1/2 as long as filaments. Capsule (2·5-)3-3·5(-4·5) mm, trigonous-ovoid to globose, usually shortly mucronate, light brown, about equalling perianth. Seeds 0·5 mm, obliquely ovoid, faintly reticulate, with one incon-
\par
\par 104}
\par