{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 times floating; submerged leaves sessile, parallel-sided, linear, entire; stipules open or closed. Spikes many- or few-flowered, sometimes interrupted. Carpels 1-4, free. Fruitlets short-beaked; embryo unciform or spiral.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. P. epihydrus} Rafin., {\i Med. Reposit.} ({\i New York}) Hexade 2, {\b 5}: 354 (1808). Rhizome creeping; stems compressed. Upper leaves up to 7 × 2·5 cm, floating, oblong to elliptical, cuneate at the base, opaque. Submerged leaves up to 8 mm wide, ribbon-like, rounded to subacute, 5- to 7-veined, the midrib with a broad border of lacunae extending sideways towards the inner lateral veins or sometimes beyond them. Stipules open. Carpels 4. Fruitlets 2·5-3·5 mm; embryo subspiral.{\i  N.W. Scotland, N.W. England.} Br. ({\i North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. P. friesii} Rupr.,{\i  Beitr. Pfl. Russ. Reich. }{\b 4}: 43 (1845) ({\i P. mucronatus} Schrader ex Sonder). Rhizome absent; stems strongly compressed; winter-buds terminating short, lateral branches, compressed and strongly ribbed at the base. Leaves all submerged, up to 3·5 mm wide (usually more than 2 mm), mucronate, (3-)5(-7)-veined, usually with conspicuous nodal glands. Stipules closed, tubular towards the base at least when young, usually becoming 2-fid. Carpels 4. Fruitlets 2-2·5 mm. 2n = 26.{\i  Europe, southwards to Corse and Bulgaria.} Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho It Ju No Po ?Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. P. rutilus} Wolfg. in Schultes & Schultes fil., {\i Mantissa}{\b  3}: 362 (1827). Rhizome absent; winter-buds terminating lateral branches, strongly ribbed at the base, with fibrous sheaths. Leaves all submerged, up to 1·5 mm wide but usually less than 1 mm, rigid, gradually narrowed at the apex to a fine, almost bristle-like point (involucral leaves occasionally slightly dilated at the apex), 3(-5)-veined, the lateral veins conspicuous; nodal glands small, inconspicuous. Stipules closed, tubular towards the base at least when young, firm, strongly veined, fibrous-persistent. Carpels 4. Fruitlets 1·5-2 mm.{\i  N., C. & E. Europe, from N. Scotland and N.W. France eastwards to C. Ukraine and S.C. Russia; very local.} Br Da Fe Ga Ge Po ?Rm Rs (N, B, C, W)
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. P. pusillus} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }127 (1753) ({\i P. panormitanus} Biv.). Rhizome absent; winter-buds axillary, usually slender-fusiform, not strongly ribbed. Leaves all submerged, up to 3 mm wide but usually less than 2 mm, mucronate (involucral leaves sometimes slightly dilated at the apex), 3(-5)-veined, the lateral veins inconspicuous; nodal glands usually absent or only feebly developed. Stipules closed, tubular towards the base at least when young, not fibrous-persistent. Carpels 4. Fruitlets 2 mm. 2n = 26.{\i  Usually in base-rich, sometimes brackish water. Most of Europe}. All except Al Co Cr Fa Rs (N, K) Sa Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. P. obtusifolius} Mert. & Koch in Röhling,{\i  Deutschl. Fl.} ed. 3,{\b  1}: 855 (1823). Rhizome absent; winter-buds terminating lateral branches, leafy. Leaves all submerged, up to 4 mm wide (usually more than 2 mm), rounded to mucronate, 3(-5)-veined, the lateral veins faint, the midrib with or without a narrow border of lacunae; nodal glands large, conspicuous. Stipules open, convolute, membranous. Carpels 4. Fruitlets 3-4 mm with a sharp dorsal keel. 2n = 26.{\i  Europe, southwards to S.W. France, C. Jugoslavia and S. Ukraine.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge ?Gr Hb He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. P. berchtoldii} Fieber in Berchtold & Opiz,{\i  Ökon.-Techn. Fl. Böhm.}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 277 (1838) ({\i P. pusillus} auct., non L.). Rhizome absent; winter-buds terminating long or short lateral branches. Leaves all submerged, up to 2·5 mm wide but usually less than 2 mm, mucronate (involucral leaves occasionally slightly dilated at the apex), 3(-5)-veined, the lateral veins conspicuous, the midrib with a narrow or sometimes wide border of lacunae at least towards the base; nodal glands usually conspicuous. Stipules open, convolute, membranous or somewhat herbaceous. Carpels 4. Fruitlets 2-2·5 mm. 2n = 26.{\i  Most of Europe, but absent from much of the south-west}. All except Az Bl Cr Hs Lu Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. P. trichoides} Cham. & Schlecht., {\i Linnaea}{\b  2}: 175 (1827). Rhizome absent; stems very slender, subterete; winter-buds terminating lateral branches. Leaves all submerged, up to 1·5 mm wide but usually less than 1 mm, gradually acute, 3-veined, the lateral veins very faint, the midrib prominent and usually much thickened especially towards the base; nodal glands small. Stipules open, convolute, herbaceous, shining-green. Carpels 1-3. Fruitlets 3 mm, the dorsal keel usually muriculate. 2n = 26.{\i  Most of Europe, northwards to Scotland, S. Sweden and C. Russia.} Au Be Br Bu Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju *Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. P. compressus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 127 (1753) ({\i P. zosterifolius} Schumacher). Rhizome absent; stems strongly compressed. Leaves all submerged, 2-4 mm wide, mucronate, appearing many-veined (5 vascular veins interspersed with very numerous, fine, vein-like sclerenchymatous strands), the midrib closely bordered by lacunae especially towards the base. Stipules open. Spikes many-flowered, cylindrical, usually shorter than the peduncle. Carpels usually 2. Fruitlets 3-4·5 mm. 2n = 26.{\i  N., C. & E. Europe, southwards to S.C. France and S. Ukraine; isolated records from Crna Gora and N. W. Greece.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho ?Hs Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. P. acutifolius} Link in Roemer & Schultes, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  3}: 513 (1818). Rhizome absent; stems strongly compressed. Leaves all submerged, 2-4 mm wide, finely acute to mucronate, appearing many-veined (3 vascular veins interspersed with numerous fine, vein-like sclerenchymatous strands), the midrib more or less widely bordered by lacunae especially towards the base. Stipules open. Spikes usually few-flowered, subcapitate, with only 2-4 groups of flowers, equalling or shorter than the peduncle. Carpel usually 1. Fruitlets 3-4 mm, with a small ventral tooth towards the base. 2n = 26.{\i  Mainly in calcareous water. From England, S. Sweden and N.W. Russia southwards to C. Italy and C. Greece.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. BATRACHOSERIS Irmisch. Rhizome creeping; winter-buds cauline; stems compressed, 2-canaliculate. Leaves submerged, sessile, linear to linear-oblong, serrulate; stipules open, often very shortly adnate to the leaf-base. Spikes shortly cylindrical, becoming interrupted. Carpels 4, shortly connate at the base. Fruitlets long-beaked; embryo unciform.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. P. crispus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 126 (1753). Leaves 3-15 mm wide, obtuse to acute, 3- to 5-veined, usually undulate or crispate when mature; young leaves flat, sometimes obscurely serrulate. Stipules small, membranous, evanescent. Fruitlets 4-5 mm, the beak equalling or longer than the body of the carpel. 2n = 52.{\i  Europe, northwards to} c. 61° 30'{\i  N. in Finland.} All except Az Cr Fa Is Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Coleogeton} Reichenb. Rhizome creeping. Leaves submerged, sessile, narrowly linear, entire; sheaths adnate to the leaf-base. Flowers pollinated below the water-surface. Carpels 4, free. Fruitlets short-beaked; embryo unciform.
\par

\par
10}
\par