{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 oblong or obovate; limb concave or broadly campanulate. Style filiform, curved, exserted, its branches short, simple. Capsule and seeds small.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Not stoloniferous; anthers purple ....................................................... {\b 1. crocata}
\par
Stoloniferous; anthers yellow ..............................................{\b  2}. × {\b crocosmiflora}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. crocata} (L.) Ker-Gawler,{\i  Bot. Mag.}{\b  16}: sub t. 581 (1802). Scape 15-35 cm, slender, simple or with 1-2 short branches. Leaves 4-7, up to 20 cm, distichous, linear-lanceolate, acute, shorter than scape. Spike up to 10-flowered, secund. Hypanthial tube up to 5 mm, infundibuliform; limb bright orange, often with yellow streaks at throat, forming an open cup 2·5 × 1·2 cm. Stamens curved, c. ½ as long as the obovate perianth-segments; anthers purple.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and naturalized in S.E. France} ({\i Var}). [Ga.] ({\i Cape of Good Hope.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T}. × {\b crocosmiflora} (Lemoine) Nicholson,{\i  Ill. Dict. Gard.}{\b  4}: 94 (1887) ({\i Crocosmia crocosmiflora} (Lemoine) N.E. Br.). Stoloniferous; corms often several in a row. Leaves 4-8, (7-)10-30(-40) cm × 5-20 mm, ensiform. Scape 30-90 cm, slender, simple or with 1-2(-4) branches. Spike 10- to 20-flowered, secund, distichous. Flowers orange-yellow; hypanthial tube infundibuliform, slightly bent at apex; perianth-segments oblong, the dorsal segment slightly larger than rest. Stamens and style extending nearly to apex of perianth; anthers yellow. {\i Woods, river-banks and seacliffs. Widely naturalized in W. Europe}. [Az Br Ga Hb Lu.]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Originated in cultivation from a cross between {\i T. aurea} Pappe ex Hooker and {\i T. pottsii }(Baker) Baker ({\i Montbretia pottsii} Baker), both from South Africa. It is capable of producing some fertile seed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Records of{\i  T. cinnabarina }Pax from the Açores refer to this hybrid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 10.        Gladiolus}      L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.P. Hamilton. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stock a corm; tunic usually with coarse fibres. Leaf-sheaths 2-4, basal. Leaves 1-16, the basal usually ensiform, the cauline usually reduced, bract-like. Flowers zygomorphic, in a simple or branched, usually secund spike. Bract and bracteoles usually large, green, persistent. Perianth-segments 6, in 2 whorls, ovate to lanceolate, often attenuated below to form a claw. Hypanthial tube usually curved, infundibuliform. Stamens usually curved towards the upper side of the perianth. Style terete, filiform; stigmatic branches 3, obovate to obcordate, with a fimbriate to papillose margin. Capsule oblong-globose to cylindrical. Seeds usually broadly winged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A large genus, centred in South Africa, with a secondary centre in the Mediterranean region. The close similarity of most of the European species, especially in the reddish-purple colour of the perianth, together with the occurrence of inter-specific hybridization, has led to some taxonomic confusion.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Several species from South Africa and their hybrids are frequently grown in gardens and sometimes escape where the climate is suitable. Among the commonest are {\b G. cardinalis} Curtis,{\i  Bot. Mag.}{\b  4}: t. 135 (1790), {\b G. tristis}, L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 53 (1762),{\b  G. liliaceus} Houtt.,{\i  Natuurl. Hist.} ({\i Handleid.}) {\b 12}: 55 (1780) ({\i G. grandis} (Thunb.) Thunb.), {\b G. carneus} Delaroche, {\i Descr. Pl. Nov.} 30 (1766) ({\i G. blandus} Aiton), and those of their hybrids collectively named {\b G}. × {\b colvillii} Sweet,{\i  Brit. Fl. Gard}. ser. 1, t. 155 (1826). All are diploid, with 2n = 30.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Anthers longer than filaments (or aborted); seeds not winged ....... {\b 5. italicus}
\par
1 Anthers equalling or shorter than filaments; seeds  winged
\par
2 Spike dense; hypanthial tube strongly curved; lowest 
\par
  leaf obtuse .................................................................................. {\b 4. imbricatus}
\par
2 Spike lax; hypanthial tube slightly curved; lowest leaf
\par
  narrowing gradually to an acute apex
\par
3 Spike ± distichous, with 3-20 flowers; axillary branches 
\par
  often present .................................................................. ({\b 1-2}). {\b illyricus} group
\par
3 Spike strongly secund, with not more than 6 flowers;
\par
  axillary branches absent ................................................................ {\b 3. palustris}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 1-2}). {\b G. illyricus} group. Plant 25-100 cm. Basal sheaths pale green, sometimes red-veined. Leaves 4-5, 10-70 cm × 4-22 mm. Spike 3- to 20-flowered, usually lax, weakly distichous, with 1-3 axillary branches. Perianth reddish-purple to pink. Perianth-segments 25-45 × 6-25 mm, obovate, rhombic or oblanceolate, the lower often blotched or lined with white and dark red. Anthers shorter than filaments in flowers with obovate segments, but equalling filaments in flowers with rhombic or oblanceolate segments. Capsule obovoid in flowers with obovate segments, but ellipsoid in flowers with oblanceolate segments.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A group of 2 closely related species and 2 subspecies which differ mainly in size and chromosome number.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant 25-50 cm; leaves 10-40 cm × 4-10 mm, spike 3- to 10-flowered, 
\par
  rarely branched; perianth-segments 25-40 × 6-16 mm .................. {\b 1. illyricus} 
\par
1 Plant 50-100 cm; leaves 30-70 cm × 5-22 mm; spike 10-to 20- 
\par
  flowered, frequently branched; perianth-segments 30-45 × 10-25 mm
\par
  ..................................................................................................... {\b 2. communis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. illyricus} Koch, {\i Syn. Fl. Germ.} 699 (1837). Plant 25-50 cm. Basal sheaths green, sometimes tinged with red, usually along the veins. Leaves 10-40 cm × 4-10 mm. Spike 3- to 10-flowered, occasionally with 1 axillary branch in larger specimens. Perianth red to reddish-purple; segments 25-40 × 6-16 mm. 2n = 60, 90. {\i Heaths, scrub and open woodland. S. & W. Europe, northwards to S. England}. Al Bl Br Bu ?Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   This species shows considerable variation in characters of flower and leaf. Some variants appear to be stable and confined to definite geographical areas. Thus {\b G. reuteri} Boiss. in Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus }112 (1852), from Spain (Aranjuez), has narrow, glaucous leaves; {\b G. glaucus} Heldr. ex Halácsy,{\i  Consp. Fl. Graec.}{\b  3}: 186 (1904), from S. Greece, is very dwarf and has the perianth-segments mucronulate; while the plants from Britain have uniformly obovate perianth-segments and a chromosome number of 2n = 90, unlike the 2n = 60 of continental populations.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. G. communis} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 36 (1753). Plant 50-100 cm. Basal sheaths green- or red-veined. Leaves 30-70 cm × 5-22 mm; spike 10- to 20-flowered, often with 1-3 axillary branches. Flowers sometimes connivent. Perianth pink, red or purplish-red; segments 30-40 × 10-25 mm; upper lateral segments frequently blotched or with white and dark red central lines.{\i  S. Europe.} Al Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju ?Rs (K) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b communis}: Plant 50-80 cm. Basal sheaths usually green- or pink-veined. Leaves 30-50 cm × 5-15 mm. Spike often with 2 or 3 axillary branches. Perianth frequently pink; segments 30-40 × 10-20 mm. 2n = 120.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b byzantinus} (Miller) A.P. Hamilton,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 358 (1978) ({\i G. byzantinus} Miller): Plant 50-100 cm. Basal sheaths frequently with dark red veins. Leaves 30-70 cm × 8-22 mm. Spike often with 1-2 axillary branches. Perianth red to purplish-red; segments 30-45 × 15-25 mm. 2n = 90, 120.{\i  Mainly in} Chamaerops-{\i garrigue. S. Spain; Sicilia. }({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par
101}
\par