{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3 Leaves solitary on specialized shoots and as bracts 
\par
  below the inflorescence (Subgen.{\i  Genuini})
\par
4 Lowest bract clearly lateral .......................................................... {\b 6. jacquinii}
\par
4 Lowest bract forming an apparent continuation of the stem
\par
5 Subepidermal sclerenchyma-bundles absent; stems smooth 
\par
  even when dry; with a creeping rhizome
\par
6 Anthers 0·5-0·7 mm, not longer than filaments ............................. {\b 8. arcticus}
\par
6 Anthers 0·8-2 mm, longer than filaments
\par
7 Anthers 0·8-1·5 mm; seeds 0·85-1·05 mm ..................................... {\b 9. balticus}
\par
7 Anthers 1·5-2 mm; seeds 0·65-0·75 mm .................................. {\b 10. pyrenaeus}
\par
5 Subepidermal sclerenchyma-bundles present; stems striate 
\par
  at least when dry; caespitose or with a creeping rhizome
\par
8 Rhizome creeping; bract at least 1/3 as long as stem ................. {\b 7. filiformis}
\par
8 Caespitose; bract less than ¼ as long as stem
\par
9 Stem almost smooth, with 40-70 weak striae ............................... {\b 12. effusus}
\par
9 Stem with 10-30 ridges below inflorescence
\par
10 Capsule acute to obtuse; pith interrupted .................................. {\b 11. inflexus}
\par
10 Capsule emarginate to obtuse; pith continuous .............. {\b 13. conglomeratus}
\par
2  Bracts and leaves flat or subterete, canaliculate or
\par
   with enlarged cells on the adaxial side
\par
11 Annual, without a rhizome; basal leaves without 
\par
   auricles (Subgen.{\i  Poiophylli})
\par
12 Capsule ovoid to prismatic or ellipsoid .................... ({\b 24-29}). {\b bufonius} group
\par
12 Capsule globose or subglobose
\par
13 Inner perianth-segments obtuse; inflorescence occupying
\par
   less than ½ the height of the plant .............................................. {\b 22. tenageia}
\par
13 Inner perianth-segments acute; inflorescence occupying
\par
   at least ½ the height of the plant ....................................... {\b 23. sphaerocarpus}
\par
11 Perennial, usually with a conspicuous rhizome; all 
\par
   leaves with auricles
\par
14 Seeds with long appendages
\par
15 Inflorescence 1- to 3-flowered; auricles lacerate ....................... {\b 15. trifidus}
\par
15 Inflorescence 5- to 15-flowered; auricles entire ........................ {\b 6. jacquinii}
\par
14 Seeds without or with very small appendages
\par
16 Leaves numerous, in a basal rosette ..................................... {\b 16. squarrosus}
\par
16 Leaves 1-4(-6) on each stem, cauline or sub-basal
\par
17 Perianth-segments obtuse
\par
18 Anthers not more than twice as long as filaments;
\par
   capsule usually exceeding perianth ....................................... {\b 17. compressus}
\par
18 Anthers 2-6 times as long as filaments; capsule about
\par
   equalling perianth ......................................................................... {\b 18. gerardi}
\par
17 Perianth-segments apiculate to aristate
\par
19 Capsule 5-6 mm; anthers (0·8-)1·2-1·4 mm, usually about
\par
   as long as filaments ................................................................. {\b 21. imbricatus}
\par
19 Capsule less than 5 mm; anthers 0·7-0·8 mm, 1/2-2/3 as
\par
   long as filaments 
\par
20 Auricles long, thin, whitish .......................................................... {\b 19. tenuis} 
\par
20 Auricles short, cartilaginous, yellowish ..................................... {\b 20. dudleyi}
\par
1  Flowers without involucral bracteoles, in ± distinct heads
\par
21 Small annual, without a rhizome
\par
22 Leaves flat to canaliculate, not septate; auricles absent  {\b 31. capitatus}
\par
22 Leaves terete, septate; auricles present
\par
23 Perianth-segments subequal; anthers not more than ½ 
\par
   as long as filaments ................................................................. {\b 35. pygmaeus}
\par
23 Inner perianth-segments exceeding the outer; anthers 
\par
   3-5 times as long as filaments .................................................. {\b 36. tingitanus}
\par
21 Perennial, rhizomatous or with bulb-like swellings, or aquatic
\par
24 Leaves flat or with involute margins, not septate, 
\par
   with a compact pith (Subgen.{\b  Graminifolii}) ....................... {\b 30. planifolius}
\par
24 Leaves terete, or flat and pluritubulose with septa at apex
\par
25 Leaves terete, not septate, pungent, with a compact 
\par
   pith and several centrally placed vascular bundles (Subgen. {\i Juncus})
\par
26 Inner perianth-segments without apical auricles
\par
27 Anthers about twice as long as filaments; capsule 
\par
   about equalling perianth ............................................................. {\b 1. maritimus}
\par
27 Anthers 2½-5 times as long as filaments; capsule
\par
   exceeding perianth .......................................................................... {\b 2. rigidus}
\par
26 Inner perianth-segments with wide, apical aurides
\par
28 Capsule 4-6 mm, with 80-120 seeds, conical or trigonous
\par
   at apex .............................................................................................. {\b 3. acutus}
\par
28 Capsule 2·5-4 mm, with 25-75 seeds, conical or obtuse at apex
\par
29 Capsule obtuse at apex; flowers dark brown .............................. {\b 4. littoralis}
\par
29 Capsule conical at apex; flowers light brown ................... {\b 5. heldreichianus}
\par
25 Leaves septate (rarely inconspicuously so), usually not 
\par
   pungent, uni- or pluri-tubulose, the tubes empty or 
\par
   with lax aerenchyma; vascular bundles only in marginal-
\par
   layer and walls
\par
30 Leaf transversely septate only in upper part, often
\par
   inconspicuously so; filaments 3-8 times as long as 
\par
   anthers (Subgen. {\i Alpini})
\par
31 Capsule distinctly emarginate .................................................. {\b 50. biglumis}
\par
31 Capsule obtuse to acute
\par
32 All bracts short, wide, not resembling leaves; leaves
\par
   bitubulose in middle and upper part .......................................... {\b 51. triglumis}
\par
32 Lowest bract of inflorescence leaf-like; leaves 
\par
   pluritubulose throughout
\par
33 Anthers 1-1·5 mm; capsule dark ............................................. {\b 53. castaneus}
\par
33 Anthers 0·4-0·7 mm; capsule pale brown ................................... {\b 52. stygius}
\par
30 Leaf transversely septate throughout, usually conspicuously
\par
   so; filaments 1/6-3 times as long as anthers
\par
34 Leaf ensiform; stem flat, winged (Subgen.{\i  Ensifolii}) ........ {\b 32. ensifolius}
\par
34 Leaf and stems terete (Subgen. {\i Septati})
\par
35 Leaf pluritubulose
\par
36 Plant 40-130 cm, with a rhizome ..................................... {\b 34. subnodulosus}
\par
36 Plant 1-30 cm, without a rhizome ............................................ {\b 39. bulbosus}
\par
35 Leaf unitubulose
\par
37 Anthers 1·8-2·5 mm; plant aquatic or semiterrestrial,
\par
   without a rhizome
\par
38 Perianth-segments obtuse; anthers 2-4 times as long
\par
   as filaments ........................................................................ {\b 37. heterophyllus}
\par
38 Perianth-segments acuminate-cuspidate; anthers 4-6 
\par
   times as long as filaments ..................................................... {\b 38. emmanuelis}
\par
37 Anthers 0·4-1·5 mm; plant usually rhizomatous,
\par
   normally not aquatic
\par
39 Seeds with long appendages ................................................. {\b 33. canadensis}
\par
39 Seeds without appendages 
\par
40 Capsule broadly obtuse and shortly mucronate 
\par
41 Perianth-segments sharply acute to acuminate ........................ {\b 41. thomasii} 
\par
41 At least the inner perianth-segments obtuse
\par
42 Rhizome slender, with long internodes; plant 2-10 cm
\par
   high, mat-forming ..................................................................... {\b 48. requienii}
\par
42 Rhizome stout, with short internodes, sometimes absent
\par
43 Outer perianth-segments acute; plant caespitose or
\par
   without a rhizome .................................................................... {\b 49. articulatus}
\par
43 Outer perianth-segments obtuse; plant with a creeping rhizome
\par
44 Anthers 1/2-2/3 as long as filaments; capsule obtuse ................. {\b 46. alpinus}
\par
44 Anthers 1-1½ times as long as filaments; capsule usually acute  {\b 47. anceps}
\par
40 Capsule acute, or abruptly contracted at apex and with
\par
   a long mucro 
\par
45 Rhizome absent or very weakly developed ........................... {\b 45. fontanesii} 
\par
45 Rhizome well-developed
\par
46 Anthers 2-3 times as long as filaments; leaves longi-
\par
   tudinally sulcate ........................................................................... {\b 44. striatus}
\par
46 Anthers ½-2 times as long as filaments; leaves smooth or
\par
    finely striate
\par
47 Perianth-segments 6-8 times as long as wide; inflorescence
\par
   of 1-4 globose, many-flowered heads ........................................ {\b 43. valvatus}
\par
47 Perianth-segments 2-3(-4) times as long as wide;
\par
   inflorescence of (1-)10-250 usually few-flowered heads
\par

\par
103}
\par