{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 unilocular, thin-walled, straw-coloured. Seeds 0·4-0·45 mm, turbinate to ellipsoid, reticulate. Flowers usually cleistogamous. 2n = 40. {\i Wet, sandy ground. W. Europe, northwards to Denmark, and extending eastwards to S.E. Italy and N.W. Jugoslavia.} ?Be Br Co Da Ga Ge Ho Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. J. tingitanus} Maire & Weiller in Maire,{\i  Fl. Afr. Nord}{\b  4}: 284 (1957) ({\i J. fasciculatus} Schousboe, non Schrank). Annual, with one or a few stems. Stems 8-12 cm, erect. Leaves up to 0·5 mm thick, unitubulose, perfectly septate. Inflorescence usually of 2 heads each with 4-12 flowers. Inner perianth-segments 7-9 mm, much longer than the outer, very narrowly ovate, subulate. Stamens 6, c. ½ as long as perianth; anthers 2-2·5 mm, 3-5 times as long as the filaments. Capsule exceeding the perianth, narrowly pyramidal, with a long beak. Seeds c. 0·4 mm, pyriform, reticulate. {\i S. Spain} ({\i W. of Málaga}). Hs. ({\i N. Morocco.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. J. heterophyllus} Dufour, {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.}{\b  5}: 88 (1825). Aquatic perennial, without a rhizome. Stems branched at base, with several leaves, rooting at the nodes. Emergent leaves up to 6 mm wide, unitubulose, perfectly septate; submerged leaves narrower, filiform; some leaves with 5-7 more or less conspicuous ridges, adaxially flattened at base; auricles large, obtuse. Inflorescence of 5-20 heads each with 2-6 flowers. Perianth-segments 6-8 mm, equal or the inner slightly longer than the outer, ovate, obtuse, with a white margin. Stamens shorter than perianth; anthers 1·8-2·5 mm, 2-4 times as long as the filaments. Style and stigma usually very long. Capsule exceeding perianth, trigonous-ovoid, with a long beak. Seeds c. 0·5 mm, turbinate, reticulate.{\i  In shallow water. S.W. Europe. }Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. J. emmanuelis} A. Fernandes & García,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2, {\b 21}: 6 (1947). Semiterrestrial perennial, without a rhizome. Stems erect, branched and creeping at base, with several leaves. Leaves 2-4(-5) mm wide, unitubulose, perfectly septate; auricles small, obtuse. Inflorescence of (1-)3-8 heads, each with (3-)10-30(-50) flowers. Perianth-segments 4·5-6 mm, equal or the outer slightly exceeding the inner, very narrowly ovate to narrowly lanceolate, acuminate or the outer cuspidate, often recurved apically, with a narrow scarious margin. Stamens 6, shorter than the perianth; anthers 1·8-2·5 mm, 4-6 times as long as filaments. Style and stigmas exserted. Capsule shorter than perianth, elongate ovoid-pyramidal, with a long beak. Seeds c. 0·6 mm, ovoid, reticulate.{\i  Damp, sandy places. • C. & S. Portugal, S.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. J. bulbosus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 327 (1753) ({\i J. supinus} Moench,{\i  J. kochii} F. W. Schultz). Caespitose perennial; rhizome absent; new shoots produced from the basal internodes of the stem. Stems 1-30 cm, sometimes up to 100 cm when floating or submerged, with a basal bulb-like swelling. Leaves mostly more or less basal, terete and slightly flattened to furrowed dorsally, pluritubulose, imperfectly or partly perfectly septate. Inflorescence of 3-20 heads each with 2-15 flowers; flowers often partly replaced by adventitious shoots. Perianth-segments 2-3 mm, equal or the inner slightly longer than the outer, ovate to lanceolate or the inner oblong, obtuse or outer acute, with a wide scarious margin. Stamens 3-6, 1/2-2/3 as long as perianth; anthers 0·3-1 mm, 1/3 as long to as long as the filaments. Capsule 2·2-3·5 mm, equalling or exceeding perianth, trigonous, obtuse to truncate at apex, unilocular. Seeds 0·5-0·6 mm, turbinate, reticulate. 2n = 40.{\i  Wet places, often submerged; somewhat calcifuge. Most of Europe except the south-east.} Au Az Be Br Co Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po ?Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. J. atratus} Krocker,{\i  Fl. Siles.}{\b  1}: 562 (1787). Perennial with a creeping, sparingly branched rhizome. Stems 40-120 cm, with 3-5 cauline leaves; basal sheaths absent. Leaves 7- to 11-angled, the adaxial side the widest, unitubulose, perfectly septate. Inflorescence of 15-50(-200) heads each with 5-10 dark brown flowers. Perianth-segments 2·5-3·5 mm, equal or the inner longer than the outer, narrowly ovate, acuminate. Stamens shorter than perianth; anthers 0·8-1·3 mm, about as long as the filaments. Capsule exceeding the perianth, trigonous-ovoid, abruptly contracted into a long, usually oblique beak. Seeds 0·5-0·7 mm. 2n = 40.{\i  C. & E. Europe, northwards to Latvia.} Au Bu Cz Ge Gr Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. J. thomasii} Ten.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Neap.}{\b  1827}: 3 (1827) ({\i J. alpigenus} auct., non C. Koch). Perennial, with a creeping, sparingly branched rhizome. Stems 25-100 cm, with 0-2 basal sheaths and 2-4 cauline leaves. Leaves 10-30 cm, unitubulose, perfectly septate, 7- to 11-angled when fresh with the adaxial side the widest, collapsing when dried, with distinct longitudinal ridges. Inflorescence dense, with few, large confluent heads, or lax and with up to 50(-200) smaller heads; heads hemispherical to globose, with 5-50 dark to reddish-brown flowers. Perianth-segments 2·5-3·5 mm, equal or the outer (rarely the inner) slightly longer, ovate to lanceolate, acute to acuminate-cuspidate. Stamens 6, 1/2-2/3 as long as perianth; anthers 0·5-1 mm, 2/3 as long to as long as the filaments. Capsule 2-3·5 mm, equalling or slightly shorter than the perianth, trigonous-ellipsoid, obtuse, shortly mucronate. Seeds 0·45-0·5 mm, ellipsoid to pyriform, pointed at both ends. •{\i  Balkan peninsula, S. & E. Carpathians, S. Italy.} Al Bu Gr It Ju Rm Rs (W) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. J. acutiflorus} Ehrh. ex Hoffm., {\i Deutschl. Fl. }125 (1791) ({\i J. sylvaticus} auct., non Reichard). Perennial with a thick, creeping, sparingly branched rhizome, the internodes usually 0·5-1·5 cm. Stems 30-110 cm, with 2-3 basal sheaths and 2-4 cauline leaves. Leaves 5-50 cm, unitubulose, perfectly and usually distinctly septate. Inflorescence of (10-)50-80(-250) heads, each with (3-)5-8(-20) flowers. Perianth-segments 2-2·7 mm, the inner longer than the outer, ovate to narrowly ovate, apiculate to cuspidate, often deflexed at apex. Stamens 6, 1/2-2/3 as long as perianth; anthers 0·8-1 mm, 1½-2 times as long as the filaments. Capsule 2-3 mm, usually exceeding the perianth, trigonous-ovoid to narrowly pyramidal, usually gradually narrowed into a beak 0·5-1 mm. Seeds c. 0·5 mm, ovoid to ellipsoid, reticulate. 2n = 40.{\i  Wet meadows and marshes. W., C. & S. Europe, extending to W. Ukraine.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fa Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (C, W, *K) Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Hybrids between {\b 42} and {\b 49} ({\i J. acutiflorus} var. {\i multiflorus} Weihe) are laxly caespitose or with a creeping rhizome, and with the inflorescence usually composed of 20-40 heads, the perianth-segments acute to apiculate, equal or the inner longer than the outer, and the capsule narrow and tapering. They have 2n = 60 and are frequent in C. & W. Europe, are usually sterile and propagate vegetatively. Putative back-crosses to {\b 49} have 2n = 80.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Portugal with rugose leaves and stems have been called subsp. {\b rugosus} (Steudel) Coutinho, {\i Fl. Port. }118 (1913), but seem not worth subspecific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. J. valvatus} Link in Schrader,{\i  Jour. für die Bot.}{\b  1799}({\b 2}): 316 (1800). Perennial with horizontally creeping rhizome having short internodes. Stems 10-30 cm, with 2-4 cauline leaves. Leaves somewhat laterally compressed, unitubulose, perfectly septate. Inflorescence of 1-4 globose, many-flowered heads, crowded or rarely one head pedunculate; flowers pale. Perianth-segments 4-5 mm, equal or unequal, very narrowly ovate, subulate at apex. Stamens c. 2/3 as long as perianth; anthers 0·5-0·8 mm,
\par

\par
109}
\par