{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. limbarae} Béguinot, {\i Bot. Jahrb. }{\b 38}: 325 (1907), from Sardegna, is intermediate between{\b  2} and {\b 3} and is probably a hybrid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. R. requienii} Parl., {\i Fl. Ital.}{\b  3}: 248 (1860). Basal leaves 2, 3-12(-17) cm × 0·75-1·25 mm, very slender, usually procumbent; cauline leaves 1-4(-9). Scape 1- to 3(-6)-flowered. Pedicels short. Flowers deep violet-purple throughout or with a whitish throat. Bract 0·9-1·3 cm, ovate, herbaceous, with a scarious margin, often tinged with purple or spotted with reddish-brown. Bracteole ovate, obtuse, scarious except for a green keel, brown or purplish, spotted. Perianth 2-2·5 cm; tube 5-8 mm, narrowly infundibuliform; segments 5-6 mm wide, obovate-oblong, rounded at apex. Anthers reaching 2/3 or more of the way up the segments, overtopped by the stigmas which are usually just below the apex of the segments. 2n = 34. {\i Moist, sandy ground near the sea. • W.C. Italy, Corse, Sardegna.} Co It Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. R. revelierei} Jordan & Fourr.,{\i  Brev. Pl. Nov. }{\b 1}: 49 (1866). Small slender plant. Basal leaves 2, up to 15 cm, 0·75-1·1 mm wide, suberect or recurved. Scape not produced above ground. Cauline leaves 2-3. Pedicels 1-2, short. Flowers small, violet with darker veins, with a paler or white throat. Bract 0·8-1·4 cm, herbaceous, with a very narrow scarious margin. Bracteole green-keeled, with a wide scarious margin spotted with reddish-brown. Perianth 1·2-1·6 cm; tube 3-5 mm; segments up to 3·5 mm wide, elliptic-oblanceolate to elliptical, rounded to subacute. Filaments hairy below; top of anthers reaching 1/2-2/3 of the way up the segments. Stigmas at the top of the anthers or just above. Capsule oblong-obovoid.{\i  Damp or seasonally inundated ground near the coast. • Corse, Capraia and islands off N. Sardegna.} Co It Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Some larger plants from W. Corse (Cargèse) may be hybrids with {\b 3}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. R. linaresii} Parl.,{\i  Fl. Panorm. }{\b 1}: 38 (1839). Basal leaves 2, 5-20 cm × 0·9-1·5 mm, mostly recurved and procumbent. Scape with 1-4 cauline leaves, 1- to 2(-3)-flowered. Pedicels short, not elongating after flowering. Flowers violet-purple, concolorous. Bract 0·9-2·3 cm, sometimes tinged with purple, herbaceous, with a very narrow scarious margin. Bracteole with a narrow green keel or almost completely scarious, spotted with reddish-brown. Perianth 1·3-2·6 cm, the tube 4-7 mm; segments oblanceolate, rounded to acute. Filaments purple, hairy at the base; anthers reaching 1/2-2/3 of the way up the segments. Stigmas below the top of the anthers. Capsule obovoid. {\i Greece and Aegean region; Sicilia.} ?Cr Gr Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b linaresii}: Bract and bracteole 1·3-2·3 cm. Perianth 2-2·6 cm, the segments rounded at apex.{\i  Coastal sands. • Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b graeca} Béguinot,{\i  Bot. Jahrb. }{\b 38}: 325 (1907): Bract and bracteole 0·9-1·6 cm. Perianth 1-3·2 cm, the segments acute. {\i Rocky and grassy places. Greece and Aegean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. R. melitensis} Béguinot, {\i op. cit. }327 (1907). Like {\b 5} but flowers dark violet, with a yellow throat; bracteole with a wider herbaceous keel, somewhat similar to that of {\b 7} but less strongly veined, the scarious margin only lightly spotted with reddish-brown. {\i Damp places. • Malta, Gozo. }Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. R. ramiflora} Ten., {\i App. Ind. Sem. Horti Neap.}{\b  1827}: 3 (1827) ({\i Trichonema ramiflorum} (Ten.) Sweet). Basal leaves 2, 6-30 cm × 0·75-1·5 mm, erect or recurved. Cauline leaves up to 4(-6), one on lower part of scape, the others more or less terminal. Scape usually below ground at anthesis, later up to 30 cm, 1- to 4(-6)flowered. Pedicels elongating after flowering to up to 10 cm.Flowers lilac-blue, sometimes with darker veins, sometimes pinkish inside, yellow-green outside; throat white or yellow. Bract 1-2·2 cm, herbaceous, strongly veined. Bracteole with a hyaline margin. Perianth 1-3 cm, the tube 2·5-7 mm; segments oblanceolate or oblanceolate-elliptical, acute. Anthers reaching about 2/3 of the way up the segments. Stigmas just below or just above the top of the anthers. Capsule 1·2-1·6 cm, cylindrical to oblong. 2n = 36.{\i  Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ramiflora}: Leaves usually fairly thick. Perianth 1-1·8 cm. Style slightly shorter than stamens. Bracteole with a narrow hyaline margin.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b gaditana} (G. Kunze) Marais,{\i  Kew Bull.}{\b  30}: 708 (1975) ({\i R. linaresii} var.{\i  gaditana} G. Kunze,{\i  R. gaditana} (G. Kunze) Béguinot): Leaves long and slender. Perianth 2-3 cm, lilac or pink, green outside. Style slightly exceeding stamens. Bracteole with a wide hyaline margin. •{\i  W. & S. parts of Iberian peninsula.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. R. columnae} Sebastiani & Mauri,{\i  Fl. Rom.} 18 (1818) ({\i Trichonema columnae }(Sebastiani & Mauri) Reichenb.). Basal leaves 2; cauline leaves 1-6 ,0·6-1 mm in diameter, fairly short, erect or appressed, or long and slender. Scape 1- to 3-flowered. Pedicels short. Flowers pale lilac to pale violet, with purple veins; throat yellow, occasionally almost white. Bract 0·6-1·3 cm, herbaceous, with a narrow scarious margin, tinged purple or spotted with reddish-brown. Bracteole almost entirely scarious. Perianth 0·9-1·9 cm; tube 2·5-5·5 mm; segments lanceolate or oblanceolate, acute. Anthers reaching about ½ way up the perianth. Stigmas below the top of the anthers. Capsule 0·5-1·1 cm, obovoid-triquetrous to subglobose-triquetrous. Fruiting scape up to 5 cm above ground.{\i  Mediterranean region and W. Europe, northwards to S.W. England, mainly near the coast.} Az Bl Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b columnae}: Leaves 3-8(-20) cm × 0·75-0·9 mm. Filaments often glabrous.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b rollii} (Parl.) Marais, {\i Kew Bull.}{\b  30}: 707 (1975) ({\i R. rollii} Parl.): Leaves 15-30 cm × 0·3-0·75 mm, slender. Filaments always hairy.{\i  Maritime sands. Mediterranean region, eastwards from S. France}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. R. rosea} (L.) Ecklon,{\i  Topogr. Verzeichn.} 19 (1827) ({\i Trichonema purpurascens} Sweet.). Corm subglobose, the basal teeth of the tunic bent to one side. Basal leaves several, up to 25 cm, 1-2·5 mm in diameter, usually spreading; cauline leaves 5-6. Pedicels 3-8 cm. Flowers magenta-pink, pale lilac, pink or white; throat yellow, sometimes marked with violet-blue. Bract 1·5-2·5 mm, herbaceous, with a narrow scarious margin. Bracteole with a wide scarious margin, brown or spotted. Perianth 1·5-4·5 cm; tube 2-8 mm. Anthers reaching about ½ way up the perianth. Stigmas below or above the top of the anthers.{\i  Naturalized in Channel Islands} ({\i Guernsey}), {\i and S.E. France }({\i St. Tropez}). [Ga.] ({\i South Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Two varieties have become naturalized: var. {\i rosea} at St. Tropez, and var. {\i australis }(Ewart) De Vos in Guernsey.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 9.       Tritonia}     Ker-Gawler  
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.H. Valentine. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous perennials with corms. Leaves linear or ensiform. Inflorescence a lax spike. Spathes membranous, the outer 3-pointed, the inner entire. Flowers slightly zygomorphic; hypanthial tube slender, widening slightly upwards; perianth-segments
\par

\par
100}
\par