{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min25}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min25}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords876}{\nofchars4998}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28  Frequently cultivated for ornament. The typical plant of subsp. (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ), which was described from a garden specimen, and is known only in cultivation, is a hexaploid (2n = 90) of low fertility. It differs slightly from wild specimens, which are octoploid (2n = 120) and fertile.
\par 
\par  Hybrids between }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 2a}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 2b}{\fs28  are found where the taxa meet, for example in S. Spain, but }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  is often separated from }{\b\fs28 2a}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 2b}{\fs28  by altitude or latitude. }{\b\fs28 G. dubius}{\fs28  Guss., }{\i\fs28 Fl. Sic. Prodr., Suppl.}{\fs28  8 (1832), widespread in the C. Mediterranean region, is intermediate between }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 , but its taxonomic status is uncertain.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. G. palustris}{\fs28  Gaudin,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Helv.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 97 (1828). Plant 25-50 cm. Basal sheaths green, sometimes tinged with red usually along the veins. Leaves 10-40 cm \'d7 4-10 mm; usually only 1 bract-like cauline leaf and 2 basal leaves. Spike strongly secund, with up to 6 flowers. Perianth red to reddish-purple. Perianth-segments 25-40 \'d7 6-16 mm, the upper subequal, obovate, the lateral rhombic, the lower c. 1 1/3 as long as the upper, oblong-cuneate; claw as long as the limb. 2n = 60.}{\i\fs28  Wet meadows and scrub. \bullet  C. Europe, extending southwards to S.E. France, C. Italy and Bulgaria; some isolated stations in S.E. White Russia and N. Ukraine.}{\fs28  Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po ?Rm Rs (C).
\par 
\par  Some abnormally wide-leaved specimens superficially resembling }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28  are recorded from France and Switzerland.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. G. imbricatus}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  37 (1753). Plant 30-80 cm. Corm-tunics finely fibrous to papery thin. Leaves usually 3, the lowest 16-35 cm \'d7 15 mm, obtuse, the cauline up to 5 mm wide, subulate. Spike dense, 4- to 12-flowered, strongly unilateral. Perianth-tube strongly curved; segments subequal, connivent; upper lateral segments lanceolate. 2n = 60. }{\i\fs28 Wet meadows and scrub. E. & C. Europe.}{\fs28  ?Au Bu Cz Ge Gr ?He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) [Fe Ga].
\par 
\par  Polymorphic; the perianth in the north and west of the range is reddish-purple, but in the south and east it is frequently violet-purple. Some plants may produce axillary branches. The width of the wing of the seed is also variable. Plants with seeds with vestigial wings have been described from the Ukraine as }{\b\fs28 G. apterus}{\fs28  Klokov in Kotov & Barbarich,}{\i\fs28  Fl. RSS Ucr. }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 : 407 (1950). Abnormally large specimens, with additional leaves, superficially resembling }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 , are occasionally found throughout the range of}{\b\fs28  4}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. G. italicus}{\fs28  Miller,}{\i\fs28  Gard. Dict.}{\fs28  ed. 8, no. 2 (1768) (}{\i\fs28 G. segetum}{\fs28  Ker-Gawler). Plant 50-100 cm. Basal sheaths usually pale to dark red, often spotted white or pale green. Leaves 3-5, the lowest 18-40 cm \'d7 16 mm, the other basal leaves 35-65 cm, the cauline 5-10 mm wide, irregularly veined. Inflorescence 6- to 16-flowered, lax, usually weakly distichous. Bract always exceeding bracteole; lower bracts frequently resembling and grading into cauline leaves. Perianth bright purplish-red to light pink. Lateral perianth-segments oblong. Anthers longer than filaments, or aborted. Capsule torulose when mature. Seeds globose-pyriform, not winged. 2n = 120, 171+2.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated land. S. Europe, extending northwards to W.C. France.}{\fs28  Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr \'86He Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par   A weed of arable crops, not recorded from natural habitats; its range as a native is therefore unknown. It may be either hermaphrodite or gynodioecious. Female plants (}{\b\fs28 G. guepinii}{\fs28  Koch,}{\i\fs28  Flora}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Regensb.}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 23}{\fs28 : 666 (1840)) have a small perianth and aborted anthers, and occur in most populations.
\par 
\par   Records from the A\'e7ores are referable to }{\i\fs28 G. carneus}{\fs28  Delaroche, a native of South Africa, which has escaped from cultivation.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 G. atroviolaceus}{\fs28  Boiss., }{\i\fs28 Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov}{\fs28 . }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 13}{\fs28 ): 14 (1853), native to S.W. Asia, has been reported as an occasional cornfield weed in N.E. Greece and Turkey-in-Europe. It differs from }{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28  mainly in its deep violet perianth and in its leaves, which have prominent, equidistant, parallel veins.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs36 JUNCALES
\par }
\pard \ {\fs36 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 189.             JUNCACEAE}{\fs28 
\par }{\fs24  Edit. D.M. Moore. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Herbs, usually perennial. Leaves long and narrow, with sheathing base, sometimes reduced to scales. Flowers actinomorphic, hermaphrodite, protogynous, usually crowded in monochasial cymes which are sometimes condensed into heads, or solitary. Perianth-segments 6, in 2 whorls. Stamens free, in (1-)2 whorls of 3. Ovary superior, 1- or 3-locular; stigmas 3; ovules 3 or numerous. Fruit a dehiscent, loculicidal capsule; seeds endospermic, often with a basal appendage.
\par 
\par Literature: F. Buchenau}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b\fs28  12}{\fs28 : 1-498 (1890).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28   Leaves not ciliate; capsule many-seeded ........................................... }{\b\fs28 1. Juncus}{\fs28  
\par  Leaves usually ciliate, at least when young; capsule 3-seeded ......... }{\b\fs28 2. Luzula}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28  1.        Juncus}{\fs28        L.
\par }{\fs24  By S. Snogerup. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Glabrous, rhizomatous perennials or annuals. Inflorescence sympodial, usually many-flowered, the ultimate divisions forming cymes often contracted into heads. Bracteoles absent, or one 2-fid and two or more simple and forming an involucre. Perianth-segments in two whorls of three. Stamens 6 or fewer; anthers basifixed, opposite and attached to the base of perianth-segments; pollen shed in tetrads. Fruit a 1- or 3-locular capsule. Ovules numerous. Testa usually prominently sculptured; embryo small.
\par 
\par   Variation in vegetative characters is very great. The subgenera are most easily characterized by the different structure and arrangement of the leaves. The relative length of anthers and filaments, which is often important for differentiating species, should be measured in late flower or in fruit. In species where the perianth-segments are unequal, the outer should be assumed the longer, unless otherwise stated.
\par 
\par   Literature: F. Buchenau in Engler,}{\i\fs28  Pflanzenreich}{\b\fs28  25}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 IV. 36}{\fs28 ): 98-284 (1906). S. Snogerup in K. H. Rechinger, }{\i\fs28 Flora Iranica}{\b\fs28  75}{\fs28 . Wien. 1971. P. J. Van Loenhoud & A. A. Sterk,}{\i\fs28  Acta Bot. Neerl. }{\b\fs28 25}{\fs28 : 193-204 (1976) (}{\i\fs28 J. bufonius}{\fs28  group).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Flowers each with 2 involucral bracteoles
\par 2 Leaves of adult plants terete, not flattened or with 
\par   enlarged cells on the adaxial side
\par 3 Flowering stems with 2-4 cauline leaves ................................. }{\b\fs28 14. subulatus}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 102}
\par }