{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 spicuous appendage. 2n = 84.{\i  Marshes, fens and wet grassland. Much of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region and absent from most of the south-east and the islands.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. J. arcticus} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  2}: 206 (1799). Plant glaucous; rhizome horizontal. Stems 10-40 cm, erect, rigid; non-flowering stems few or absent. Lowest bract 1/8-1/4 as long as stem. Inflorescence compact, with 3-8 flowers. Perianth-segments 3-4·5 mm, unequal, ovate to elliptical; outer obtuse to mucronate or apiculate; inner obtuse to acute. Anthers 0·5-0·7 mm, 1/3 as long to as long as filaments. Capsule 3·5-4·5 mm, equalling or exceeding the perianth, trigonous-ovoid to trigonous-ellipsoid, obtuse, shortly mucronate, dark brown to reddish-brown at apex. Seeds 0·6-1·1 mm, obovoid, without or with inconspicuous appendages. 2n = 84.{\i  Streamsides and damp, open habitats. Arctic and subarctic Europe and mountains of Fennoscandia; Alps; C. Appennini.} Au Fe Ga He ?Hs Is It No Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Hybrids between{\b  7} and {\b 8}, with intermediate morphology, have low pollen-fertility and reproduce vegetatively. They are well established in some parts of Fennoscandia and the Alps.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. J. balticus} Willd., {\i Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin Mag.}{\b  3}: 298 (1809) ({\i J. arcticus }subsp.{\i  balticus} (Willd.) Hyl.). Plant glaucous; rhizome horizontal, with short internodes. Stems (10-)25-100 cm, erect, rigid; non-flowering stems few or absent. Lowest bract 1/5-1/3 as long as stem. Inflorescence lax, with (5-)25-60(-80) flowers. Perianth-segments 3·2-5 mm, usually subequal, ovate to narrowly ovate, obtuse to mucronate or apiculate. Anthers 0·8-1·5 mm, 1½-2 times as long as filaments. Capsule 3-4·5 mm, equalling or exceeding perianth, trigonous-ovoid, shortly mucronate, usually dark brown. Seeds 0·8-1 mm, ovoid, with inconspicuous appendages. 2n = ?80, 84.{\i  Damp, sandy places. N. Europe, southwards to N. England and the Netherlands, mainly near the coast.} Br Da Fa Fe Ge Ho Is No Po Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The usually sterile hybrid between {\b 7} and{\b  9} is locally common. It is tall but otherwise intermediate between the parents.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. J. pyrenaeus} Timb.-Lagr. & Jeanb., {\i Bull. Soc. Sci. Phys. Nat. Toulouse}{\b  6}: 232 (1883). Like {\b 9} but inflorescence with 5-25 flowers; anthers 1·5-2 mm, 2-6 times as long a, filaments; seeds 0·65-0·75 mm. •{\i  E. Pyrenees} ({\i near Mont-Louis}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. J. inflexus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 326 (1753) ({\i J. glaucus} Sibth.,{\i  J. longicornis} Bast.). Plant caespitose. Stems 50-120 cm, the basal sheaths usually reddish-brown. Stems and leaves with 10-20 ridges; pith interrupted. Lowest bract long. Inflorescence many-flowered, usually lax. Perianth-segments 2·5-4 mm, unequal, narrowly ovate, acuminate. Stamens 6, c. ½ as long as perianth; anthers 0·8-1 mm, 1-1½ times as long as filaments. Capsule exceeding or rarely equalling perianth, trigonous-ovoid to trigonous-ellipsoid, acute to obtuse and mucronate. Seeds c. 0·5 mm, obliquely ovoid, reticulate. 2n = 40, 42.{\i  Fens, wet grassland and damp, open habitats; usually calcicole. Europe, northwards to Scotland and S. Sweden}. All except Az Fa Fe Is No Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. J. effusus} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }326 (1753). Plant densely caespitose. Stems 50-150 cm, the basal sheaths often reddish-brown. Stems and leaves smooth or with 30-70 weak striae; pith continuous. Lowest bract long, with a narrow sheath. Inflorescence many-flowered, dense or lax; flowers usually pale brown. Perianth-segments 1·5-3 mm, subequal, ovate, acuminate. Stamens 3(-6), 1/2-3/4 as long as perianth; anthers 0·6-0·8 mm, as long as the filaments. Capsule ovoid to globose, obtuse, not or slightly emarginate, usually shorter than perianth. Seeds c. 0·5 mm, obliquely ovoid, reticulate. 2n = 40, 42.{\i  Damp places. Almost throughout Europe except the arctic.} All except Bl Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. J. conglomeratus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 326 (1753) ({\i J. leersii} Marsson, {\i J. subuliflorus} Drejer). Like {\b 12} but stems 40-100 cm; stem with 12-30 usually conspicuous ridges below the inflorescence; lowest bract with a wide sheath; inflorescence usually compact, sometimes of several clusters; perianth-segments 2-4 mm; stamens 1/2-2/3 as long as perianth; anthers 0·4-0·7 mm, usually shorter than filaments; capsule usually emarginate, mucronate, about equalling perianth. 2n = 42.{\i  Damp places; somewhat calcifuge. Most of Europe}. All except Al Az Bl Cr Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Subulati} Buchenau. Like Subgen. {\i Genuini} but leaves all cauline; pith of stellate cells; lowest bract much shorter than the inflorescence, not forming an apparent prolongation of the stem; seeds with short appendages.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. J. subulatus} Forskål, {\i Fl. Aegypt.} 75 (1775) ({\i J. multiflorus }Desf., non Retz.). Stems 30-120 cm, with basal sheaths and 2-4 cauline leaves. Pith continuous. Inflorescence lax, many-flowered. Perianth-segments 2-3·5 mm, equal or subequal, pale green to brownish; outer lanceolate, apiculate to acute; inner wider, obtuse. Stamens c. ½ as long as perianth; anthers 1-1·2 mm, 4-5 times as long as the filaments. Capsule equalling perianth, trigonous-ovoid, obtuse, mucronulate, brown, shiny. Seeds 0·6-0·7 mm. 2n = 42.{\i  Salt-marshes and other saline habitats. Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si [*Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Pseudotenageia} V. Krecz. & Gontsch. Perennials, with a more or less slender rhizome. Leaves and bracts not pungent. Leaves several, all cauline, flat or canaliculate, with marginal sclerenchyma-strands. Inflorescence apical; flowers with involucral bracteoles. Seeds with or without appendages.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. J. trifidus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 326 (1753). Plant densely caespitose to mat-forming, with stems in very dense rows from a branching rhizome. Stems 5-40 cm, slender, with 4-6 basal sheaths, rarely with one lower cauline leaf up to 10 cm, and 2-4 upper leaves. Auricles lacerate; leaf-margin finely serrulate. Upper leaves usually appearing as bracts of the inflorescence. Flowers 1-3(-4). Perianth-segments 2-5 mm, equal or subequal, dark brown, lanceolate to ovate, acute to apiculate, the outer sometimes aristate. Stamens 6, 2/3-3/4 as long as perianth; anthers 1·2-1·5 mm, about twice as long as the filaments. Capsule exceeding perianth, trigonous-ovoid, mucronate, dark brown at apex. Seeds 0·9-1·3 mm, irregular and variable in form, including the unequal appendages 1·2-1·6 mm. 2n = 30. {\i Arctic and subarctic Europe, extending southwards to S.W. Scotland; mountains of C., S. & E. Europe southwards to C. Spain, S. Italy and N. Greece}. Au Br Bu Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b trifidus}: Stems 5-25 cm. Uppermost basal sheath with a very short lamina. Cauline leaves appearing as bracts of the inflorescence. Inflorescence usually 2- to 3-flowered; perianth-segments 3-4 mm. {\i Rocks, stony ground and heathy grassland; calcifuge. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par
 ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b monanthos} (Jacq.) Ascherson & Graebner,{\i  Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  2}({\b 2}): 427 (1904): Stems 20-40 cm. Uppermost basal sheath with lamina up to 10 cm. Cauline leaves 2 or 3, usually only the uppermost appearing as a bract of the inflorescence. Inflorescence usually 1-flowered; perianth-segments 4-5 mm.{\i  Calcicole; usually on cliffs or rocks. • Alps, Appennini.}
\par

\par
105}
\par