{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. J. hybridus} Brot.,{\i  Fl. Lusit.}{\b  1}: 513 (1804) ({\i J. ambiguus} Guss.,{\i  J. insulanus} Viv.). Plant with few to many stems. Stems (5-)10-20(-30) cm, erect and usually stout, with 1-4 usually long leaves below the inflorescence, the lower bracts long, leaf-like. Leaves 2-7(-10) cm, usually 0·5-1 mm wide, flat, with convolute margins. Flowers usually in 1-10 capitate clusters. Perianth-segments 3·5-8·5 mm, usually mostly scarious; outer narrowly ovate to lanceolate; inner narrowly ovate to lanceolate, obtuse or subacute. Stamens 6, 1/3-1/2 as long as the perianth; anthers 0·4-0·8 mm, 2/3-4/5 as long as the filaments. Capsule 3·5-4·5 mm, equalling or slightly shorter than the inner perianth-segments, obtusely angled to ellipsoid, subacute to obtuse, often with a raised style-base; style usually deciduous. Seeds 0·3-0·4 mm, broadly ellipsoid to ovoid, usually obtuse, smooth. Flowers occasionally cleistogamous. 2n = 34.{\i  Wet, usually saline habitats. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu ?Rm Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Graminifolii} Buchenau. Perennials with a rhizome. Leaves several, basal and cauline, flat or involute to rarely canaliculate, without marginal sclerenchyma-strands. Inflorescence terminal; involucral bracteoles absent. Seeds with or without appendages.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. J. planifolius} R. Br.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Nov. Holl.} 259 (1810). Caespitose perennial, often flowering in the first year. Stems 10-30(-60) cm, with usually c. 10 basal leaves. Leaves much shorter than the stem, 2-5(-10) mm wide, flat or slightly involute; auricles absent. Inflorescence of (1-)4-12(-50) dense, globular heads, each head usually 8- to 10-flowered. Perianth-segments 1·5-3 mm, subequal, ovate to lanceolate, dark brown, the outer acuminate, the inner obtuse. Stamens 3, almost as long as the perianth; anthers 1/3 as long as the filaments. Capsule exceeding the perianth, trigonous-obovoid, with a mucro c. 0·5 mm, dark brown. Seeds 0·35-0·4 mm, broadly ellipsoid, without appendages. {\i Bogs and lake-margins. Naturalized in W. Ireland.} [Hb.] ({\i Temperate South America, New Zealand, Australia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Juncinella} V. Krecz. & Gontsch. Small annuals, caespitose or with a single stem. Leaves and bracts not pungent. All leaves basal on flowering stems. Sheaths large, leaf-like, the lamina small, flat to subterete, without sclerenchyma-strands in the margin. Flowers solitary on the stem or in clusters; involucral bracteoles absent. Seeds prominently reticulate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. J. capitatus} Weigel, {\i Obs. Bot.} 28 (1772). Stems 1-20 cm, with several short basal leaves. Leaves 0·5-5 cm, narrow, flat to canaliculate; auricles absent. Inflorescence of 1-4 heads, or dwarf specimens rarely with one flower; clusters with two basal leaf-like bracts and usually 5-10 flowers. Perianth-segments unequal; outer (2-)3-4 mm, ovate, acuminate; inner shorter, almost entirely scarious, acute to acuminate. Stamens 3, 1/2-2/3 as long as the perianth; anthers 0·2-0·7 mm, c. ½ as long as the filaments. Style short; stigmas short, directed downwards. Capsule (1-)1·5-2 mm, usually much shorter than perianth, ovoid to globose, obtuse, not or shortly mucronate, light brown, reticulate to dark reddish-brown. Seeds c. 0·3 mm, ovoid. 2n = 18.{\i  Fens, wet grassland and margins of streams. Much of Europe, but rare in the north.} All except ?Al Fa Fe Hb Is No ?Rm Rs (N, K) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Ensifolii} (Snogerup) Snogerup. Perennials; rhizome well-developed. All leaves on flowering stems. Leaves ensiform pluritubulose, imperfectly septate throughout. Flowers in heads; involucral bracteoles absent. Stamens shorter than perianth-segments. Seeds without appendages.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. J. ensifolius} Wikström,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.}{\b  1823}: 274 (1823). Laxly caespitose or with a creeping rhizome. Stems 25-80 cm, compressed and narrowly winged, with a few basal sheaths and 4-6 cauline leaves. Leaves 2-5 mm wide. Inflorescence of 1-6 globose, many-flowered heads. Perianth-segments 3-4 mm, equal or the inner slightly; shorter outer narrowly ovate, acuminate; inner oblong-lanceolate, acute. Stamens 3(-6), c. ½ as long as perianth; anthers 0·5-0·8 mm, about as long as filaments. Capsule equalling or slightly exceeding perianth, trigonous-prismatic, attenuate into a short mucro. Seeds 0·6-0·7 mm, turbinate to ellipsoid, dark and acute at both ends, reticulate. 2n = 40.{\i  Locally naturalized in Finland.} [Fe.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Septati} Buchenau. Perennials or rarely annuals; rhizome usually well-developed. All the leaves usually on flowering stems. Leaves terete or subterete, with transverse septa, unitubulose or, if pluritubulose (divided longitudinally), either perfectly septate (septa of the individual tubes coincident) or imperfectly septate (septa of the individual tubes not coincident). Flowers in heads; involucral bracteoles absent. Stamens shorter than perianth-segments, the filaments more or less rigid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. J. canadensis} Gay in Laharpe, {\i Monogr. Jonc. }134 (1825). Caespitose perennial. Stems 15-100 cm, with 2-3 cauline leaves. Leaves shorter than the stem, 1·5-3 mm wide, unitubulose, perfectly septate; auricles short, obtuse. Inflorescence of 5-100 or more heads, very variable; heads 5- to 50-flowered, of various shapes. Perianth-segments 2·7-4 mm, the inner slightly longer, narrowly ovate, acute to very narrowly apiculate. Stamens 3(-6), shorter than the perianth; anthers 0·2-0·7 mm, 1/7-1/2 as long as filaments. Capsule 3·5-4·5 mm, exceeding the perianth, trigonous-ovoid to subprismatic, usually more or less abruptly contracted into a mucro up to 0·5 mm long. Seeds 0·65-0·75 mm, fusiform, with 2 long, pale, equal appendages. 2n = 80.{\i  Naturalized in the Netherlands and Belgium}. [Be Ho.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. J. subnodulosus} Schrank,{\i  Baier. Fl.}{\b  1}: 616 (1789) ({\i J. obtusiflorus} Ehrh. ex Hoffm.). Perennial; rhizome creeping, thick, with internodes usually c. 1 cm. Stems 40-130 cm, with 3-4 basal sheaths and 1-2 cauline leaves; non-flowering shoots short, with one long leaf. Leaves 20-100 cm × 2-4 mm, pluritubulose with a wider central tube and a central vascular bundle, perfectly septate; auricles short, wide, firm. Inflorescence of 10-50(-100) heads; branches usually patent; heads hemispherical to subglobose, with 5-10(-30) flowers. Perianth-segments 2-2·5 mm, equal, elliptical, obtuse; outer boat-shaped. Stamens 6, 2/3-3/4 as long as perianth; anthers 0·8-1·1 mm, 1½-2 times as long as the filaments. Capsule slightly exceeding perianth, trigonous-ovoid, compressed laterally, attenuate, mucronate, 3-locular. Seeds 0·5-0·6 mm, pyriform, markedly reticulate with c. 30 longitudinal ridges. 2n = 40.{\i  Wet places; usually calcicole. W., C. & S. Europe, extending northwards to Estonia.} Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, W) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. J. pygmaeus} L.C.M. Richard in Thuill., {\i Fl. Paris} ed. 2, 178 (1800). Caespitose annual, usually with few stems. Stems 1-10 cm, erect or rarely ascending, with a few basal sheaths, 0-1 cauline leaves and 1-2 leaf-like bracts. Leaves short, usually not more than 0·5 mm wide, unitubulose, perfectly septate but septa rarely visible externally in fresh material, with scarious auricles. Inflorescence of 1-5 heads each with 2-15 flowers. Perianth-segments 4-7 × 0·5-1 mm, subequal, lanceolate, obtuse to apiculate; inner acuminate. Stamens 3-6, variable and often unequal; outer usually ¼-½ as long as perianth; inner often smaller or absent; anthers 0·3-1 mm, not more than ½ as long as filaments. Capsule 2·5-3·5(-4) mm, shorter than perianth, narrowly pyramidal to narrowly ovoid, sometimes shortly mucronate,
\par

\par
108}
\par