{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 cauline leaves. Leaves shorter than the stem, 0·5-1 mm wide. Inflorescence occupying only upper part of the stem, often rather dense. Perianth-segments 2-2·5 mm, equal or subequal, ovate to lanceolate; outer acute, often mucronate; inner obtuse. Stamens ½ as long as perianth; anthers as long as the filaments. Capsule equalling perianth, trigonous-globose, emarginate. Seeds 0·3-0·4 mm, conspicuously striate.{\i  Damp, open habitats; usually calcifuge. C. & S. Europe, extending to the Netherlands and N. France}. Au Be Bu Co Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rs (W, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. J. sphaerocarpus} Nees, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 1}: 521 (1818). Stems 5-30 cm, thin, erect or slightly recurved, with 0-2 leaves below the inflorescence; lower bracts long and leaf-like. Leaves 1-5 cm × 0·5-1·5 mm, flat or slightly convolute. Inflorescence lax, occupying at least the upper ½ of stem; flowers solitary. Perianth-segments 2·5-4·5 mm, unequal; outer narrowly ovate, apiculate; inner lanceolate, acute to apiculate. Stamens 1/3-1/2 as long as perianth; anthers 0·1-0·4 mm, 1/3-1/2 as long as the filaments. Style short; stigmas contorted. Capsule shorter than perianth, trigonous-globose, obtuse. Seeds 0·3-0·45 mm, ovoid to ellipsoid, smooth or inconspicuously striate. 2n = 36.{\i  Ditches, river-banks and damp, open habitats. Iberian peninsula and S. France; C. Europe; S. margin of U.S.S.R.} Au Cz Ga Ge Gr Hs Hu Ju Lu Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Rare and inconstant over most of its range. Small specimens are difficult to distinguish from {\b 22}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b 24-29}). {\b J. bufonius} group. Inflorescence usually occupying at least the upper ½ of the stem. Perianth-segments unequal, narrowly ovate to lanceolate, the outer apiculate to cuspidate. Capsule ovoid to ellipsoid or subprismatic.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Anthers 3-5 times as long as filaments; seeds 0·55-0·65 mm,
\par
  with longitudinal ridges ............................................................... {\b 24. foliosus}
\par
1 Anthers ¼-1½ times as long as filaments; seeds 0·3-0·55 mm,
\par
   almost smooth
\par
2 Inner perianth-segments obtuse to subacute, equalling 
\par
  or shorter than capsule
\par
3 Seeds c. 0·5 mm; most flowers usually solitary ......................... {\b 28. ranarius}
\par
3 Seeds 0·3-0·4 mm; most flowers usually in dense clusters ....... {\b 29. hybridus}
\par
2 Inner perianth-segments acute to acuminate, longer than capsule
\par
4 Capsule subprismatic to trigonous-ellipsoid, ± abruptly
\par
  contracted at apex ...................................................................... {\b 25. sorrentini}
\par
4 Capsule ovoid to ellipsoid, acute to obtuse
\par
5 Capsule 3-5 mm; anthers at least 2/5 as long as filaments ........ {\b 26. bufonius}
\par
5 Capsule 2·5-3 mm; anthers 1/4-1/3 as long as filaments ......... {\b 27. minutulus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. J. foliosus} Desf., {\i Fl. Atl. }{\b 1}: 315 (1798). Stems 10-50 cm, erect, with 1-2 large leaves below the inflorescence, the lower bracts leaf-like. Leaves up to 20 cm × 1·5-3 mm, flat. Inflorescence often occupying most of the stem, many-flowered, lax. Perianth-segments 4-6 mm, unequal, usually with dark brown lines between the herbaceous centre and scarious margin; outer narrowly ovate, apiculate; inner lanceolate to narrowly ovate, subacute to apiculate. Stamens 6, 1/2-2/3 as long as perianth; anthers 1·2-2 mm, usually 3-5 times as long as the filaments. Capsule about equalling the inner perianth-segments, obtusely angled, obtuse, with a raised style-base. Seeds 0·5-0·65 mm, ovoid, with 20-25 prominent longitudinal and weaker transverse striae. 2n = 26. {\i Damp, open habitats. W. Europe, northwards to Scotland.} Br Ga Hb Hs Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. J. sorrentini} Parl.,{\i  Fl. Ital.}{\b  2}: 356 (1857). Plant with few to many stems, densely caespitose. Stems 8-12 cm, erect, with most leaves sub-basal. Leaves 3-8 cm, usually 0·5-1 mm wide, flat, with involute margins. Inflorescence of 1-3(-5) dense, capitate clusters of 5-10(-20) flowers, each cluster usually subtended by 1-2 basal bracts 1-5 cm long. Outer perianth-segments 6-8·5 mm, narrowly ovate, acuminate to cuspidate with a usually rather long and sharp apex; inner shorter, acuminate, with a broad scarious margin. Stamens 6, c. ½ as long as outer perianth-segments; anthers 0·7-1·2 mm, 1/3-1 2/3 times as long as filaments. Capsule 3-4·5 mm, shorter than perianth, trigonous-ellipsoid to sub-prismatic, more or less abruptly contracted to a conical apex. Seeds 0·4-0·5 mm, broadly ellipsoid, obtuse, with small darker apex, smooth. 2n = 28.{\i  Damp places in the mountains. C. Mediterranean region.} Co Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. J. bufonius} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 328 (1753). Plant usually with many stems. Stems 5-50 cm, usually weak, erect, ascending or sometimes slightly recurved, with 1-5 leaves below the inflorescence, the lower bracts leaf-like. Leaves 1-12 cm × 0·5-2 mm, flat, often with slightly convolute margins. Inflorescence usually lax, rarely with some flowers in clusters. Perianth-segments (4·5-)6-8 mm, narrowly ovate, outer usually herbaceous, with a narrow scarious margin; inner acute to apiculate, often mostly scarious. Stamens 6, 1/3-1/2 as long as perianth; anthers 0·5-1 mm or rarely longer, 2/5 as long to as long as the filaments. Capsule (3-)3·5-5 mm, shorter than perianth, ovoid to almost ellipsoid, acute to obtuse, very variable in colour; style usually persisting as a short beak. Seeds 0·4-0·55 mm, ellipsoid, usually apiculate at base and apex, smooth or finely striate. Flowers often cleistogamous. 2n = 100-110. {\i Wet, usually open habitats. Throughout Europe.} All except Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. J. minutulus} Albert & Jahandiez, {\i Cat. Pl. Vasc. Dép. Var} 501 (1908). Plant caespitose, rarely with only one stem. Stems 0·5-5(-15) cm, slender, erect or ascending, with at most one short leaf below the inflorescence, the lower bracts leaf-like. Leaves 0·5-2 cm, less than 1 mm wide, flat to subterete. Inflorescence with 2-15(-20) flowers; flowers solitary or in few-flowered clusters. Perianth-segments narrowly ovate, with a wide scarious margin; outer 4-6·5 mm; inner apiculate. Stamens 3 or rarely 6, 1/3-1/2 as long as perianth; anthers 0·2-0·6 mm, 1/4-1/3 as long as the filaments. Capsule 2·5-3 mm, shorter than perianth, ovoid, obtuse; style-base persisting as a mucro 0·1-0·2 mm. Seeds 0·35-0·4(-0·5) mm, ovoid to ellipsoid, smooth or finely striate. Flowers usually cleistogamous. 2n = c. 70.{\i  Open, usually sandy ground. Much of Europe, but rare in the east; distribution imperfectly known} . Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Lu No Po Rm Rs (?N, C, E) Si Su Tu
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. J. ranarius} Song. & Perr. in Billot, {\i Annot.} 192 (1860) ({\i J. ambiguus} auct. plur., non Guss.). Plant usually with many stems. Stems 3-20 cm, erect or ascending, often weak, with 1-3 leaves below the inflorescence, the lower bracts long, leaf-like. Leaves 1-10 cm × 0·5-1 mm, flat with convolute margins to subterete. Inflorescence lax or usually with some flowers in capitate clusters. Perianth-segments 3·5-6 mm; outer narrowly ovate; inner lanceolate, obtuse or rarely subacute, mostly scarious. Stamens 6, 1/3-1/2 as long as perianth; anthers 0·4-0·8 mm, 1/2 as long to as long as the filaments. Capsule 3·5-5 mm, usually equalling or slightly exceeding the inner perianth-segments, obtusely angled, obtuse to more or less truncate; style usually deciduous. Seeds c. 0·5 mm, very broadly ellipsoid to ovoid, obtuse at base and apex, smooth. Flowers often cleistogamous. 2n = 34. {\i Salt-marshes, wet grassland and damp, open habitats. N., C. & E. Europe, mainly near the coast.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu Is No Po Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par
107}
\par