{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. J. squarrosus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 327 (1753). Plant caespitose to densely mat-forming, with a short, suberect, branched rhizome. Stems 15-50 cm, rigid, with a basal rosette of many leaves and rarely one cauline leaf or leafless sheath. Leaves 7-30 cm × 1-2 mm, subcoriaceous, canaliculate, with auricles of varying length. Inflorescence with 10-30(-40) flowers. Perianth-segments 4-5 mm, subequal, obtuse, dark brown, with a whitish hyaline margin; outer narrowly ovate; inner lanceolate. Stamens 6, usually as ½ long as perianth; anthers 1·5-2 mm, 2½-6 times as long as the filaments. Capsule equalling perianth, ovoid to ellipsoid, obtuse, mucronate. Seeds 0·6-0·8 mm, obliquely ovoid, with conspicuous, verrucose striae; appendages absent. 2n = 42. {\i Moorland and damp heaths. C., W. & N.W. Europe, extending to N. Italy and eastwards to} c. 31° {\i E. in N.W. Russia and N. Ukraine.} Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Is It Lu No Po Rs (B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from W.C. Spain have been described as{\b  J. ellmanii} C. E. Hubbard, Sandwith & Turrill, {\i Kew Bull.}{\b  1928}: 153 (1928). They have narrow, semiterete leaves and anthers up to 4 mm, almost as long as the perianth. These characters do not seem to be constantly correlated and no taxonomic recognition seems necessary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. J. compressus} Jacq.,{\i  Enum. Stirp. Vindob.} 60, 235 (1762). Plant with a creeping rhizome or laxly caespitose. Stems 10-40 cm, usually slightly compressed, with 0-3 basal sheaths, 1-4 basal and 1-2 upper cauline leaves. Leaves 5-25 cm × 0·8-2 mm, flat or rarely canaliculate, glaucous; auricles obtuse. Inflorescence usually lax, with 10-60 flowers. Perianth-segments 2-3 mm, equal, ovate, obtuse. Stamens 1/2-2/3 as long as perianth; anthers 0·5-1 mm, 1-2 times as long as the filaments. Capsule up to 1½ times as long as perianth, globose to ovoid, often slightly trigonous at apex, mucronate. Seeds 0·35-0·5 mm, with c. 12 striae, without appendages. 2n = 44. {\i Damp grassland and disturbed ground. Most of Europe.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. J. gerardi} Loisel. in Desv.,{\i  Jour. Bot. Rédigé }{\b 2}: 284 (1809). Plant caespitose or with a creeping rhizome. Stems 5-50 cm, sometimes compressed, with 0-2 basal sheaths, 4-5 basal and 0-2 upper cauline leaves. Leaves 2-30 cm × 0·5-2·5 mm, flat to subterete. Inflorescence usually lax. Perianth-segments 2·5-4 mm, equal, ovate, obtuse. Stamens 2/3 as long to almost as long as perianth; anthers 1-2·2 mm, 2-6 times as long as the filaments. Capsule about equalling perianth, ovoid to broadly ellipsoid, usually trigonous at apex, obtuse and mucronate or rarely acute. Seeds 0·4-0·5 mm, without appendages. 2n = 84.{\i  Salt-marshes and damp, usually saline grassland. Most of Europe}. ?Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) ?Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Outer tepals with a conspicuous mucro, dark .............. ({\b e}) subsp. {\b libanoticus}
\par
1 Tepals with no or very small mucro, variously coloured
\par
2 Plant with at least one well-developed upper cauline leaf
\par
3 Uppermost leaf at least 3 times as long as sheath ................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b gerardi}
\par
3 Uppermost leaf less than 3 times as long as sheath ........ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b atrofuscus}
\par
2 Most stems without upper cauline leaves
\par
4 Inflorescence usually 30- to 60-flowered; first bract long
\par
  .......................................................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b soranthus}
\par
4 Inflorescence usually 5- to 20-flowered; first bract short
\par
  ........................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b montanus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b gerardi}: Stems usually slender, equalling or rarely exceeding the leaves. Inflorescence usually more than 7 cm, lax, with 20-50 flowers. Bracteoles usually acute. Anthers 2-3 times as long as the filaments.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b atrofuscus} (Rupr.) Printz, {\i Veg. Siber.-Mong. Front.} 177 (1921): Stems stout, much exceeding the leaves. Inflorescence less than 7 cm, more or less dense, with 5-20 flowers. Bracteoles obtuse. Flowers blackish-brown. Anthers 3½-5 times as long as the filaments.{\i  Arctic coasts of Norway and Russia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b montanus} Snogerup,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  131}: 185 (1978): Stems stout, exceeding the leaves. Inflorescence less than 5 cm, dense, with 5-20 flowers. Bracteoles acute. Flowers dark brown. Anthers 3-4 times as long as the filaments.{\i  E. Spain} ({\i mountains of Teruel prov.}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b soranthus} (Schrenk) Snogerup in Rech. fil.,{\i  Fl. Iran.}{\b  75}: 14 (1971): Stems stout, exceeding the leaves. Leaves 1-2 mm wide, flat. Inflorescence 3-13 cm, with (15-)30-60(-120) flowers. Bracteoles acute or obtuse. Flowers light brown, with dark stripes. Anthers 2½-4½ times as long as filaments.{\i  S.E. Russia and S. Ukraine}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b libanoticus} (J. Thiéb.) Snogerup in Rech fil.,{\i  Fl. Iran. }{\b 75}: 13 (1971). Stems stout, exceeding the leaves. Inflorescence 3-10 cm. Flowers dark. Anthers 3-6 times as long as filaments.{\i  Turkey-in-Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. J. tenuis} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  2}: 214 (1799) ({\i J. macer}  S.F. Gray). Plant densely caespitose. Stems 10-80 cm, rigid to weak, with a few basal sheaths and 2-3 basal cauline leaves. Leaves about as long as stem, 0·5-2 mm wide, flat, often conspicuously convolute; auricles long, obtuse, thin, whitish. Inflorescence with 5-40 flowers, usually lax, rarely with the flowers in a few clusters. Two lowest bracts leaf-like, usually exceeding the inflorescence. Perianth-segments 3·5-4 mm, subequal, narrowly ovate, long-acute. Stamens ½ as long as perianth; anthers 0·7-0·8 mm, 1/2-2/3 as long as the filaments. Capsule shorter than perianth, broadly ovoid, obtuse to truncate, shortly mucronate. Seeds 0·3-0·4 mm, obliquely ovoid, with short appendages. 2n = 84.{\i  Roadsides and other damp, open habitats; rarely in damp grassland. Widely naturalized, mainly in N., W. & C. Europe.} [Au Az Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Su.] ({\i Temperate North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. J. dudleyi} Wieg.,{\i  Bull. Torrey Bot. Club}{\b  27}: 524 (1900). Like {\b 19} but leaves only 1/3 as long as the stem; auricles short, cartilaginous, yellowish. 2n = 84. {\i Naturalized in two localities in Scotland; casual in C. Europe}. [Br.] ({\i Temperate North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. J. imbricatus} Laharpe,{\i  Mém. Soc. Hist. Nat. Paris }{\b 3}: 149 (1827). Perennial, densely caespitose. Stems 15-40(-80) cm, with several basal sheaths and 1-4 sub-basal leaves. Leaves (5-) 15-30 cm, shorter than the stem, 0·5-1 mm wide, canaliculate. Inflorescence with 5-25 flowers, usually dense. Perianth-segments equal, the outer ovate, acute to apiculate, the inner lanceolate, acute to obtuse and mucronate, with a wide scarious margin. Stamens 1/2-2/3 as long as perianth; anthers (0·8-)1·2-1·4 mm, usually about as long as filaments. Capsule 5-6 mm, exceeding perianth, trigonous-ovoid to -ellipsoid, obtuse. Seeds c. 0·4 mm, obliquely ovoid.{\i  Naturalized in rice-fields in Portugal.} [Lu.] ({\i Temperate South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The plants from Portugal have been referred to var.{\i  chamissonis} (Kunth) Buchenau, which is doubtfully distinguishable from the typical variant.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Poiophylli} Buchenau. Annuals, without a rhizome, usually caespitose. Leaves and bracts pungent. Leaves all cauline on flowering stems, flat or subterete, with marginal sclerenchyma-strands. Inflorescence apical; flowers with involucral bracteoles. Seeds without appendages.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. J. tenageia} L. fil.,{\i  Suppl.} 208 (1781). Plant caespitose or rarely with one stem. Stems 5-35 cm, erect, usually with 3
\par

\par
106}
\par