{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ½ as long to as long as the filaments. Capsule distinctly exceeding the perianth, narrowly pyramidal, tapering to a short beak, unilocular. Seeds 0·3-0·4 mm.{\i  C. & S. Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. J. striatus} Schousboe ex E.H.F. Meyer,{\i  Syn. Junc.} 27 (1822). Perennial with a horizontally creeping rhizome. Stems 30-70 cm, with several basal sheaths and 2-5 cauline leaves. Leaves unitubulose, perfectly and distinctly septate. Leaves, sheaths and stems strongly longitudinally sulcate Inflorescence of 2-20 heads; heads hemispherical to globose, with 8-30 flowers. Perianth-segments 3·5-5 mm, the inner markedly longer than the outer, narrowly ovate to lanceolate, cuspidate, the outer acute or mucronate. Stamens 1/2-2/3 as long as perianth; anthers 1·2-1·8 mm, 2-3 times as long as the filaments. Capsule exceeding the perianth, trigonous-ovoid, tapering to a beak. Seeds 0·5-0·6 mm. {\i Damp places. Mediterranean region and S.W. Europe.} Ga Gr Hs It Lu Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. J. fontanesii} Gay in Laharpe,{\i  Mém. Soc. Hist. Nat. Paris}{\b  3}: 130 (1827) ({\i J. striatus} auct., non Schousboe). Perennial, with rhizome weakly developed or absent, the new shoots arising from the nodes of creeping stems. Leaves unitubulose, perfectly and usually distinctly septate. Perianth-segments 2·5-4 mm, the inner longer than the outer, ovate to narrowly ovate, acute to acuminate. Stamens 1/2-2/3 as long as perianth; anthers 0·8-1·5 mm, 1½-3 times as long as the filaments. Capsule equalling or exceeding the perianth, with a beak 0·4-2 mm. Seeds 0·4-0·5 mm, pyriform to ovoid or subglobose, reticulate. {\i Fens and streamsides. S. Europe.} Al Bl Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b fontanesii}: Plant with stolons up to 200 cm; rhizome usually absent. Capsule usually much exceeding the perianth, trigonous-ovoid, tapering to a beak usually 1-2 mm.{\i  Throughout the western and central parts of the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pyramidatus} (Laharpe) Snogerup in Rech. fil., {\i Fl. Iran.}{\b  75}: 25 (1971). Plant with few or no stolons; rhizome usually present, though weak. Capsule slightly exceeding the perianth, narrowly pyramidal or rarely trigonous-ovoid, often abruptly contracted to a beak usually 0·5-1 mm. 2n = 40.{\i  E. Mediterranean region.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Intermediates between the subspecies are rather frequent in Sicilia and S. Italy. Plants from S. Spain and S. Portugal described as{\b  J. webbianus} V. Krecz., {\i Bull. Jard. Bot. URSS}{\b  30}: 98 (1932), have unusually large flowers and capsules with a long beak, but are best included in subsp. ({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. J. alpinus} Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  2}: 233 (1787) ({\i J. geniculatus} auct., non Schrank,{\i  J. alpinoarticulatus} auct., non Chaix). Perennial with a horizontally creeping rhizome. Stems 5-60(-80) cm, usually weak, with 0-1(-2) basal sheaths and (2-)3(-5) cauline leaves. Leaves unitubulose, perfectly septate, with a rather conspicuous adaxial furrow at base. Inflorescence very variable in form and size. Perianth-segments 2-3(-3·8) mm, equal or subequal; inner broadly obtuse; outer obtuse or subacute, often mucronate. Stamens 6, 1/2-2/3 as long as perianth; anthers 0·4-0·7 mm, 1/2-2/3 as long as the filaments. Capsule equalling or exceeding the perianth, obtuse, shortly mucronulate. Seeds 0·55-0·6 mm, ovoid, sometimes oblique, reticulate.{\i  Damp places. Most of Europe.} Al Au Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, ?E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers usually greenish to light brown; pedicellate 
\par
  flowers usually present ................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b nodulosus} 
\par
1 Flowers dark or reddish-brown; pedicellate flowers few 
\par
  or absent
\par
2 Stems usually 30-60 cm; heads usually 25-60 ............ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b geniculatus}
\par
2 Stems usually 10-20 cm; heads 1-7 .................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b alpestris}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alpinus} ({\i J. fuscoater}  Schreber, {\i J. alpinus} subsp. {\i arthrophyllus} (Brenner) Hyl.): Stems usually 30-60 cm. Inflorescence rather wide, with erecto-patent branches; heads usually 25-60; pedicellate flowers few or absent. Flowers small, dark or reddish-brown. Perianth-segments usually 2-2·5 mm, obtuse, the outer usually mucronate. Capsule equalling or slightly exceeding the perianth, ovoid. 2n = 40.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except Iceland and northern Fennoscandia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b nodulosus} (Wahlenb.) Lindman,{\i  Svensk Fanerogamfl.} 155 (1918): Stems usually 20-40 cm. Inflorescence usually narrow, with rather long, erect primary and secondary branches; heads usually 5-25, with few to many, usually greenish to light brown flowers; some pedicellate flowers usually present. Perianth-segments usually 2·2-3 mm, the outer subacute to obtuse, mucronate. Capsule usually much exceeding the perianth, subcylindrical. 2n = 40.{\i  Fennoscandia, Iceland and N. Russia.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b alpestris} (Hartman) A. & D. Löve, {\i Rep. Dept. Agric. Univ. Inst. Appl. Sci}.({\i Reykjavik}) ser. B,{\b  3}: 23 (1948). Stems usually 10-20 cm, the rhizomes often with short nodes. Inflorescence of 1-7 heads, with short branches; heads usually with 6-8 dark- to reddish-brown flowers; pedicellate flowers few or absent. Perianth-segments 2-3(-3·8) mm, broadly obtuse, the outer mucronate. Capsule slightly to much exceeding the perianth, usually somewhat tapering but abruptly contracted at apex. 2n = 40.{\i  N. Europe, southwards to S. Norway}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The hybrid between {\b 46} and {\b 49} is usually laxly caespitose, and intermediate between the parents in the shape of the perianth-segments and capsule, except that the capsule has concave sides, and the plant sets little or no seed and reproduces vegetatively. It is locally common in N. & C. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. J. anceps} Laharpe, {\i Mém. Soc. Hist. Nat. Paris}{\b  3}: 126 (1827). Perennial with a stout, creeping rhizome. Stems 20-60 cm, usually rigid, with 0-2 basal sheaths and 3-5 cauline leaves. Leaves unitubulose, perfectly septate, with a rather conspicuous adaxial furrow and often an abaxial edge basally. Inflorescence usually of 50-80 heads, lax or crowded, often divided into two parts; primary branches more or less erect; secondary erectopatent; heads with 3-4(-8) usually dark- to reddish-brown flowers. Perianth-segments 2-2·7 mm, subequal, ovate to oblong; outer subacute, mucronulate; inner obtuse. Stamens 6, c. 2/3 as long as perianth; anthers 0·7-1 mm, equalling or slightly longer than the filaments. Capsule slightly exceeding perianth, trigonous-ovoid, tapering at apex or in inland variants subobtuse, with a mucro usually 0·3-0·5 mm. Seeds c. 0·5 mm, reticulate. 2n = 40. {\i Wet places. W. & S. Europe, extending to S. Sweden.} Al Be Co Da Ga Ge Gr Ho Hs It Ju Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The hybrid between {\b 47} and {\b 49} is laxly caespitose, with rigid stems. It resembles {\b 47} in perianth-segments and capsules although the capsule is rather small and with concave sides, but the inflorescence consists of many small heads, and is contracted. It sets little or no seed and reproduces vegetatively. It is locally common in Denmark, Sweden, France and Italy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. J. requienii} Parl.,{\i  Fl. Ital.}{\b  2}: 346 (1857). Perennial, mat-forming by means of slender, branching rhizomes with long internodes. Stems 2-10 cm, slender, with 1-3 basal sheaths and 2-3 cauline leaves. Leaves up to 4 cm, unitubulose, perfectly septate, sulcate at base. Inflorescence of 1-6 heads; heads usually with 3-4 dark- to reddish-brown flowers. Perianth-segments 1·7-2·2 mm, equal or subequal, ovate or the inner oblong, obtuse; outer often mucronate. Stamens 6, 3/4-4/5 as long as perianth; anthers 0·6-0·9 mm, 1-1½ times as long as the filaments. Capsule 2·2-2·5 mm, much exceeding the perianth, trigonous-ovoid, more or less abruptly contracted into a short beak. Seeds c. 0·5 mm, reticulate.{\i  Fens and streamsides. •  Corse.} Co.
\par

\par
110}
\par