{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. P. filiformis} Pers., {\i Syn. Pl.}{\b  1}: 152 (1805). Leaves up to 1·5 mm wide but usually less than 1 mm, obtuse or rounded; sheaths closed, tubular towards the base at least when young. Spikes widely interrupted, especially in fruit. Fruitlets 2-2·75 mm, with a very short, verruciform, subapical beak. 2n = 78. {\i Chiefly near the sea and often in brackish water. N. Europe and the Alps, extending very locally southwards to N.E. Spain, S. Italy and Crna Gora.} Au Br Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  P}. × {\b suecicus} K.Richter,{\i  Pl. Eur.}{\b  1}: 15 (1890) ({\b 20} × {\b 22}) is a fairly frequent hybrid which can be confused with either {\b 20} or {\b 22}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. P. vaginatus} Turcz., {\i Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  27}({\b 2}): 66 (1854). Leaves up to 2·5 mm wide but mostly less than 1 mm, obtuse or rounded; sheaths open, convolute, the lower ones loose and inflated with a more or less reduced lamina. Spikes shortly interrupted. Fruitlets 2·5-3 mm, with a very short, verruciform, subapical beak. 2n = c. 88.{\i  Usually in brackish water. E. Sweden and W. Finland.} Fe Su. ({\i N. Asia, North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. P. pectinatus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 127 (1753). Leaves usually less than 2 mm wide (sometimes wider on young non-flowering branches), gradually acute to apiculate or mucronate; sheaths open, convolute, usually white-margined. Spikes at first cylindrical, later becoming more or less interrupted. Fruitlets 3-5 mm, with a short, subventral beak. 2n = 78. {\i Base-rich or brackish water. Almost throughout Europe.} All except Az Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.        Groenlandia}       Gay
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves opposite or rarely in whorls of 3; sheaths adnate to the leaf-base, with auricles in the involucral leaves, without auricles in the other leaves. Spikes few-flowered, shortly pedunculate. Carpels 4, free. Fruitlets achene-like, with thin pericarp; embryo spiral.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. densa} (L.) Fourr., {\i Alm. Soc. Linn. Lyon} nov. ser., {\b 17}: 169 (1869) ({\i Potamogeton densus} L.). Rhizome creeping. Leaves up to 4 × 1·5 cm, submerged, ovate to lanceolate, obtuse, minutely denticulate, 3- to 5-veined. Peduncles 0·5-1·5 cm, recurved in fruit. Fruitlets 3 mm, shortly beaked. 2n = 30.{\i  Fresh-water streams, ditches and ponds. Europe, northwards to Scotland and Denmark, and eastwards to Lithuania and Turkey.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu †No Po Rm Rs (B) Si †Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 178.     RUPPIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.H. Valentine. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Submerged, perennial herbs of saline water. Leaves narrowly linear, sheathing at the base. Flowers hermaphrodite, small, ebracteate, in 2-flowered, pedunculate spikes; peduncles slender, often accrescent in fruit. Perianth absent. Stamens 2; anthers sessile, opening by longitudinal slits. Carpels 4(-10), free, with 1 ovule, sessile in flower but usually becoming slender-stipitate in fruit. Fruitlets indehiscent; seeds without endosperm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.              Ruppia}                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves alternate, or the involucral subopposite, minutely denticulate at the apex, otherwise entire; sheaths shortly auriculate. Spikes subtended by 2 subopposite involucral leaves with more or less inflated sheaths; flowers arranged one above the other on opposite sides of the rhachis. Stamens with a small dorsal appendage at the base. Carpels with a sessile, peltate stigma.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: G.Reese, {\i Zeitschr. Bot.} ({\i Stuttgart}) {\b 50}: 237-264 (1962). J. C. Gamarro, {\i Darwiniana}{\b  14}: 575-608 (1968).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Peduncles more than 8 cm, much elongated after anthesis,
\par
  spirally coiled in fruit; anthers c. 1·7 mm, reniform;
\par
  leaves usually rounded or obtuse ................................................... {\b 2. cirrhosa} 
\par
1 Peduncles usually less than 6 cm, shortly accrescent 
\par
  after anthesis, not spirally coiled in fruit;
\par
  anthers 0·6-0·7 mm, elliptical; leaves usually acute .................... {\b 1. maritima}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. maritima} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 127 (1753) ({\i R. rostellata} Koch). Leaves less than 1 mm wide, usually acute at least in flowering plants; sheaths of involucral leaves only slightly inflated. Peduncles up to 6 cm, shortly accrescent after anthesis, often recurved or somewhat flexuous in fruit but not spirally coiled. Anthers 0·6-0·7 mm, elliptical. Fruitlets 2-3 mm (excluding the stipe), long- or short-stipitate, very obliquely ovoid, often curved. 2n = 20.{\i  Saline water, usually near the sea. Most of Europe.} All except Al Au ?Cz He Hu Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. R. cirrhosa} (Petagna) Grande,{\i  Bull Orto Bot. Napoli}{\b  5}: 58 (1918) ({\i R. spiralis} L. ex Dumort.,{\i  R. maritima} subsp.{\i  spiralis} (L. ex Dumort.) Ascherson & Graebner, {\i R. maritima} auct., non L.). Leaves up to 1 mm wide, usually rounded or obtuse; sheaths of involucral leaves usually conspicuously inflated. Peduncles more than 8 cm, much elongated after anthesis, spirally coiled in fruit. Anthers c. 1·7 mm, reniform. Fruitlets 2·5-3 mm (excluding the stipe), long-stipitate, somewhat obliquely ovoid. 2n = 40. {\i Saline waters near the sea. Coasts of most of Europe except N. Russia.} Al Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs It Ju Lu No Po Rs (B, W, K, E) Sa Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 179.       POSIDONIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.H. Valentine. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Submerged, marine perennial herbs with creeping rhizomes. Leaves basal, alternate, linear, sheathing at the base. Inflorescence of 1 or more aggregated spikes borne on an elongated peduncle and subtended by leaf-like bracts. Flowers hermaphrodite or the uppermost with a reduced gynoecium, ebracteate. Perianth absent. Stamens 3; anthers sessile, opening by longitudinal slits. Carpel 1, ovule 1. Fruit a berry; seeds without endosperm; embryo straight.
\par

\par
11}
\par