{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. NIVALES Chrtek & Krisa. Inflorescence a subumbellate panicle of several clusters on erect or recurved peduncles.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. arcuata} Swartz,{\i  Summa Veg. Scand.} 13 (1814). Plant 5-25(-30) cm, caespitose, with short stolons. Basal leaves 1-3 mm wide, rigid, deeply canaliculate, usually glabrous. Inflorescence with 2-8 clusters of 3-10 flowers, the outer on long, recurved peduncles, the inner on short, erect peduncles. Bracteoles ciliate. Perianth-segments 2-2·3 mm, equal. Anthers as long as or shorter than filaments. Capsule c. 2 mm, broadly ovoid, about as long as perianth-segments. Seeds (0·8-)1-1·2 mm; basal appendage short, dark brown. 2n = 36, 42. {\i Stony mountainsides and tundra. N. Europe, southwards to} 56° 45' {\i N. in Scotland.} Br Fa ?Fe Is No Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. confusa} Lindeb., {\i Bot. Not.}{\b  1855}: 9 (1855). Like {\b 5} but laxly caespitose; basal leaves sometimes not canaliculate; inflorescence with 2-5 clusters on erect peduncles, or sometimes subsessile; perianth-segments sometimes up to 3 mm, subequal; capsule sometimes up to 2·8 mm; seeds sometimes up to 1·6 mm, reddish-brown. 2n = 48.{\i  Stony or sandy tundra or mountainsides. Arctic and subarctic Europe and mountains of Norway.} Fe Is No Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Perhaps not specifically distinct from {\b 5}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. L. arctica} Blytt, {\i Norg. Fl.}{\b  1}: 299 (1861) ({\i L. nivalis }auct., non Sprengel). Plant (3-)8-12(-18) cm, laxly caespitose, with very short stolons. Basal and cauline leaves (1·5-)2·5-3·5(5.5) mm wide, flat, rigid. Inflorescence with sessile to subsessile clusters of 5-10 flowers. Bracteoles entire or shallowly lacerate. Perianth-segments 1·5-1·7 mm, subequal, with hyaline margin. Anthers about as long as filaments. Capsule up to 2 mm, oblong-ovoid, slightly longer than perianth-segments. Seeds 0·9-1·2 mm, pale brown; basal appendage short. 2n = 24. {\i Stony mountain-sides and tundra; calcicole. Arctic Europe and mountains of Norway}. No Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. ALPINAE Chrtek & Krisa. Inflorescence dense, often interrupted, drooping, spike-like.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 8-11}). {\b L. spicata} group. Caespitose, with short stock. Basal leaves usually canaliculate, glabrous to sparsely ciliate. Inflorescence usually interrupted. Lower bract about as long as the inflorescence. Perianth-segments subequal. Seeds with a short basal appendage.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Anthers about as long as filaments .................................................. {\b 8. spicata} 
\par
1 Anthers longer than filaments
\par
2 Anthers 0·6-0·8 mm; capsule 1·4-2 mm; seeds 0·8-1·2 mm ..... {\b 11. hispanica}
\par
2 Anthers 0·9-1·2 mm; capsule 2·3-2·9 mm; seeds 1·5-1·7 mm
\par
3 Cauline leaves often canaliculate; capsule (1·4-)2·3-2·6 mm;
\par
   seeds (1·1-)1·3-1·4(-1·5) mm ........................................................... {\b 9. italica} 
\par
3 Cauline leaves flat; capsule (2·4-)2·5-2·9(-3·1) mm;
\par
  seeds (1·4-)1·5-1·7(-2) mm ........................................................... {\b 10. pindica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. L. spicata} (L.) DC. in Lam. & DC., {\i Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  3}: 161 (1805). Plant (5-)7-25(-45) cm. Basal leaves 1-2(-4) mm wide, slightly recurved. Perianth-segments (2-)2·5-3 mm, aristate. Anthers about as long as the filaments. Style as long as the ovary. Capsule broadly ellipsoid to globose, dark brown to blackish, equalling the perianth-segments.{\i  Rocks, stony ground and heathy grassland; calcifuge. N. Europe, southwards to }56° 15' {\i N. in Scotland; mountains of C. & S. Europe southwards to Corse, the Alps and the S. Carpathians.} Au Br Co Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge He Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, W) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b spicata}: Plant usually 15-25 cm. Inflorescence oblong-elliptical. Capsule (1·9-)2·1-2·5(-2·6) mm; seeds (1-)1·1-1·5(-1·6) mm. 2n = 24. {\i N. Europe; locally in C. & S. Europe from S.W. Poland to S.C. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b mutabilis} Chrtek & Krisa, {\i Bot. Not. }{\b 115}: 302 (1962): Plant usually 7-15 cm. Inflorescence ovoid. Capsule (1·5-)1·7-2(-2·2) mm; seeds (0·7-)0·8-1·2(-1·3) mm. 2n = 12, 14. •{\i  Jura, Alps, Carpathians, N. Appennini, Corse}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. L. italica} Parl., {\i Fl. Ital.}{\b  2}: 309 (1857) ({\i L. spicata} auct., non (L.) DC.). Plant (7-)15-25(-35) cm. Inflorescence oblong-elliptical. Perianth-segments c. 2·5 mm. Anthers much longer than filaments. Capsule (2-)2·3-2·6(-2·8) mm, slightly longer than perianth-segments, oblong-ovoid, brown to blackish. Seeds (1·1-)1·3-1·4(-1·5) mm, brown to rusty brown.{\i  Mountain rocks and alpine grassland. C. part of Balkan peninsula; C. Italy and Sardegna.} Al Bu ?Co Gr It Ju Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. L. pindica} (Hausskn.) Chrtek & Krisa, {\i Webbia}{\b  19}: 6 (1964) ({\i L. bulgarica} subsp.{\i  pindica }(Hausskn.) Chrtek & Krisa). Plant (15-)20-30(-45) cm. Basal and cauline leaves (3-)5-8 mm wide, flat. Inflorescence oblong-elliptical. Perianth-segments c. 2·5 mm. Anthers much longer than filaments. Capsule (2·4-)2·5-2·9(-3·1) mm, ovoid, yellowish- to dark brown, distinctly longer than perianth-segments. Seeds (1·4-)1·5-1·7(-2) mm, brown to rusty brown.{\i  Stony and grassy places. • Mountains of S.W. Jugoslavia and N.W. Greece, and of S. Italy}. Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. L. hispanica} Chrtek & Krisa, {\i Novit. Bot. Horti Bot. Univ. Carol. Prag.}{\b  1965}: 28 (1965). Plant 6-20(-30) cm. Basal leaves slightly recurved. Inflorescence ovoid, rarely interrupted. Perianth-segments 1·5-2·5 mm. Anthers longer than filaments. Capsule 1·4-2 mm, ovoid, dark brown to blackish, usually slightly shorter than perianth-segments. Seeds 0·8-1·2 mm.{\i  Stony and grassy places. Pyrenees and mountains of Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. L. nutans} (Vill.) Duval-Jouve,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  10}: 80 (1863) ({\i L. pediformis} (Chaix) DC.). Plant (15-)30-50(-70) cm, laxly caespitose, with long, stout stock. Leaf-sheaths decaying into a brownish fibrous mass; basal leaves 3-6(-8) mm wide, flat. Inflorescence 2-4(-6) cm, with 20-100 flowers, interrupted. Lower bract often longer than inflorescence. Perianth-segments 4-5(-5·5) mm, subequal, dark brown, with wide hyaline margin. Anthers 4-5 times as long as filaments. Style c. 2 or more times as long as ovary. Capsule 4-4·5(-5) mm, ovoid-pyriform. Seeds 2-2·3 mm, pale brown; basal appendage 0·2-0·5 mm. 2n = 12. {\i Open woods, rocks and mountain pastures. • Mountains of S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. L. caespitosa} Gay, {\i Pl. Astur. Exsicc}. n. 216 (1836) ({\i L. pediformis} (Chaix) DC. subsp. {\i caespitosa} (Gay) Guinea). Plant (15-)20-30(-40) cm, more or less caespitose, with short and slender creeping stolons clothed with persistent leaf-sheaths. Basal leaves 1·5-3 mm wide, convolute. Inflorescence 0·9-3 cm, slightly interrupted, with 3-20 flowers. Lower bract longer than inflorescence. Perianth-segments 3·8-4·5 mm, subequal, with hyaline margin. Style about twice as long as ovary. Anthers 4-5 times as long as filaments. Capsule 2·8-3·6 mm, globose, about as long as perianth. Seeds 1·6-1·9 mm, pale brown; basal appendage short. {\i Rocks and stony pastures; usually calcifuge. • Mountains of N. & C. Spain and N.C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subspecies have been described from Spain by Montserrat Recoder but require further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. NODULOSAE Chrtek & Krisa. Inflorescence erect, condensed into few-flowered clusters in a cyme. Rhizomes robust, with short internodes.
\par

\par
113}
\par