{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. L. nodulosa} (Bory & Chaub.) E.H.F. Meyer, {\i Linnaea}{\b  22}: 410 (1849). Plant 30-50(-70) cm, caespitose, with short nodulose stolons. Basal leaves 3-5(-6) mm wide, strongly ciliate. Inflorescence of 2-7(-12) stipitate clusters of 2-7 flowers on straight, erect branches. Lower bract distinctly shorter than inflorescence. Perianth-segments 4·5-5·5(-6) mm, equal, pale brown, with wide hyaline margin. Anthers much longer than filaments. Style short. Capsule 4-5 mm, about equalling the perianth-segments. Seeds c. 2 mm, greyish-brown.{\i  Open woods and stony scrub. S. Greece and S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Anthelaea} (Griseb.) Buchenau. Perennials or annuals. Flowers usually in pairs, sometimes borne singly or in larger groups. Seeds with short to inconspicuous basal appendage or appendage absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. L. sylvatica} (Hudson) Gaudin, {\i Agrost. Helv.}{\b  2}: 240 (1811). Plant (30-)40-80(-100) cm, robust, laxly caespitose, with numerous short, ascending stolons. Basal leaves 5-20(-30) mm wide, spreading, sparsely to densely ciliate. Flowers in groups of 2-5. Bracteoles conspicuously lacerate to ciliate. Perianth-segments 2-4(-4·5) mm, brown; inner longer than outer, with wide hyaline margin. Anthers up to 6 times as long as filaments. Style longer than ovary. Capsule about equalling the perianth-segments, ovoid. Seeds slightly shiny; basal appendage small. {\i Damp woods, moorland and rocky places; usually calcifuge. S., W. & C. Europe.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fa Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (W) Si Tu [Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sylvatica}: Bracts 8-10(-15) mm. Perianth-segments 3-4(-4·5) mm. Capsule (3·5-)4-4·4 mm; seeds 1·5-2(-2·2) mm. 2n = 12.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, except Portugal and parts of N.W. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b henriquesii} (Degen) P. Silva,{\i  Agron. Lusit.}{\b  12}: 359 (1950): Bracts (3·5-)4-8(-12) mm. Perianth-segments 2-3(-3·4) mm. Capsule 2·2-3 mm; seeds 1·3-1·5 mm. 2n = c. 84. •{\i  N. & C. Spain, N. W. Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subsp. {\b croatica} Beyer,{\i  Verh. Bot. Ver. Brandenb.}{\b  41}: xix (1899), with capsules up to 2·5 mm, shorter than the perianth, was described from Jugoslavia. It requires investigation. Of similar uncertain taxonomic status is{\b  L. sicula} Parl., {\i Fl. Ital. }{\b 2}: 303 (1857), from S. Italy and Sicilia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. L. sieberi} Tausch,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 19}: 423 (1836). Plant (30-)40-60 cm, laxly caespitose. Basal leaves 3-6 mm wide, distinctly ciliate. Flowers borne 2-3 together. Perianth-segments 3-3·5(-4) mm, reddish-brown. Anthers longer than filaments. Style longer than ovary. Capsule 2·5-3(-3·5) mm, ovoid, equalling the perianth. Seeds 1·2-1·3 mm.{\i  Coniferous woods. • Alps; mountains of C. Jugoslavia.} Au Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. L. lutea} (All.) DC. in Lam. & DC., {\i Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  3}: 159 (1805). Plant (10-)15-30 cm, laxly caespitose, with short stolons. Basal leaves 3-6 mm wide, with reddish-brown sheaths. Flower clusters erect, pedunculate. Perianth-segments 2·5-3 mm, equal, yellow. Anthers about as long as or longer than filaments. Capsule c. 2·5 mm, subovoid to globose, dark brown to blackish, equalling perianth-segments. Style longer than ovary. Seeds 1-1·5 mm, rusty brown, oblong; basal appendage inconspicuous. 2n = 12. {\i Rocks and stony mountain pastures; calcifuge. • Alps, Pyrenees, N. Appennini.} Au Ga He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. L. purpureosplendens} Seub., {\i Fl. Azor.} 23 (1844). Plant 20-60 cm, caespitose, with stolons. Basal leaves 2-8 mm wide, flat, ciliate; leaf-sheaths purple at base; cauline leaves short. Perianth-segments 4·5-5 mm, the inner about equalling the outer, purplish. Anthers 2½-3 times as long as filaments. Capsule globose to ovoid, reddish-brown, shorter than perianth-segments. Seeds 1·2-1·7 mm, dark brown; basal appendage inconspicuous.{\i  Open mountain woods. • Açores.} Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. L. nivea} (L.) DC. in Lam. & DC., {\i Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  3}: 158 (1805). Plant 40-60(-80) cm, laxly caespitose, with long stolons. Basal leaves 3-4(-5) mm wide, flat; cauline leaves 15-20 cm. Inflorescence with 6-20 flower-clusters; peduncles suberect to somewhat recurved. Perianth-segments c. 5 mm, whitish, unequal, acute. Anthers about as long as or shorter than filaments. Style longer than ovary. Capsule 2-2·5 mm, globose, c. ½ as long as perianth. Seeds c. 1·5 mm, reddish-brown. 2n = 12.{\i  Woodland and scrub, mainly in the mountains. • From N.C. France southwards to N.E. Spain, C. Italy and Slovenija.} Au Ga Ge He Hs It Ju ?Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. L. lactea} (Link) E.H.F. Meyer, {\i Syn. Luzul.} 15 (1823). Plants 30-60(-70) cm, laxly caespitose, with long stolons; stem rigid. Basal leaves c. 4 mm wide, with slightly revolute margins; cauline leaves 6-10 cm; leaf-sheaths soon decaying into a brownish fibrous mass. Inflorescence with 8-20 clusters, each cluster of 8-20(-30) flowers. Perianth-segments 4·5-5(-5·5) mm, equal, subobtuse or acuminate, whitish, translucent. Anthers up to twice as long as filaments. Style longer than ovary. Capsule c. 2 mm, ovoid, 1/3-1/2 as long as perianth-segments. Seeds 1·1-1·2 mm, reddish-brown; basal appendage inconspicuous. 2n = 12. {\i Woods, scrub, heaths and mountain meadows. • N. & C. Spain, N. Portugal; Açores.} Az Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. L. pedemontana} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 115 (1852). Plant (25-)30-60 cm, caespitose, with short stolons. Basal leaves convolute; cauline leaves c. 2 mm wide, somewhat convolute to flat. Inflorescence lax, with (10-)20-40(-50) clusters, each with 2-3(-5) flowers. Perianth-segments (2·8-)3-3·3 mm, whitish, translucent, subequal. Anthers about twice as long as filaments. Style about twice as long as ovary. Capsule 2·8-3·2 mm, about as long as or slightly shorter than perianth-segments, oblong-ovoid. Seeds 1·2-1·5 mm, greyish-brown. {\i Open woods and scrub. • S.W. Alps, N. Appennini, Corse. }Co Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. L. luzuloides} (Lam.) Dandy & Wilmott,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 76}: 352 (1938) ({\i L. nemorosa} (Pollich) E. H. F. Meyer, non Hornem.). Plant (30-)40-65(-75) cm, laxly caespitose, with short stolons. Basal leaves 3-6 mm wide, flat, long-ciliate. Inflorescence corymbose, lax or condensed with divaricate branches with clusters of 2-10 flowers. Perianth-segments (2-)2·5-3·5 mm, whitish, sometimes suffused with red, the outer shorter than the inner, acute. Capsule ovoid, about as long as perianth-segments. Anthers c. 3 times as long as filaments. Style longer than ovary. Seeds 1·1-1·2 mm, brown to black. 2n = 12.{\i  Woods and meadows. From the Netherlands and Poland southwards to the Pyrenees, N. Appennini and Macedonia; introduced with grass-seed to N. Europe and widely naturalized. }Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho ?Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W) Tu [Br Da Fe No Rs (B, C) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b luzuloides}: Inflorescence lax. Perianth-segments whitish. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cuprina} (Rochel ex Ascherson & Graebner) Chrtek & Krisa,{\i  Preslia }{\b 46}: 212 (1974): Inflorescence more or less condensed. Perianth-segments suffused with red.{\i  Throughout most of the native range of the species, mainly in the mountains}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. L. alpinopilosa} (Chaix) Breistr.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Sci. Dauph.}{\b  61}: 609 (1947) ({\i L. spadicea} (All.) DC.). Plant (15-)25-40(-50) cm,
\par

\par
114}
\par