{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 22 Racemes 3-20, subdigitate ...............................................{\b  148. Dichanthium} 
\par
22 Racemes paired
\par
23 Stem simple; racemes 4-14 cm ....................................... {\b 149. Andropogon}
\par
23 Stem usually branched; racemes 2-4 cm ......................... {\b 150. Hyparrhenia}
\par
16 Spikelets not in groups of 2(-3) with 1 sessile and
\par
   1(-2) pedicellate
\par
24 Upper glume with hooked spines on the veins ......................... {\b 128. Tragus}
\par
24 Upper glume without hooked spines on the veins
\par
25 Inflorescence a single, terminal spike or raceme
\par
26 Palea with 2-4 dorsal awns; spikelets usually pendent ..... {\b 43. Pleuropogon}
\par
26 Palea unawned; spikelets erect or patent 
\par
27 Glumes longer than the florets
\par
28 Spikelets in pairs at each node of the rhachis ....................... {\b 51. Crithopsis}
\par
28 Spikelets solitary at each node of the rhachis
\par
29 Spikelets not embedded in concavities of the rhachis ............... {\b 34. Mibora}
\par
29 Spikelets ± embedded in concavities of the rhachis,
\par
   except at anthesis
\par
30 Spikelets with 3 or more florets ................................................... {\b 5. Lolium}
\par
30 Spikelets with 1 or 2 florets
\par
31 Lateral spikelets with 1 glume ............................................... {\b 98. Hainardia}
\par
31 Lateral spikelets with 2 glumes
\par
32 Spikelets with 2 florets; rhachis not disarticulating
\par
   at maturity; lateral veins of lemma extending to apex ............. {\b 96. Pholiurus}
\par
32 Spikelets with 1 floret; rhachis disarticulating at
\par
   maturity; lateral veins of lemma very short ............................ {\b 97. Parapholis} 
\par
27 Glumes shorter than the florets
\par
33 Lower glume very small, the upper absent; leaves setiform, 
\par
   patent at maturity; sheaths coriaceous, whitish,
\par
   erect, persistent .......................................................................... {\b 116. Nardus}
\par
33 One or both glumes conspicuous; leaves and sheaths not
\par
   as above
\par
34 Spikelets with the back of the lemma towards the rhachis
\par
35 Some lemmas in each spikelet with a geniculate, dorsal awn 
\par
36 Perennial .................................................................................. {\b 62. Avenula} 
\par
36 Annual
\par
37 Lowest lemma awned, as long as the 2nd lemma ................... {\b 66. Gaudinia}
\par
37 Lowest lemma unawned, shorter than the 2nd lemma ......... {\b 67. Ventenata}
\par
35 Awns, if present, not dorsal and geniculate 
\par
38 Perennial or biennial
\par
39 Lateral spikelets with 1 glume ..................................................... {\b 5. Lolium}
\par
39 Lateral spikelets with 2 glumes
\par
40 Glumes unequal ............................................................. {\b 45. Brachypodium}
\par
40 Glumes subequal ................................................................. {\b 46. Festucopsis}
\par
38 Annual
\par
41 Spikelets ± embedded in concavities of the rhachis,
\par
   except at anthesis
\par
42 Spikelets with 1 fertile floret .................................................... {\b 33. Psilurus}
\par
42 Spikelets with 4-5 fertile florets ......................................... {\b 11. Narduroides}
\par
41 Spikelets not embedded in concavities of the rhachis
\par
43 Inflorescence of 1-2(-6) spikelets
\par
44 Rhachilla concealed by the florets; palea conspicuously
\par
   pectinate-ciliate ................................................................ {\b 45. Brachypodium}
\par
44 Rhachilla easily visible between the florets;
\par
   palea not conspicuously pectinate-ciliate ................................. {\b 15. Vulpiella} 
\par
43 Inflorescence of numerous spikelets
\par
45 Lemma densely tuberculate ..................................................... {\b 10. Castellia}
\par
45 Lemma not tuberculate
\par
46 Lemma with an apical awn
\par
47 Glumes subequal ................................................................. {\b 9. Micropyrum}
\par
47 Glumes very unequal
\par
48 Grain adherent to palea; hilum at least ¾ as long as grain ........... {\b 6. Vulpia}
\par
48 Grain ± free from palea; hilum less than ½ as long 
\par
   as grain ....................................................................................... {\b 7. Ctenopsis}
\par
46 Lemma unawned 
\par
49 Inflorescence pectinate; spikelets at an angle of 45-90° to
\par
   the rhachis after anthesis .................................................... {\b 8. Wangenheimia}
\par
49 Inflorescence not pectinate; spikelets ± appressed to 
\par
   the rhachis after anthesis
\par
50 Glumes unequal
\par
51 Inflorescence c. 10 mm wide .............................................. {\b 23. Sclerochloa} 
\par
51 Inflorescence not more than 2 mm wide ................................. {\b 66. Galldinia}
\par
50 Glumes subequal 
\par
52 Glumes ± strongly keeled; grain with punctiform hilum ... {\b 12. Desmazeria} 
\par
52 Glumes not keeled; grain with linear hilum ........................ {\b 9. Micropyrum}
\par
34 Spikelets with the side of the lemma towards the rhachis
\par
53 Spikelets in groups of 2-6 at each node of the rhachis
\par
54 Spikelets with usually 3-5 hermaphrodite florets;
\par
   rhachis tough
\par
55 Spikelets in groups of 2-6 at each node of the rhachis;
\par
   glumes narrowly lanceolate to subulate; awn of lemma 
\par
   not more than 3 mm .................................................................... {\b 47. Leymus}
\par
55 Spikelets in pairs at each node of the rhachis, at 
\par
   least in the middle part of the spike; glumes narrowly
\par
   lanceolate; awn of lemma 15-20 mm .......................................... {\b 48. Elymus}
\par
54 Spikelets with 1-2 hermaphrodite florets; rhachis often
\par
   fragile
\par
56 Spikelets in pairs at each node of the rhachis, with 
\par
   2 florets, the lower hermaphrodite, the upper sterile ......... {\b 59. Taeniatherum}
\par
56 Spikelets usually in groups of 3 at each node of the 
\par
   rhachis
\par
57 Spikelets sessile, with 2-3 florets, the lower 1-2 
\par
   hermaphrodite, the upper sterile; rhachis fragile ........... {\b 56. Psathyrostachys}
\par
57 At least the lateral spikelets in each group pedicellate,
\par
   with 2 florets, the lower usually hermaphrodite and the 
\par
   upper sterile
\par
58 Central spike sessile, hermaphrodite, the lateral 
\par
   pedicellate, hermaphrodite, male or sterile; glumes not
\par
   connate at base; rhachis fragile or tough .................................. {\b 57. Hordeum}
\par
58 All spikelets pedicellate, the central hermaphrodite 
\par
   or male, the lateral hermaphrodite; glumes connate at
\par
   base; rhachis tough .............................................................. {\b 58. Hordelymus}
\par
53 Spikelets solitary at each node of the rhachis
\par
59 Glumes subulate, with 0-1 vein
\par
60 Spikelets with 5-7 florets; glumes covering the sides 
\par
   of the lower florets, weakly keeled; lemma not keeled,
\par
   glabrous ...................................................................................... {\b 47. Leymus}
\par
60 Spikelets with 2 florets; glumes covering the backs of
\par
   the florets, strongly keeled; lemma strongly keeled,
\par
   with rigid, pectinate cilia on the keel ............................................ {\b 55. Secale}
\par
59 Glumes not subulate, with several ± distinct veins
\par
61 Glumes with 2 prominent keels bearing tufts of hair .......... {\b 54. Dasypyrum}
\par

\par
119}
\par