{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 long as filaments. Style as long as ovary. Capsule 2·8-4·5 mm, ovoid. Seeds 1·3-1·6 mm; basal appendage short, straight. 2n = 24. {\i Woods and hedges; somewhat calcifuge. S., W. & S.C. Europe, northwards to C. England.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cr Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The complex pattern of variation shown by {\b 30} is still imperfectly known, especially in the Balkan peninsula, and it is therefore difficult to delimit subspecies (as proposed by Montserrat-Recoder for Spain) at this stage.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. L. luzulina} (Vill.) Dalla Torre & Sarnth.,{\i  Fl. Tirol}{\b  6}({\b 1}): 426 (1906) ({\i L. flavescens} (Host) Gaudin). Plant (10-)15-25(-30) cm, laxly caespitose, with long, slender stolons. Basal leaves 2-4 mm wide, flat, with short yellowish apex. Inflorescence with unequal patent branches, with c. 10 flowers. Perianth-segments 3·5-5 mm, subequal, with wide hyaline margin, yellowish to pale brown. Anthers as long as filaments. Style about as long as ovary. Capsule more or less ovoid, distinctly longer than perianth, yellowish-brown. Seeds 1·3-1·5 mm, reddish-brown; basal appendage usually as long as seeds, falcate. 2n = 24.{\i  Coniferous woods. • Mountains of C. & S. Europe}. Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc  BROMELIALES
\par


\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 190.         BROMELIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs, often epiphytic. Leaves alternate or basal, usually with sheathing base, often furnished with absorbent, scale-like hairs. Flowers regular, hermaphrodite, in spikes, racemes or capitula, often with conspicuously coloured bracts. Perianth of distinct calyx and corolla, each of 3 segments, free or connate. Stamens 6. Ovary 3-locular, superior or inferior; ovules numerous. Fruit a berry or capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 An almost exclusively American family.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.      Fascicularia}        Mez
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Robust cushion-plants with short, branched stem and spinose-dentate leaves in dense, crowded rosettes. Inflorescence a sessile, terminal capitulum subtended by broadly oblong, spinose dentate bracts. Sepals and petals free; ovary inferior, surmounted by a short hypanthial tube. Fruit a berry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. pitcairniifolia} (Verlot) Mez in A. & C. DC., {\i Monogr. Phan.}{\b  9}: 10 (1896). Leaves up to 35 cm, tapered from a wide, sheathing base to an acute apex, coriaceous, sparsely covered with white scales when young, dark, somewhat glaucous green, but the innermost, before and during anthesis, bright red on the proximal part of the upper surface; marginal spines pungent, c. 8 mm apart. Capitulum c. 5 cm in diameter. Sepals c. 20 mm, oblong-lanceolate, whitish, erect. Petals slightly exceeding sepals, oblong, pale blue, erect but with out-turned apex. Hypanthial tube c. 5 mm. {\i Naturalized on maritime rocks on islands off the coasts of S.W. England and N.W. France.} [Br Ga.] ({\i Chile}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc  COMMELINALES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 191.              COMMELINACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs; stems often swollen at the nodes.Leaves alternate, often distichous, entire, with a closed, somewhat membranous basal sheath. Flowers hermaphrodite, in terminal or axillary cymes, often closely invested by 1 or 2 large, leaf-like bracts. Perianth-segments 6, the 3 outer sepaloid, the 3 inner petaloid, usually fugitive. Stamens 6, of which 3 are sometimes reduced to staminodes. Ovary superior, 3-locular, with simple style and capitate or shortly 3-lobed stigma. Fruit a loculicidal capsule; seeds few, marked by a small callosity indicating the position of the embryo.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A mainly tropical and subtropical family, represented in Europe only by some ornamental species escaped from gardens.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals unequal ......................................................................... {\b 3. Commelina} 
\par
1 Petals equal
\par
2 Cymes subtended by paired, leaf-like bracts; stamens 
\par
  all similar ................................................................................ {\b 1. Tradescantia}
\par
2 Cymes not subtended by leaf-like bracts; stamens 
\par
  strongly dimorphic .................................................................. {\b 2. Tripogandra}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.      Tradescantia}        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By N.A. Burges. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial. Inflorescences mostly terminal, subtended by paired, leaf-like bracts. Flowers actinomorphic; sepals and petals free. Fertile stamens 6; filaments usually hairy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  Zebrina pendula} Schnizlein, {\i Bot. Zeit.}{\b  7}: 870 (1849), from Mexico, is similar to {\i T. fluminensis} in habit and foliage, and is often confused with it. It differs, however, in the petals, which are united below into a tube c. 5 mm long, and the leaves, which are usually marked with longitudinal bands of reddish-purple and white beneath. It has occasionally been recorded as a garden escape in S. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Stems erect; leaves up to 35 cm, linear-lanceolate ....................... {\b 1. virginiana} 
\par
Stems procumbent to ascending; leaves 3-6 cm, ovate ............. {\b 2. fluminensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. virginiana} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 288 (1753). Stems 30-60 cm, erect, caespitose. Leaves 15-35 cm × 5-25 mm, linear-lanceolate, glabrous or puberulent. Cymes many-flowered; pedicels 2-3 cm. Sepals 10-15 mm, hairy; petals 12-18 mm, broadly ovate, violet
\par

\par
116}
\par