{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs36\qc  GRAMINALES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 193.     GRAMINEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Poaceae})
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs, or rarely woody, often with rhizomes or stolons. Flowering stems usually cylindrical, with hollow internodes and solid nodes, rarely solid throughout, with a meristem at the base of each internode. Leaves alternate, 2-ranked, consisting of sheath, ligule and lamina. Sheaths surrounding the stem, with free, overlapping, or connate margins, sometimes auriculate at the mouth. Ligule situated at the junction of sheath and lamina, usually membranous, sometimes a row of hairs or rarely absent. Lamina linear to filiform, rarely lanceolate to ovate, usually with more or less prominent, parallel ribs, usually constricted at the junction with the sheath, rarely shortly petiolate. Epidermis with long and short cells, some short cells usually filled with {\i silica-bodies}, others with corky walls; hairs of 2 kinds often present,{\i  macro-hairs} which are stout, thick-walled, usually 1-celled, and {\i micro-hairs} which are microscopic and either slender or globose, usually 2-celled, with the distal cell thin walled. Flowers usually hermaphrodite, consisting of 1-3(-6) stamens and an ovary with usually 2 styles, the stamens subtended by (0-)2(-3) small, hyaline scales ({\i lodicules}), enclosed between usually 2 bract-like structures, the whole forming a{\i  floret}. Florets 1-many, inserted alternately on 2 sides of a slender, jointed axis ({\i rhachilla}) and subtended by (0-)2(-3) bracts({\i glumes}), the whole forming a{\i  spikelet}. Lower bract of the floret ({\i lemma}) often with a dorsal or apical awn; upper bract ({\i palea}) usually membranous and 2-keeled, sometimes very small or absent. Lemma with a thickened, sometimes elongate and pungent base ({\i callus}). Ovary 1-locular, superior; ovule 1, attached on the adaxial side of the loculus, to a point or line visible in fruit as the hilum. Fruit ({\i grain}) a caryopsis or rarely with a free, membranous pericarp.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In the following account {\i leaf} refers to the lamina only;{\i  stem} refers to the flowering stem or culm, and the stigmas are plumose, unless the contrary is stated. Measurements of ligules refer to the ligule of the uppermost leaf on the flowering stem, unless the contrary is stated. Information about starch-grains refers to those in the endosperm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Descriptions and measurements of spikelets refer to those around the middle of a well-developed inflorescence, excluding those at the apex of a branch; descriptions and measurements of lemmas refer to the lowest lemma in such a spikelet, unless otherwise stated.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The following occasional abnormalities are not allowed for in the key: the branching of normally unbranched inflorescences and {\i vice versa}; the occurrence of spikelets with 1 floret in genera which normally have 2 or more florets and{\i  vice versa}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Some grasses produce late inflorescences, especially after mowing or grazing; these are often abnormal and may have proliferating spikelets and have not been allowed for in the key.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: M. Kerguélen,{\i  Lejeunia} nov. ser., {\b 75}: 1-343 (1975) (nomenclature). C. R. Metcalfe, {\i Anatomy of the Monocotyledones. 1. Gramineae}. Oxford. 1960 (vegetative anatomy). T. Tateoka, {\i Bot. Mag.} ({\i Tokyo}){\b  75}: 377-383 (1962) (starch-grains in the endosperm).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems woody; leaves on main stems with reduced lamina;
\par
  leaves on branches shortly petiolate, articulated with 
\par
  the sheath
\par
2 Internodes each with a longitudinal groove, the grooves
\par
  alternating at each node between the 2 sides of the stem; 
\par
  branches 2(-3) at each node .................................................. {\b 3. Phyllostachys}
\par
2 Internodes without grooves, at least in lower part of stem;
\par
  branches 1 or several at each node, rarely 2 or 3
\par
3 Stems ascending; leaves mostly 50-70 mm wide; setae at
\par
  mouth of sheath scabrid ....................................................................... {\b 1. Sasa}
\par
3 Stems erect or arching; leaves mostly 7-40 mm wide;
\par
  setae at mouth of sheath smooth ............................................. {\b 2. Arundinaria}
\par
1 Stems usually herbaceous; most leaves on main stems 
\par
  with well-developed lamina; leaves not petiolate, not
\par
  articulated with the sheath
\par
4 Spikelets proliferating
\par
5 Callus with hairs 1-2 mm ................................................... {\b 74. Deschampsia}
\par
5 Callus glabrous or ± scabrid
\par
6 Leaves setaceous; lemma not keeled ............................................. {\b 4. Festuca}
\par
6 Leaves flat or plicate; lemma strongly keeled ................................... {\b 16. Poa}
\par
4 Spikelets not proliferating
\par
7 Inflorescence of 1 terminal spikelet enclosed in a 
\par
  sheath; palea much longer than lemma ..................................... {\b 117. Lygeum}
\par
7 Not as above
\par
8 Dioecious, densely caespitose perennials
\par
9 Leaves sharply serrulate ........................................................ {\b 110. Cortaderia}
\par
9 Leaves not serrulate ........................................................................... {\b 16. Poa}
\par
8 Monoecious or florets hermaphrodite
\par
10 Male and female spikelets in separate inflorescences 
\par
   or in separate parts of the same inflorescence
\par
11 Male spikelets in a terminal panicle, the female on 
\par
   stout axillary axes enclosed in leaf-sheaths ..................................... {\b 155. Zea}
\par
11 Male and female spikelets in different parts of the 
\par
   same inflorescence
\par
12 Spikelets numerous, in a panicle with the male below 
\par
   and the female above ................................................................. {\b 131. Zizania}
\par
12 Spikelets few, the female enclosed in a bony involucre from 
\par
   which the stigmas protrude, the male in a terminal spike .............. {\b 154. Coix}
\par
10 Male or sterile, and female or hermaphrodite spikelets
\par
   in groups of 2-7 throughout the inflorescence, or 
\par
   spikelets all hermaphrodite
\par
13 Spikelets strongly dimorphic, mostly in groups of 3-7
\par
   with 1 central hermaphrodite spikelet and 2-6 male or
\par
   sterile spikelets surrounding it
\par
14 Male or sterile spikelets persistent ....................................... {\b 28. Cynosurus}
\par
14 Sterile and fertile spikelets falling in groups
\par
15 Lemma of fertile spikelets awned ........................................ {\b 29. Lamarckia}
\par
15 Lemma of fertile spikelets unawned ......................................... {\b 99. Phalaris}
\par
13 Spikelets not strongly dimorphic, solitary or in pairs
\par
   (rarely threes)
\par
16 Spikelets in pairs (rarely threes), 1 sessile, hermaphrodite,
\par
    1(-2) pedicellate, male or sterile
\par
17 Inflorescence a panicle with elongate central axis
\par
18 Panicle-branches terminating in a raceme of many 
\par
   spikelets ................................................................................... {\b 146. Sorghum}
\par
18 Panicle-branches terminating in a group of 1 sessile 
\par
   and 2 pedicellate spikelets ................................................ {\b 147. Chrysopogon}
\par
17 Inflorescence of solitary, paired or subdigitate racemes, 
\par
   with the central axis much shorter than the racemes
\par
19 Spikelets unawned
\par
20 Racemes 20-35 cm ............................................................. {\b 152. Phacelurus}
\par
20 Racemes 4-10 cm .............................................................. {\b 153. Hemarthria}
\par
19 Spikelets awned
\par
21 Racemes solitary or few; awns forming a twisted spire . {\b 151. Heteropogon}
\par
21 Racemes paired or subdigitate; awns not forming a 
\par
   twisted spire
\par

\par
118}
\par