{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. J. articulatus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 327 (1753) ({\i J. lampocarpus} Ehrh. ex Hoffm.). Perennial, caespitose or with a creeping rhizome, rarely with submerged stems rooting and branching at the nodes. Stems 5-60 cm, rarely up to 100 cm and floating, erect or ascending, with 0-2 basal sheaths and 3-6 cauline leaves. Leaves unitubulose, perfectly septate, terete or somewhat laterally compressed. Inflorescence usually wide, with (1-)5-20(-80) heads; heads with 5-15(-30) flowers. Perianth-segments 2·5-3·5 mm, equal or unequal, ovate or rarely lanceolate; outer acute or rarely obtuse and mucronate; inner acute to obtuse, often mucronate. Stamens 6, 1/2-3/4 as long as the perianth; anthers 0·7-1 mm, equalling or longer than the filaments. Capsule 2·5-3·5(-4) mm, usually exceeding the perianth, trigonous-ovoid or rarely ellipsoid, acute or rarely obtuse, mucronate. Seeds 0·5-0·6 mm, ovoid, reticulate. 2n = 80.{\i  Wet places. Throughout Europe.} All except Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Alpini} Buchenau. Small or medium rhizomatous perennials. Leaves and bracts not pungent. Leaves often transversely septate, terete or canaliculate. Flowers in heads, usually strongly coloured and often large; involucral bracteoles absent. Filaments usually slender. Seeds with appendages.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. J. biglumis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 328 (1753). Plant usually caespitose, the rhizome with short internodes and producing leafy, non-flowering shoots and often long subterranean runners. Stems 2-20 cm, erect, with several basal leaves. Leaves short or occasionally up to 8 cm, 1- to 3-tubulose at base, unitubulose above; transverse septa usually present but not visible externally. Inflorescence with a single (1-)2(-4)-flowered head; flowers in a vertical row, the first bract erect, exceeding the flowers and often with a small lamina. Perianth-segments 2·5-3 mm, equal, elliptical to ovate or the inner slightly obovate, mostly dark brown to blackish. Stamens 6, usually slightly exceeding or equalling perianth. Anthers 0·3-0·4 mm, 1/8-1/6 as long as the filaments. Capsule 4-5 mm, 1½-2 times as long as the perianth, obtusely angled, emarginate, mucronate. Seeds 0·7-0·9 mm, with 2 subequal appendages 0·3-0·6 mm. 2n = 60.{\i  Wet places, mainly in the mountains; calcicole. N. Europe, southwards to }56° 15' {\i N. in Scotland; one station in C. Austria.} Au Br Fa Fe Is No Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. J. triglumis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 328 (1753). Like {\b 50} but stems sometimes with one upper cauline leaf; leaves 1-10 cm, 2-tubulose at middle, often up to 5-tubulose at base; heads with (2-)3(-5) flowers, the flowers in a horizontal row; bracts wide, erectopatent, usually shorter than the flowers; perianth-segments c. 4 mm, equal or subequal, usually yellowish-white, dark at apex; stamens almost equalling the perianth; anthers 0·7-0·9 mm, 1/4-1/3 as long as the filaments; capsule 5-6 mm, trigonous-ellipsoid, obtuse, mucronate; seeds 2-2·5 mm. 2n = 50, c. 134. {\i Wet places, mainly in the mountains. N. Europe, extending southwards in the mountains to the Pyrenees, C. Appennini and S.W. Bulgaria.} Au Br Bu Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge He Hs Is It No Po Rm Rs (N, W) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. J. stygius} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 987 (1759). Plant with solitary stems or a few together arising from a rhizome with short internodes also producing short subterranean runners. Stems 10-25 cm, slender, with a few basal and 1-3 upper cauline leaves. Leaves up to 15 cm, thin, terete to slightly canaliculate, pluritubulose; septa usually present but not visible externally. Stems and leaves often reddish. Inflorescence of 1-2(-4) heads; heads with 2-3(-5) flowers usually in a horizontal row, the basal bracts of the inflorescence leaf-like, those of the heads small, almost entirely scarious. Perianth-segments 3·5-4·5 mm, equal or subequal, ovate or the inner elliptical, obtuse to subacute, green to light brown. Stamens 6, equalling or slightly shorter than the perianth; anthers 0·4-0·7 mm, 1/6-1/4 as long as the filaments. Capsule 5-6·5 mm, c. 1½ times as long as the perianth, trigonous-ovoid to ellipsoid, obtuse, light brown to straw-coloured. Seeds 2-2·5 mm.{\i  Bogs; calcifuge. N. Europe, westwards to Norway; S. Germany and Switzerland.} Fe Ge He No Po Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. J. castaneus} Sm.,{\i  Fl. Brit. }{\b 1}: 383 (1800). Plant with a creeping rhizome forming long subterranean runners between the usually solitary stems. Stem 10-32 cm × 2-3 mm, erect, with a few basal sheaths, 3-5 basal and sometimes one upper cauline leaf. Leaves up to 10(-15) cm × 4 mm, flat and more or less convolute, pluritubulose; septa present, sometimes visible externally at apex. Inflorescence of 1-3 heads with 3-10 flowers; bracts of the inflorescence leaf-like, those of the heads small. Perianth-segments 4·5-5·5 mm, equal or unequal, narrowly ovate, blackish-brown, lighter at apex; outer acute; inner obtuse. Stamens 6, equalling or slightly shorter than the perianth; anthers 1-1·5 mm, 1/4-1/3 as long as the filaments, with a short, acute apex. Capsule (5-)6-7·5(-9) mm, c. 1½ times as long as the perianth, ovoid to ellipsoid, obtuse, mucronate, shiny and reddish-brown at apex, lighter at base. Seeds 2-3 mm. 2n = 40.{\i  Wet grassland and damp, open habitats. Fennoscandia and arctic Russia; Scotland; Alps and Carpathians; N. & C. Ural.} Au Br Cz He Is It No Rm Rs (N, C, W) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.      Luzula}         DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J. Chrtek & B. Krisa. 
\par


\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs, rarely annual. Leaves mostly basal, with closed sheath, without auricles, flat or canaliculate, usually with long, white cilia. Flowers in cymes, sometimes condensed into heads. Capsule 3-seeded; seeds usually with a basal appendage.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: F. Buchenau in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich}{\b  25}({\b IV.36}): 42-98 (1906). H.Nordenskjöld,{\i  Hereditas}{\b  37}: 325-355 (1951);{\b  42}: 7-73 (1956). J. Chrtek & B. Krisa,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  115}: 293-310 (1962);{\i  Webbia}{\b  19}: 1-10 (1964). P. Montserrat-Recoder,{\i  Anul. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  21}: 409-523 (1963). J. E. Ebinger, {\i Mem. New York Bot. Gard.}{\b  10}({\b 5}): 279-304 (1964).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers borne singly, or, rarely, some flowers in pairs,
\par
  often long-pedicellate
\par
2 Appendage of seeds 0·6-1·5(-3) mm
\par
3 Plant with long stolons, laxly caespitose .................................... {\b 31. luzulina}
\par
3 Plant caespitose, with short stolons
\par
4 Basal leaves (3·5-)5-10 mm wide; inflorescence-branches
\par
  patent, deflexed in fruit ................................................................... {\b 29. pilosa}
\par
4 Basal leaves 2·5-3·5(-5) mm wide; inflorescence-branches
\par
  secund, not deflexed in fruit ......................................................... {\b 30. forsteri}
\par
2 Appendage of seeds not more than 0·3 mm or absent
\par
5 Anthers longer than filaments
\par
6 Stem usually not more than 40 cm; cauline leaves 6-12 mm wide
\par
  ...................................................................................................... {\b 24. glabrata}
\par
6 Stem up to 70 cm; cauline leaves 2-8 mm wide ....................... {\b 25. desvauxii}
\par
5 Anthers shorter than to about as long as filaments
\par
7 Annual; anthers shorter than filaments; seeds less than 1 mm .... {\b 28. elegans}
\par
7 Perennial; anthers as long as filaments; seeds at least 1 mm 
\par
8 Bracteoles ciliate; lowest bract not more than 1 cm ........... {\b 26. wahlenbergii} 
\par
8 Bracteoles not ciliate; lowest bract at least 1·5 cm .................. {\b 27. parviflora} 
\par
1 Flowers in groups of (2-)3 or more, in clusters or in 
\par
  heads, rarely some flowers solitary
\par
9 Inflorescence corymbose or a ± lax cyme
\par

\par
111}
\par