{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 (rarely white). Seeds 3-6. {\i Widely cultivated for ornament, and naturalized in S. Europe}. [Ga It ?Rm.] ({\i E. United States.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Many of the plants cultivated under this name are really hybrids between {\b 1} and related species, and it is possible that some of the naturalized plants are also hybrids.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. fluminensis} Velloso, {\i Fl. Flum.} 140 (1825). Stems procumbent or decumbent, rooting at the nodes. Leaves 3-6 cm, broadly ovate, acute, rather fleshy, usually purplish beneath, glabrous except for some cilia at the mouth of the sheath. Cymes few-flowered; pedicels 1-2 cm, slender. Sepals up to 9 mm, lanceolate, glabrous except for pubescent midrib. Petals up to 12 mm, narrowly ovate, white or pale lilac. {\i Naturalized in shady places in S.W. Europe}. [Az Co Hs Lu ?Rm.] ({\i S.E. Brazil to Argentina.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.      Tripogandra}     Rafin.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.R. Hunt. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Inflorescences terminal and axillary, not subtended by leaflike bracts. Flowers somewhat zygomorphic; sepals and petals equal, free; stamens 6, dimorphic, 3 with short filaments and 3 with long.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. multiflora} (Swartz) Rafin., {\i Fl. Tellur.}{\b  2}: 16 (1837). A decumbent perennial, rooting at the nodes; flowering stems erect, up to 80 cm. Leaves 3-9 cm, ovate, acute, rather fleshy, glabrous or hairy. Pedicels 2-4 mm. Sepals 2-4 mm, ovate, glabrous or hairy. Petals 2-4 mm, ovate, white or pink. Filaments of longer stamens hairy.{\i  Extensively naturalized in the Açores.} [Az.] ({\i Tropical America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.        Commelina}         L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial. Inflorescences mostly axillary, not umbellike but with the axis evident. Flowers zygomorphic; sepals free or connate; petals free, unequal. Fertile stamens 3; staminodes 3; filaments glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. communis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 40 (1753). Subglabrous annual, with procumbent to ascending stems up to 70 cm. Leaves 5-7 cm, ovate-lanceolate, acute, ciliate at mouth of sheath. Cymes subtended by a large, keeled, spathe-like bract. Sepals ovate, membranous, 2 of them partly united. 2 larger petals bright blue, with suborbicular limb and narrow claw, the third much smaller, ovate-lanceolate, white. Seeds usually 4 (one loculus of the ovary being sterile), rugose.{\i  Naturalized in S. & C. Europe.} [Cz He It Ju Rm Rs (C, W).] ({\i Temperate Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b C. virginica} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. ed. 2, 61 (1762), from the E. United States, has been recorded as naturalized in N. Italy. It is a suberect perennial up to 120 cm with conspicuous, reddish hairs at the mouths of the leaf-sheaths, blue petals more nearly equal than in {\b 1}, and a capsule containing 3 smooth seeds.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 192.    ERIOCAULACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious herbs, usually perennial. Leaves linear, usually in rosettes. Flowers small, numerous, 2- or 3-merous, in compact, bracteate capitula, the female near the outside, the male mainly near the centre. Perianth usually of 2 whorls, more or less glumaceous. Ovary superior, 2- or 3-locular, with 1 ovule in each loculus; stigmas 2-3. Fruit a loculicidal capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.         Eriocaulon}       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, except sometimes for perianth. Roots with conspicuous transverse striations. Scapose, with leaves in basal rosettes. Flowers actinomorphic or slightly zygomorphic. Outer perianth-segments free or united; inner segments united in male flowers, free or absent in female. Stamens twice as many as inner perianth-segments.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: W. Ruhland in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich }{\b 13}({\b IV.30}): 30-117 (1903).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Each rosette usually with a single scape; flowers 2-merous; 
\par
   inner perianth-segments black, with conspicuous white 
\par
   cilia near apex ........................................................................... {\b 1. aquaticum} 
\par
Each rosette usually with numerous scapes; flowers 3-merous; 
\par
   inner perianth-segments absent or inconspicuous, not ciliate .....{\b 2. cinereum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 1. E. aquaticum} (Hill) Druce,{\i  Pharm. Jour.}{\b  83}: 700 (1909) ({\i E. septangulare} With.). Shortly stoloniferous, forming dense mats; usually submerged except for capitulum. Leaves 3-10 cm, 3-5 mm wide at the base, linear-subulate, pellucid, with a reticulum of opaque veins. Scape 7-20(-150) cm, 1(-3) from each rosette, fragile, the lower part enclosed by a loosely sheathing leaf. Capitulum 3-8 × 6-11 mm, hemispherical. Bracts 2-3 mm, greyish. Perianth of 2 whorls, each of 2 segments; those of female flowers c. 2 mm, free, greyish-black; outer segments of male flowers 3 mm, free, the inner united below, yellowish-grey. Inner segments of all flowers with black apex and conspicuously white-ciliate. Ovary 2-lobed; stigmas 2; seed 1 mm, smooth. 2n = 64.{\i  Margins of peaty lakes. W. Ireland, W. Scotland}. Br Hb. ({\i E. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Some authors separate the American plant as{\b  E. pellucidum} Michx,{\i  Fl. Bor. Amer.}{\b  2}: 166 (1803), mainly on the grounds of its different chromosome number (2n = 32), but the morphological differences are very slight, and until these differences and the chromosome numbers have been shown to be constant throughout the two populations they are best regarded as conspecific.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. cinereum} R.Br., {\i Prodr. Fl. Nov. Holl. }254 (1810) ({\i E. sieboldianum} Sieb. & Zucc. ex Steudel). Like {\b 1} but less robust; leaves not more than 2·5 mm wide at base; scapes 10-15(-40) cm, very slender, 5-30 from each rosette; capitulum 3-5 mm, subglobose; bracts 1·5-2 mm, flowers 3-merous, with inconspicuous, pale yellowish, glabrous perianth, the segments of the outer whorl connate in male flowers, free in female, the inner whorl tubular in the male, absent in the female.{\i  Naturalized on wet mud in rice-fields in N. Italy}. [It.] ({\i S.E. & E. Asia, N. Australia}.)
\par

\par
117}
\par