{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 10 Leaves glabrous or very sparsely ciliate 
\par
11 Inflorescence lax; perianth dark brown .............................. {\b 23. alpinopilosa} 
\par
11 Inflorescence dense; perianth yellow or yellowish-brown ............ {\b 17. lutea}
\par
10 Leaves ciliate
\par
12 Perianth purplish ...................................................... {\b 18. purpureosplendens}
\par
12 Perianth brown or white, sometimes tinged with red
\par
13 Perianth brown; basal leaves 3-20 mm wide
\par
14 Basal leaves (5-)10-20(-30) mm wide ..................................... {\b 15. sylvatica}
\par
14 Basal leaves 3-6 mm wide .......................................................... {\b 16. sieberi}
\par
13 Perianth white, sometimes tinged with red; basal 
\par
   leaves 3-6 mm wide
\par
15 Capsule about ½ as long as perianth
\par
16 Perianth-segments equal, subobtuse or acuminate ....................... {\b 20. lactea}
\par
16 Perianth-segments unequal, acute ................................................. {\b 19. nivea}
\par
15 Capsule about as long as perianth
\par
17 Basal leaves ± convolute; perianth-segments subequal .... {\b 21. pedemontana}
\par
17 Basal leaves flat; outer perianth-segments shorter 
\par
   than the inner ........................................................................... {\b 22. luzuloides} 
\par
9 Inflorescence capitate, spike-like or a subumbellate panicle 
\par
18 Inflorescence drooping, spike-like 
\par
19 Stock short, slender ..................................................... ({\b 8-11}).{\b  spicata} group
\par
19 Stock long, stout
\par
20 Basal leaves 3-6(-8) mm wide, flat ............................................. {\b 12. nutans}
\par
20 Basal leaves 1·5-3 mm wide, convolute ................................ {\b 13. caespitosa}
\par
18 Inflorescence erect, ± capitate or subumbellate
\par
21 Capsule 4-5 mm ...................................................................... {\b 14. nodulosa}
\par
21 Capsule not more than 3 mm
\par
22 Bracteoles ciliate
\par
23 Outer clusters of flowers on recurved peduncles ......................... {\b 5. arcuata}
\par
23 Outer clusters of flowers on erect peduncles or sub-sessile ........ {\b 6. confusa}
\par
22 Bracteoles entire or shallowly lacerate
\par
24 Inflorescence of 1(-3) sessile clusters of flowers .......................... {\b 7. arctica}
\par
24 Inflorescence of one subsessile and several ± pedunculate
\par
    clusters of flowers
\par
25 Style shorter than ovary; perianth-segments unequal
\par
26 All flower-clusters on erect branches; perianth-segments
\par
   dark to purplish-brown ................................................................. {\b 4. sudetica}
\par
26 Central cluster of flowers subsessile; perianth-segments
\par
   pale yellowish-brown ................................................................ {\b 3. pallescens}
\par
25 Style as long as or longer than ovary; perianth-segments
\par
   ± equal
\par
27 Laxly caespitose, with short stolons; style longer 
\par
   than ovary; anthers 2-6 times as long as filaments ................... {\b 1. campestris}
\par
27 Densely caespitose, with few or no stolons; style about as long
\par
    as ovary; anthers less than 1½ times as long as filaments ........ {\b 2. multiflora}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Luzula} (Subgen. {\i Gymnodes} (Griseb.) Buchenau). 
\par
Perennials. Flowers in dense clusters. Inflorescence spike-like or a subumbellate panicle. Seeds with conspicuous basal appendage.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. LUZULA. Inflorescence subumbellate, with pedunculate or subsessile clusters on straight erect branches at anthesis.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 1. L. campestris} (L.) DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  3}: 161 (1805) ({\i L. subpilosa} (Gilib.) V. Krecz.). Plant 10-30(-40) cm, laxly caespitose, with short stolons. Basal leaves 2-4 mm wide, sparsely ciliate. Inflorescence a panicle of one sessile and 3-8 pedunculate clusters of 5-12 flowers, the branches more or less deflexed in fruit. Perianth-segments 3-4 mm, reddish- to pale brown. Anthers 2-6 times as long as filaments. Style longer than ovary. Capsule 2·5-3 mm, shorter than perianth-segments, obovoid to globose. Seeds 1·1-1·3 mm; basal appendage up to as long as seed. 2n = 12.{\i  Grassland. Most of Europe, northwards to} 64° {\i N. in Norway.} All except Bl ?Cr Is Rs (N, ?E) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. multiflora} (Retz.) Lej., {\i Fl. Spa }{\b 1}: 169 (1811) ({\i L. campestris} subsp. {\i multiflora} (Retz.) Buchenau, {\i L. multiflora} subsp. {\i occidentalis} V. Krecz.). Plant 10-30(-55) cm, densely caespitose, with few or no stolons, erect. Basal leaves 3-4(-6) mm wide, sparsely ciliate. Inflorescence subumbellate, of 3-10(-12) ovate to elongate 8- to 18-flowered clusters on erect branches, pedunculate or subsessile in rounded heads. Perianth-segments 2·5-3·5 mm, subequal, reddish- to pale brown, with hyaline margin. Anthers as long as or slightly longer than filaments. Style about as long as ovary. Capsule 2-2·8(-3) mm, ovoid to globose, about as long as or shorter than perianth-segments. Seeds 1·1-1·3 mm, about twice as long as wide; basal appendage up to ½ as long as seed. {\i Grassland, woods and moorland, mainly on acid, peaty soil. Most of Europe, but only on mountains in the south.} All except Bl Cr Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flower-clusters subsessile; lower bract usually longer than
\par
   inflorescence; perianth-segments longer than capsule .... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b congesta}
\par
1 Flower-clusters clearly stipitate; lower bract not longer 
\par
  than inflorescence; perianth-segments as long as capsule
\par
2 Capsule-valves obovate, green to brown ....................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b multiflora}
\par
2 Capsule-valves ovate to elliptical, dark brown to black  .... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b frigida}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b multiflora}: Flower-clusters pedunculate. Lower bract not longer than inflorescence. Perianth-segments as long as capsule. Seeds with a basal appendage (0·3-)0·4-0·7 mm. 2n = 24, 36. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b frigida} (Buchenau) V. Krecz.,{\i  Bot. Zur. }{\b 12}: 490 (1928) ({\i L. frigida} (Buchenau) Sam.): Flower-clusters pedunculate. Lower bract not longer than inflorescence. Perianth-segments as long as capsule. Seeds with a basal appendage 0·25-0·4 mm. 2n = 36. {\i Arctic and subarctic Europe, extending southwards to S. Norway}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b congesta} (Thuill.) Hyl., {\i Uppsala Univ. Årsskr.}{\b  1945}({\b 7}): 110 (1945): Flower-clusters subsessile. Lower bract usually longer than inflorescence. Perianth-segments distinctly longer than capsule. 2n = 48.{\i  Mainly in S., W. & C. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Many other subspecies have been described but their taxonomic status is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. pallescens} Swartz,{\i  Summa Veg. Scand.} 13 (1814). Plant 10-35(-45) cm, caespitose, pale to yellowish-green. Basal leaves (1-)2-5 mm wide. Inflorescence subumbellate, of 5-10 globose-oblong clusters of 12-20(-25) flowers, the central cluster subsessile, the others on straight, erect branches. Perianth-segments 1·5-2·5 mm, the inner shorter than the outer, pale yellowish-brown. Anthers slightly shorter than to as long as filaments. Style shorter than ovary. Capsule 1·5-2·1 mm, obovoid, usually shorter than the perianth-segments. Seeds 0·8-1·1 mm; basal appendage 0·2-0·4 mm, less than ½ as long as the seed. 2n = 12. {\i Grassland, fens and open woodland. N. & C. Europe.} Au Br Cz †Da Fe ?Ga Ge Ho Hu Is Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, ?E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. sudetica} (Willd.) DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 5}: 306 (1815) ({\i L. campestris} subsp.{\i  sudetica} (Willd.) Celak.). Plant (10-)15-35(-40) cm, laxly caespitose. Basal leaves 1·5-3(-3·5) mm wide. Inflorescence subumbellate, of 3-5(-8) ovoid to ellipsoid clusters of 5-10(-14) flowers on straight, erect branches. Perianth-segments 2-2·5(-3) mm, the inner shorter than the outer, dark to purplish-brown, with narrow pale brown to whitish margin. Anthers about as long as filaments. Style shorter than ovary, persistent in fruit. Capsule 1·5-2·5 mm, ovoid to ellipsoid, about equalling the perianth-segments. Seeds 1-1·2 mm; basal appendage 0·2-0·3 mm, up to 1/3 as long as seed. 2n = 36, 48.{\i  Wet grassland, mainly on acid, peaty soils. N. Europe, southwards to} 59°{\i  N. in Sweden; mountains of C. & S. Europe.} Au Bu Co Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, W) Su.
\par

\par
112}
\par