{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 caespitose. Basal leaves 1-8 mm wide, sparsely ciliate, rarely with hairs only at the mouth of leaf-sheath. Flowers 2-5 together. Inflorescence erect or slightly drooping. Perianth-segments 1·5-3 mm, subequal, dark brown. Anthers 3-7 times as long as filaments. Style about as long as or slightly longer than ovary. Capsule 2-2·5(-2·8) mm, ovoid to globose. Seeds 1-1·3 mm, pale brown; basal appendage short. 2n = 12. {\i Shady rocks, wet screes and snow-patches; usually calcifuge. • Mountains of Europe, from the Vosges and Carpathians to the Pyrenees, C. Appennini and Bulgaria}. Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant usually 40-50 cm; leaves 6-8 mm wide, 
\par
  glabrous ......................................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b velenovskyi}
\par
1 Plant 10-30 cm; leaves 1-6 mm wide, sparsely hairy
\par
2 Leaves 3-6 mm wide; perianth-segments 2·5-3 mm; anthers
\par
  5-7 times as long as filaments ............................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b obscura}
\par
2 Leaves 1-3·5(-5) mm wide; perianth-segments 1·5-2·5 mm;
\par
  anthers 3-4 times as long as filaments
\par
3 Leaves 1-2·5(-3) mm wide; perianth-segments up to 2·5 mm
\par
  ....................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b alpinopilosa}
\par
3 Leaves 2·5-3·5(-5) mm wide; perianth-segments not more
\par
  than 2 mm ......................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b candollei}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alpinopilosa}: Stem usually ascending. Leaves 1-2·5(-3) mm wide. Perianth-segments up to 2·5 mm. Anthers 3-4 times as long as filaments.{\i  Pyrenees, mountains of S. France, Alps, Appennini}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b candollei} (E.H.F. Meyer) Rothm., {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  67}: 4 (1963) ({\i L. spadicea }var.{\i  candollei} E. H. F. Meyer): Stem erect. Leaves 2·5-3·5(-5) mm wide. Perianth-segments not more than 2 mm. Anthers 3 times as long as filaments.{\i  Pyrenees, Vosges, Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b obscura} Fröhner,{\i  Preslia}{\b  40}: 426 (1968): Stem usually 10-30 cm, erect. Leaves 3-6 mm wide. Perianth-segments 2·5-3 mm. Anthers 5-7 times as long as filaments. 2n = 12.{\i  Carpathians}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b velenovskyi} (Kozuharov) Chrtek & Krisa, {\i Preslia}{\b  46}: 212 (1974) ({\i L. spadicea }var. {\i velenovskyi} Kozuharov, {\i L. glabrata} auct. balcan., non (Hoppe) Desv.): Stem usually 40-50 cm, erect. Leaves 6-8 mm wide. Perianth-segments 2·5-3 mm. Anthers 6-7 times as long as filaments. {\i S. Jugoslavia, S.W. Bulgaria}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. L. glabrata} (Hoppe) Desv., {\i Jour. Bot. Rédigé}{\b  1}: 143 (1808). Plant 20 40(-60) cm, laxly caespitose, with short stolons. Basal and cauline leaves 6-12 mm wide, flat, glabrous or slightly pubescent at the mouth of leaf-sheath. Lower bract much shorter than inflorescence. Flowers usually borne singly, rarely in pairs. Perianth-segments (2·5-)2·7-3(-3·5) mm, subequal, reddish- or dark brown. Anthers c. 3 times as long as filaments. Style as long as ovary. Capsule 2·5-3(-3·5) mm, subglobose. Seeds 1·2-1·8 mm, greyish-brown; basal appendage c. 0·1 mm.{\i  Mountain pastures and stony scrub; usually calcicole. • E. Alps.} Au Ge It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b L. deflexa} Kozuharov in Jordanov,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Bulg.}{\b  2}: 402 (1964), described from Bulgaria, is said to be distinguished by the following characters: stem 40-60 cm; leaves 4-6 mm wide, glabrous or sparsely hairy; inflorescence corymbose, lax; perianth-segments c. 2 mm; anthers as long as filaments. Further investigation is needed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. L. desvauxii} Kunth,{\i  Enum. Pl.}{\b  3}: 304 (1841). Plant (30-) 40-60(-70) cm, laxly caespitose, with short stolons. Basal leaves 2·5-6(-7) mm wide; cauline leaves 2-8 mm wide, flat, glabrous or sparsely ciliate. Lower bract shorter than inflorescence. Flowers borne singly or in pairs or threes. Perianth-segments 2-2·5(-2·8) mm, subequal, dark brown. Anthers 3-4 times as long as filaments. Style slightly longer than ovary. Capsule 2-2·5 mm, subglobose, about as long as perianth. Seeds 1-1·2 mm, greyish-brown; basal appendage c. 0·2 mm. 2n = 12.{\i  Wet, stony places in the mountains. S.W. & W.C. Europe, from S.W. Germany to the Cordillera Cantábrica.} Ga Ge Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. L. wahlenbergii} Rupr.,{\i  Beitr. Pfl. Russ. Reich.}{\b  2}: 58 (1845). Plant 20-30(-50) cm, caespitose. Basal leaves (2·5-)3-5 mm wide, sparsely hairy on margins; cauline leaves 2. Lowest bract 0·4-1 cm. Inflorescence with 10-30 flowers. Bracteoles strongly ciliate, dark brown. Perianth-segments 2-2·5 mm, acute. Anthers about as long as filaments. Style about as long as or shorter than ovary. Capsule 2·2-2·5(-2·7) mm, ovoid, as long as to slightly longer than the perianth. Seeds 1·2-1·4 mm, dark reddish-brown; basal appendages fibrous. 2n = 24, 36. {\i Wet grassland and mossy tundra. Arctic Europe, extending southwards to} 63°{\i  N. in C. Sweden and to} 61°{\i  N. in N. Ural}. Fe No Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. L. parviflora} (Ehrh.) Desv., {\i Jour. Bot. Rédigé}{\b  1}: 144 (1808). Plant (20-)30-50 cm, usually laxly caespitose. Basal leaves 5-9(-12) mm wide; cauline leaves 3-5. Lowest bract (1·5-)2-3·5 cm. Inflorescence with more than 30 flowers. Bracteoles subentire to lacerate. Perianth-segments 1·5-2(-2·5) mm, acute. Anthers about as long as filaments. Style about as long as or shorter than ovary. Capsule (2·2-)2·5-3 mm, ovoid, shorter to longer than perianth. Seeds 1-14 mm, reddish-brown; basal appendage inconspicuous. 2n = 24.{\i  Tundra, damp grassland and wood-margins. Arctic and subarctic Europe, southwards to} c. 61° {\i N. in Norway and Ural.} Fe No Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. L. elegans} Lowe, {\i Trans. Cambr. Philos. Soc.}{\b  6}: 532 (1838) ({\i L. purpurea} (Masson ex Buchenau) Link). Annual (10-)20-30(-45) cm, usually erect, slender. Basal leaves 1-3 mm wide, usually sparsely ciliate. Lower bract much shorter than inflorescence. Inflorescence with more than 20 flowers. Perianth-segments 2-2·5(-3) mm, mucronate-aristate. Anthers shorter than filaments. Style shorter than ovary. Capsule 1·5-1·7 mm, ovoid, shorter than perianth-segments. Seeds 0·7-0·9 mm, pale brown, without a basal appendage. 2n = 6. {\i Scrub on sandy soils. Naturalized in C. Portugal.} [Lu.] ({\i Madeira, Islas Canarias.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Pterodes} (Griseb.) Buchenau. Perennials. Flowers borne singly. Inflorescence a lax cyme. Seeds with a long basal appendage.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. L. pilosa} (L.) Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Horti Berol.} 393 (1809). Plant (15-)20-35(-40) cm, caespitose, with short stolons. Basal leaves (3·5-)5-10 mm wide, sparsely to densely ciliate, flat. Inflorescence with unequal patent capillary branches deflexed in fruit. Perianth-segments 3-4·5 mm, subequal, acute, usually dark brown, with wide hyaline margin. Anthers longer than filaments. Style about as long as ovary. Capsule 3·5-4·5 mm, ovoid, very wide below, longer than perianth, yellowish-green. Seeds 1·2-1·8 mm, pale brown; basal appendage 0·8-1·5(-2·5) mm, hooked. 2n = 66, 72. {\i Woods. Most of Europe except the extreme south.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. L. forsteri} (Sm.) DC. in Lam. & DC., {\i Syn. Pl. Fl. Gall.} 150 (1806) ({\i L. caspica} Rupr. ex Bordz.). Plant (15-)20-30(-45) cm, caespitose, with short, slender stolons. Basal leaves 2·5-3·5(-5) mm wide, flat, with short yellowish apex. Inflorescence with unequal patent branches erect in fruit. Perianth-segments 3·5-5 mm, subequal, usually dark brown. Anthers 1-4 times as
\par

\par
115}
\par