{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min25}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min26}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1002}{\nofchars5716}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 84 Stems 25-40 cm; leaves with 7 veins, the sclerenchyma-
\par    strands not decurrent; spikelets 6-6\'b75(-8) mm ............................. }{\b\fs28 98. hervieri}{\fs28 
\par 82 Sheaths decaying into fibres, closed for at least \'bd their length
\par 85 Panicle 7-17 cm, linear-oblong; spikelets 5-7\'b78 mm;
\par    sheaths closed for \'bd their length .............................................. }{\b\fs28 93. jeanpertii}{\fs28 
\par 85 Panicle (3-)4-7(-9\'b75) cm, wider; spikelets (6-)7-8 (-9) mm;
\par     sheaths closed for more than \'bd their length
\par 86 Leaves (0\'b73-)0\'b74-0\'b77(-0\'b79) mm wide; glumes and lemma
\par    subulate ..................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 94. stenantha}{\fs28 
\par 86 Leaves (0\'b735-)0\'b75-1\'b71 mm wide; glumes and lemma lanceolate
\par 87 Sheaths often densely setulose, closed for at least \'be of their length; 
\par    lemma 4\'b79-6\'b72 \'d7 1-2\'b73 mm, broadly lanceolate .................... }{\b\fs28 95. pseudodura}{\fs28 
\par 87 Sheaths glabrous, closed for not more than \'be of their length;
\par     lemma 4-5\'b78 \'d7 1\'b74-2\'b75 mm, lanceolate ................... }{\b\fs28 96. circummediterranea}{\fs28  
\par 81 Panicle usually simple, the lowest branch with 1-2(-3)
\par    spikelets
\par 88 Leaves 0\'b75-0\'b78 mm wide, with a ring of sclerenchyma ........ }{\b\fs28 92. horvatiana}{\fs28 
\par 88 Leaves usually 0\'b73-0\'b76 mm wide, always with 3 separate
\par    strands of sclerenchyma
\par 89 Leaves with 5-7 veins
\par 90 Sheaths closed to the mouth; awn more than \'bd as long
\par    as lemma ....................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 84. balleri}{\fs28 
\par 90 Sheaths rarely closed for more than \'be of their length;
\par    awn \'bd as long as lemma
\par 91 Leaves 0\'b75-0\'b79 mm wide, with stout sclerenchyma-strands;
\par    anthers more than 2 mm ............................................................ }{\b\fs28 83. riloensis}{\fs28 
\par 91 Leaves 0\'b725-0\'b77 mm wide, with slender sclerenchyma-
\par strands; anthers less than 2 mm
\par 92 Spikelets 7-8 mm                       }{\b\fs28 82. intercedens}{\fs28 
\par 92 Spikelets 5-6\'b75(-7) mm
\par 93 Leaves with 3 sclerenchyma-strands; lemma 3\'b76-4\'b79 \'d7 1\'b75-1\'b76 mm,
\par    lanceolate; anthers 1\'b74-1\'b77 mm ................................................... }{\b\fs28 81. pirinica}{\fs28 
\par 93 Leaves with (3-)5(-7) sclerenchyma-strands; lemma 3\'b75-5 \'d7
\par    1\'b75-2 mm, broadly lanceolate; anthers 0\'b77-1\'b73 mm
\par 94 Stems 15-30 cm; lemma 3\'b77-5\'b75 mm, with awn 1\'b72-2 mm;
\par    anthers 0\'b77-1\'b73 mm ............................................................. }{\b\fs28 79. brachyphylla}{\fs28 
\par 94 Stems 7-10(-15) cm; lemma 3-3\'b75 mm, with awn 1-1\'b77 mm;
\par    anthers 0\'b75-0\'b76 mm ................................................................ }{\b\fs28 80. hyperborea}{\fs28 
\par 89 Leaves with not more than 5 veins
\par 95 Leaves always with 5 veins
\par 96 Stems 4-7 cm; ligule with acuminate auricles; spikelets
\par    less than 6 mm .............................................................................. }{\b\fs28 88. frigida}{\fs28 
\par 96 Stems 6-30 cm; ligule with rounded auricles; spikelets
\par    more than 6 mm
\par 97 Sheaths thickened at base; awn 1/4-1/3 as long as lemma ....... }{\b\fs28 85. glacialis}{\fs28 
\par 97 Sheaths not thickened at base; awn 1/3-1/2 as long as lemma
\par 98 Stems 13-30 cm; leaves with 1 rib; spikelets pruinose;
\par    anthers 2-2\'b76 mm ................................................................... }{\b\fs28 86. rupicaprina}{\fs28 
\par 98 Stems up to 12 cm; leaves with 3 ribs; spikelets not
\par    pruinose; anthers 1\'b78-2\'b72 mm ............................................... }{\b\fs28 87. bucegiensis}{\fs28 
\par 95 Leaves with 3-5 veins, not constantly 5
\par 99 Leaves not more than 0\'b75 mm wide, with 3 veins and 
\par    slender sclerenchyma-strands; lemma 3\'b76-4\'b72 mm;
\par    anthers less than \'bd as long as palea .............................................. }{\b\fs28 89. alpina}{\fs28 
\par 99 Leaves 0\'b72-0\'b78 mm wide, with 3-5 veins; lemma 4\'b72-5\'b78 mm
\par 100 Leaves with stout sclerenchyma-strands; spikelets 6\'b75-7\'b78 mm;
\par     anthers 2\'b75 mm, more than \'bd as long as palea ........................ }{\b\fs28 90. olympica}{\fs28 
\par 100 Leaves with slender sclerenchyma-strands; spikelets 8\'b74-9\'b75 mm;
\par      anthers 1\'b75-2 mm, less than \'bd as long as palea .................. }{\b\fs28 91. vizzavonae}{\fs28 
\par 80  Sheaths mostly closed for not more than \'bd their length,
\par     usually not decaying into fibres; leaves often scabrid,
\par     usually with the sclerenchyma forming a ring; ligule always
\par     with distinct auricles
\par 101 Leaves with 3(-5) veins; ligule with \'b1 acute auricles
\par 102 Leaves (0\'b74-)0\'b75-0\'b77 mm wide, flattened at apex;
\par     sheaths closed to mouth; ligule not more than 0\'b78 mm ............. }{\b\fs28 100. hystrix}{\fs28 
\par 102 Leaves (0\'b73-)0\'b74-0\'b755 mm wide, not flattened at apex;
\par     sheaths open to base; ligule 2 mm ..................................... }{\b\fs28 101. reverchonii}{\fs28 
\par 101 Leaves with more than 3 veins; ligule with obtuse auricles
\par 103 Leaves laterally compressed, with 3 sclerenchyma-
\par     strands (rarely confluent into an unequally thickened
\par     ring), always scabrid
\par 104 Sclerenchyma in a \'b1 interrupted, unequally thickened ring
\par 105 Leaves 0\'b75-1\'b71 mm wide; veins usually 7
\par 106 Leaves smooth or nearly so; sheaths glabrous ....................... }{\b\fs28 170. duvalii}{\fs28 
\par 106 Leaves scabrid or hairy; at least some sheaths hairy
\par 107 Stems 30-75 cm; sheaths closed at base only; panicle 
\par     4\'b75-13 cm .......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 168. trachyphylla}{\fs28 
\par 107 Stems up to 22 cm; sheaths closed in lower 1/3;     panicle 3-4 cm ........................................................................ }{\b\fs28 169. brevipila}{\fs28 
\par 105 Leaves 0\'b74-0\'b76(-1\'b71) mm wide; veins usually 5
\par 108 Sheaths glabrous or weakly scabrid; lemma subulate-
\par     lanceolate; awn at least \'bd as long as lemma ............................. }{\b\fs28 165. callieri}{\fs28 
\par 108 Sheaths densely tomentose; lemma ovate-lanceolate to
\par     lanceolate; awn not more than \'bd as long as lemma
\par 109 Leaves (0\'b74-)0\'b75-0\'b775(-0\'b78) mm wide; lemma ovate-lanceolate;
\par     awn up to \'bc as long as lemma .............................................. }{\b\fs28 166. wolgensis}{\fs28 
\par 109 Leaves 0\'b755-0\'b798 mm wide; lemma oblong-lanceolate;
\par     awn nearly \'bd as long as lemma .................................................. }{\b\fs28 167. stricta}{\fs28 
\par 104 Sclerenchyma in 3 separate strands
\par 110 Stems mostly more than 30 cm
\par 111 Leaves (0\'b74-)0\'b75-1 mm wide; lemma ovate lanceolate to
\par     lanceolate ................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 161. rupicola}{\fs28 
\par 111 Leaves 0\'b74-0\'b78 mm wide; lemma subulate-lanceolate to
\par     subulate
\par 112 Leaves not pruinose; lemma 6\'b75-8\'b74 mm, subulate ................ }{\b\fs28 162. taurica}{\fs28 
\par 112 Leaves pruinose; lemma 5-6\'b75(-7\'b78) mm, subulate-lanceolate
\par 113 Spikelets 7\'b78-10\'b75 mm; lemma (5\'b73-)5\'b76-6\'b75(-7\'b78) mm ..... }{\b\fs28 163. dalmatica}{\fs28 
\par 113 Spikelets 6\'b75-8 mm; lemma 5-5\'b76 mm ................... }{\b\fs28 164. pseudodalmatica}{\fs28 
\par 110 Stems rarely more than 30 cm
\par 114 Leaves (0\'b74-)0\'b77-1 mm wide ............................................. }{\b\fs28 160. carnuntina}{\fs28 
\par 114 Leaves 0\'b73-0\'b75(-0\'b77) mm wide
\par 115 Sheaths glabrous
\par 116 Leaves always 5-veined; lemma subulate-lanceolate to
\par     subulate .................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 159. valesiaca}{\fs28 
\par 116 Leaves 5- to 7-veined; lemma oblong-lanceolate ........... }{\b\fs28 158. makutrensis}{\fs28 
\par 115 Sheaths \'b1 hairy
\par 117 Leaves with 5 veins; plant usually not pruinose; lemma 2\'b76-3\'b79 mm
\par 
\par 129}
\par }