{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.       Posidonia}          C. Konig
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves entire. Leaf-like bracts similar to the leaves but smaller, with a more or less reduced blade; spikes 3- to 6-flowered. Anthers extrorse, with a broad connective produced above the thecae into an appendage; pollen-grains filiform. Stigma sessile, irregularly lobed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: C. den Hartog, {\i The Sea-grasses of the World.} 121-144. Amsterdam & London. 1970.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. oceanica} (L.) Delile, {\i Descr. Égypte, Hist. Nat.}{\b  2}: 78 (1813) ({\i P. caulini }C. Konig). Rhizomes stout, with a sheath-like scale at each node; base of plant densely clothed with the fibrous remains of old scales and sheaths. Leaves up to 55 cm × 9 mm, obtuse to emarginate, 13- to 17-veined. Peduncles up to 25 cm; leaf-like bracts with blades at least as long as their sheaths; spikes 3- to 5-flowered. Connective of anthers obovate-obcordate, with a narrow appendage. Fruit c. 10 mm, ovoid.{\i  Coasts of the Mediterranean region and locally on the Atlantic coast of S.W. Europe.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju ?Lu Sa Si ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 180.      ZOSTERACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial, submerged marine herbs. Rhizome creeping, with long internodes, bearing at each node 2 or more unbranched roots and a leaf with a short shoot in its axil. Short shoots with several distichous, linear leaves with compressed, sheathing bases. Flowering stems lateral or terminal. Inflorescence enclosed in the sheathing base of a spathe. Flowers with 1 dorsifixed, sessile stamen and 1 unilocular ovary with a style and 2 long, filiform stigmas, arranged alternately on the margin of the flattened axis; perianth absent. Pollen-grains filiform. Ovule 1.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.         Zostera}           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome monopodial, with 2 vascular bundles in the cortex. Small axillary scales present. Leaves with 3-9(-11) parallel veins; margin entire or rarely minutely denticulate. Spathes leaflike, with a caducous lamina. Connective of anthers sometimes with an appendage ({\i retinaculum}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: C. Den Hartog,{\i  The Sea-grasses of the World.} Amsterdam & London. 1970. F. Markgraf,{\i  Ber. Deutsch. Bot. Ges.}{\b  54}: 191-229 (1936).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowering-stems lateral, simple or sparingly branched;
\par
  leaf-sheaths open; retinacula present .................................................. {\b 3. noltii} 
\par
1 Flowering-stems terminal, much-branched; leaf-sheaths 
\par
  closed, splitting when old; retinacula absent
\par
2 Leaves on non-flowering shoots usually 5-10 mm wide;
\par
  stigma twice as long as style; fruit 3-3·5 mm .................................. {\b 1. marina} 
\par
2 Leaves on non-flowering shoots usually 1-2 mm wide;
\par
  stigma about as long as style; fruit 2·5-3 mm .......................... {\b 2. angustifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen. {\b Zostera.} Sheaths closed. Retinacula absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. Z. marina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 968 (1753). Leaves on non-flowering shoots 20-50(-120) cm × (2-)5-12 mm, dark green, with rounded, often mucronate apex, those on flowering stems usually narrower; sheaths closed, splitting irregularly when old. Flowering stems up to 80(-150) cm, terminal, much-branched. Retinacula absent, except rarely in the lowest flower. Stigma twice as long as style. Fruit 3-3·5 mm, ellipsoid. 2n = 12.{\i  On fine gravel, sand or mud, from low water neap tides down to c. 10 m. Coasts of most of Europe.} Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, ?E) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. Z. angustifolia} (Hornem.) Reichenb., {\i Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  7}: 3 (1845). Like {\b 1} but leaves on non-flowering shoots usually 15-30 cm × 1-2 mm, often becoming emarginate at apex; flowering stems 10-30 cm; stigma about as long as style; fruit 2·5-3 mm. 2n = 12.{\i  On mud in sheltered habitats, from half-tide down to low-tide mark, rarely lower. Probably throughout most of the range of} {\b 1} but distribution imperfectly known owing to confusion with {\b 3} and narrow-leaved variants of {\b 1}. Br Da Hb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Zosterella} (Ascherson) Ostenf. Sheaths open. Retinacula present.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. Z. noltii} Hornem.,{\i  Fl. Dan.}{\b  12}({\b 35}): 1 (1832) ({\i Z. minor} Nolte ex Reichenb., {\i Z. nana} Roth pro parte). Leaves on non-flowering shoots 4-12(-20) cm × 0·5-1·5 mm, with emarginate apex; sheaths open. Flowering stems usually c. 10 cm, lateral, simple or sparingly branched. Retinacula present. Fruit 1·5-2 mm. 2n = 12. {\i On mud in sheltered habitats, from half-tide mark down to low-tide mark, and in shallow water in non-tidal saline habitats. Coasts of Europe northwards to} 60° 30' {\i in Norway.} ?Al Be Bl Br Bu Co Da Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs(W, K, E) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 181.   ZANNICHELLIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.H. Valentine. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Submerged, perennial aquatic herbs, with creeping rhizomes. Leaves alternate or subopposite, linear, sheathing at the base. Flowers unisexual, small, solitary or in falcate cymes. Male flowers pedunculate; perianth absent or cupular; stamens 1-3; anthers connate, sessile, opening by longitudinal slits. Female flowers sessile or shortly pedunculate; perianth absent or cupular or of 3 segments; carpels 1-9, free, with 1 ovule; styles simple or divided into 2 filiform stigmas. Fruitlets achene- or nut-like; seeds without endosperm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Dioecious, marine; leaves 2-4 mm wide, spinulose-dentate
\par
  towards the apex; styles divided into 2 filiform stigmas ......... {\b 3. Cymodocea}
\par
1 Monoecious, in fresh or brackish water, leaves up to 
\par
  2 mm wide, entire; styles simple
\par
2 Leaves alternate; sheaths adnate to the leaf-base, long-
\par
  auriculate; male flowers with a 3-dentate, cupular 
\par
  perianth; female flowers with a perianth of 3 segments ............... {\b 1. Althenia}
\par

\par
12}
\par