{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 54 Stems 10-55 cm × 0·7-1·2 mm; upper glume 3·4-5 × 1·3-2 mm, 
\par
   ovate-lanceolate, shortly acuminate
\par
55 Leaves pungent; ribs 5; anthers less than half as long as palea . {\b 53. borderi}
\par
55 Leaves scarcely pungent; ribs 3; anthers more than 
\par
   half as long as palea
\par
56 Stems 30-55 cm; panicle 7-9 mm, the branches glabrous
\par
   or shortly hairy; awn 3-4 mm ................................................... {\b 51. peristerea}
\par
56 Stems (10-)15-30(-40) cm; panicle 3·5-6 cm, the 
\par
   branches long-tomentose; awn not more than 2·7 mm ........... {\b 52. korabensis}
\par
48 Free part of margins of sheaths not infolded; leaves
\par
   without contiguous sclerenchyma-strands
\par
57 Ligule a narrow rim, without auricles; sclerenchyma-
\par
   strands 5-9; non-flowering shoots usually extra-vaginal
\par
58 Sheaths not decaying into fibres; veins 5-7; non-
\par
   flowering shoots intra- and extravaginal
\par
59 Anthers 1/7-1/5 as long as palea, subglobose ...................... {\b 64. baffinensis}
\par
59 Anthers mostly more than ½ as long as palea, ellipsoid
\par
60 Basal leaves with 3 veins and 1 rib
\par
61 Upper leaves 7- to 11-veined, flat when fresh; panicle
\par
   6-17 cm, lax ......................................................................... {\b 56. heterophylla}
\par
61 Leaves all similar, plicate, 3-veined; panicle 2-4 cm, dense ...... {\b 57. plicata}
\par
60 All leaves with more than 3 veins and with 3-5(-7) ribs
\par
62 Leaves with 5-7(-9) veins; upper glume ovate, rarely 
\par
   ovate-lanceolate, obtuse or very shortly acuminate
\par
63 Stems not more than 22 cm; leaves acute; sheaths thick,
\par
   corrugated; panicle-branches sparsely hairy; spikelets
\par
   5·6-6 mm .................................................................................. {\b 62. clementei}
\par
63 Stems up to 45 cm; leaves obtuse; sheaths thin, smooth;
\par
   panicle-branches shortly tomentose; spikelets 6·3-8 mm ....... {\b 63. picta}
\par
62 Leaves always with 5 veins; upper glume lanceolate,
\par
   long-acuminate
\par
64 Leaves usually not more than 0·4 mm in diameter, with
\par
   narrow sclerenchyma-strands, that of the midrib not 
\par
   more than 10 cells wide
\par
65 Panicle-branches glabrous or shortly hairy; ovary 
\par
   sparsely hairy, rarely glabrous .................................................... {\b 58. violacea}
\par
65 Panicle-branches densely tomentose; ovary densely hairy ........... {\b 59. nitida}
\par
64 Leaves up to 0·7 mm in diameter, with wider sclerenchyma-
\par
   strands, that of the midrib more than 10 cells wide
\par
66 Panicle 3-7 cm; branches glabrous or with few minute hairs;
\par
    spikelets not more than 8 mm, pale violet, awn 1·3-2·7 mm ...... {\b 60. iberica}
\par
66 Panicle 6-9 cm; branches hairy; spikelets (7·8-)8-10 mm,
\par
   blackish-violet; awn 2-4·7 mm ............................................... {\b 61. puccinellii}
\par
58 Sheaths usually decaying into fibres; veins 5-9(-13);
\par
   non-flowering shoots extravaginal
\par
67 Plant densely caespitose; stolons absent or very short;
\par
   awn at least ½ as long as lemma ............................................. {\b 65. nigrescens}
\par
67 Plant ± laxly caespitose; stolons often present; awn 
\par
   not more than ½ as long as lemma
\par
68 Sheaths not or scarcely decaying into fibres; leaves stout and 
\par
   rigid, acute or subacute, usually with bulliform cells
\par
69 Leaves with 5 very stout sclerenchyma-strands and 
\par
   sometimes 1 very slender intermediate strand; sheaths
\par
   densely puberulent ...................................................................... {\b 78. cretacea}
\par
69 Leaves with 3 very stout sclerenchyma-strands alternating
\par
   with 4 smaller strands; sheaths glabrous or scabrid
\par
70 Leaves 0·65-0·85 mm wide, without sclerenchyma in the
\par
   ribs; sheaths glabrous; panicle very lax and wide ................... {\b 76. rothmaleri}
\par
70 Leaves 0·5-1·4 mm wide, with sclerenchyma in the ribs;
\par
   sheaths densely pubescent; panicle rather rigid and 
\par
   narrow, except at anthesis ...................................................... {\b 77. nevadensis}
\par
68 Sheaths usually decaying into fibres; leaves soft or slightly 
\par
   rigid, obtuse or acute, with or without bulliform cells
\par
71 Basal leaves often flat, distinctly carinate, with 
\par
   bulliform cells; spikelets with at least 8 florets
\par
72 Sheaths densely hairy; panicle very lax; epidermal 
\par
   cells subequal ............................................................................... {\b 74. diffusa}
\par
72 Sheaths glabrous; panicle very narrow, except at 
\par
   anthesis; epidermal cells very unequal ....................................... {\b 75. rivularis}
\par
71 Basal leaves usually plicate, rounded or weakly 
\par
   carinate on back, without bulliform cells; spikelets
\par
   rarely with more than 6 florets
\par
73 Leaves junciform, acute, with 7-11 veins and usually
\par
   confluent sclerenchyma-strands 
\par
74 Densely caespitose, with short stolons; ribs usually without 
\par
   sclerenchyma; panicle dense; leaves with 7(-9) veins ............. {\b 72. oelandica} 
\par
74 Weakly caespitose, with long stolons; ribs with sclerenchyma;
\par
   panicle very lax; leaves with 7-9(-11) veins ............................ {\b 73. juncifolia}
\par
73 Leaves setaceous to junciform, with 5-9 veins and 
\par
   separate sclerenchyma-strands 
\par
75 Leaves (0·4-)0·65-1·5 mm wide
\par
76 Panicle usually more than 5 cm; lemma glabrous or 
\par
   hairy but not whitish; awn distinct .................................................. {\b 66. rubra}
\par
76 Panicle usually not more than 4·5 cm; lemma densely 
\par
   hairy, whitish; awn absent or very short ............................... {\b 67. richardsonii}
\par
75 Leaves 0·3-0·65 mm wide
\par
77 Laxly caespitose; sheaths decaying into fibres
\par
78 Leaves glabrous, smooth, obtuse, with 7 veins;
\par
   panicle not more than 3·5 cm, dense ........................................ {\b 68. pyrenaica}
\par
78 Leaves ± scabrid towards apex, subacute, with (4-)
\par
   5 veins; panicle at least 6 cm, lax .......................................... {\b 69. trichophylla}
\par
77 Rather densely caespitose; sheaths not decaying into fibres
\par
79 Leaves strongly scabrid, with bulliform cells; upper 
\par
   glume lanceolate ....................................................... {\b 70. pseudotrichophylla}
\par
79 Leaves smooth, without bulliform cells; upper glume subulate . {\b 71. cyrnea}
\par
57 Ligule with auricles; sclerenchyma forming a ring or 
\par
   in 3 separate strands; non-flowering shoots intravaginal
\par
80 Sheaths sometimes closed to the mouth, usually decaying into 
\par
   fibres; leaves always smooth, the sclerenchyma usually in 3 
\par
   separate strands; ligule sometimes with indistinct auricles
\par
81 Panicle compound, the lowest branch with 3 to many 
\par
   spikelets
\par
82 Sheaths not or tardily decaying into fibres, closed 
\par
   for not more than ¼ of their length
\par
83 Ligule distinct; lemma 3·2-4·6 × 1·4-1·6 mm; sheaths
\par
   open to base ................................................................................. {\b 99. patzkei}
\par
83 Ligule very short; lemma 4-6 × 1·5-2 mm; sheaths 
\par
   closed for 1/6-1/4 of their length
\par
84 Stems 35-50 cm; leaves with 7-9 veins, the sclerenchyma-
\par
   strands in cross section laterally decurrent;
\par
   spikelets 7-8(-9) mm ...................................................................... {\b 97. costei}
\par

\par
128}
\par