{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 61 Glumes without 2 prominent keels bearing tufts of hair
\par
62 Veins of lemma not confluent towards the apex
\par
63 Glumes with 1 or more teeth or awns at apex, usually 
\par
   rounded on the back; rhachis fragile ......................................... {\b 52. Aegilops}
\par
63 Glumes with 1 or 2 teeth at apex, with 1 prominent and
\par
   sometimes a second weaker keel; rhachis fragile or tough ....... {\b 53. Triticum}
\par
62 Veins of lemma confluent towards the apex
\par
64 Glumes not navicular, without a prominent keel;
\par
   spikelets appressed to rhachis ..................................................... {\b 48. Elymus}
\par
64 Glumes navicular, with a prominent keel; spikelets usually 
\par
   pectinate, diverging from the rhachis at a wide angle 
\par
65 Glumes not connate at base; rhachis tough; perennial ......... {\b 49. Agropyron} 
\par
65 Glumes connate at base; rhachis fragile or spike 
\par
   breaking off whole at maturity; annual .............................. {\b 50. Eremopyrum} 
\par
25 Inflorescence not a single, terminal spike or raceme
\par
66 Inflorescence of 2 or more spikes or racemes
\par
67 Spikes or racemes ± digitately arranged on a short main axis
\par
68 Ligule membranous
\par
69 Racemes usually 2; spikelets solitary on the rhachis;
\par
   upper floret with crustaceous lemma and exposed palea ....... {\b 138. Paspalum}
\par
69 Racemes usually more than 2; spikelets usually in groups 
\par
   of 2 or more on short, appressed branches; upper floret 
\par
   with cartilaginous lemma enfolding the palea ......................... {\b 137. Digitaria}
\par
68 Ligule a row of hairs
\par
70 Strongly rhizomatous perennial ............................................ {\b 126. Cynodon}
\par
70 Annual or caespitose perennial
\par
71 Lemma unawned, acute ......................................................... {\b 124. Eleusine}
\par
71 Lemma with a curved awn or mucro ......................... {\b 125. Dactyloctenium}
\par
67 Spikes or racemes not digitate, the main axis easily 
\par
   visible between them
\par
72 Main axis flattened, 3-5 mm wide, with numerous very 
\par
   short racemes ± sunk in it ............................................... {\b 139. Stenotaphrum}
\par
72 Main axis less than 3 mm wide, racemes free
\par
73 Ligule a row of hairs
\par
74 Leaves not more than 5 cm, rigid and patent ........,,,,,,,,,..... {\b 119. Aeluropus}
\par
74 Leaves mostly more than 5 cm, not conspicuously rigid
\par
   and patent ........................................,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,....... {\b 127. Spartina}
\par
73 Ligule membranous or rarely absent
\par
75 Leaves lanceolate .............................,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,......... {\b 133. Oplismenus}
\par
75 Leaves linear
\par
76 Spikelets with a bead-like swelling at base ........,,,,,,,,,,,,,..... {\b 136. Eriochloa}
\par
76 Spikelets without a bead-like swelling at base 
\par
77 Lower glume absent or obscure .......................,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,..... {\b 138. Paspalum} 
\par
77 Lower glume distinct, usually well-developed 
\par
78 Glumes equal .........................................,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,.. {\b 27. Beckmannia} 
\par
78 Glumes unequal
\par
79 Spikelets usually in 4 irregular rows, often awned .......... {\b 134. Echinochloa}
\par
79 Spikelets in 2 regular rows, unawned ................................. {\b 135. Brachiaria}
\par
66 Inflorescence not composed of spikes or racemes,
\par
   though sometimes condensed and spike-like
\par
80 Lemma with 9 awns ........................................................ {\b 118. Enneapogon}
\par
80 Lemma with 0-3 awns
\par
81 Inflorescence a dense, ovoid to globose head of
\par
   sessile spikelets
\par
82 Lemma unawned ............................................................... {\b 38. Ammochloa}
\par
82 Lemma with an often recurved awn ....................................... {\b 39. Echinaria}
\par
81 Inflorescence not a dense head of sessile spikelets
\par
83 Inflorescence a short, dense panicle, surrounded by an
\par
   obconical, membranous, toothed involucre ........................ {\b 95. Cornucopiae}
\par
83 Inflorescence not surrounded by an obconical,
\par
   membranous involucre
\par
84 Spikelets subtended by an involucre of setae or spines
\par
85 Setae persisting on the rhachis after the spikelets have fallen .. {\b 140. Setaria}
\par
85 Setae or spines falling with the spikelets
\par
86 Setae free to the base, arising from a pubescent,
\par
   linear pedicel ....................................................................... {\b 141. Pennisetum}
\par
86 Setae or spines connate below, arising from a glabrous,
\par
   obconical pedicel .................................................................... {\b 142. Cenchrus}
\par
84 Spikelets not subtended by an involucre of setae or spines
\par
87 Spikelets with 1 hermaphrodite floret only, sometimes
\par
   with the rhachilla prolonged, but without a sterile 
\par
   floret above or below the fertile floret
\par
88 Glumes absent 
\par
89 Stems at least 30 cm ................................................................ {\b 130. Leersia}
\par
89 Stems not more than 15(-25) cm
\par
90 Perennial; spikelets not in globose clusters ............................. {\b 22. Phippsia}
\par
90 Annual; spikelets in dense, globose clusters ..................... {\b 100. Coleanthus}
\par
88 Glumes present 
\par
91 Glumes linear, pectinate-ciliate ................................................ {\b 73. Lagurus}
\par
91 Glumes not linear and pectinate-ciliate
\par
92 Lemma strongly indurate and shiny when mature
\par
93 Lemma unawned; spikelets dorsally compressed
\par
94 Lemma glabrous ...................................................................... {\b 102. Milium}
\par
94 Lemma with short, clavate hairs on the back ........................ {\b 103. Zingeria}
\par
93 Lemma awned; spikelets laterally compressed
\par
95 Lemma glabrous; awn often caducous ............................ {\b 104. Piptatherum}
\par
95 Lemma hairy; awn persistent
\par
96 Glumes (6-)10-80 mm; awn at least 1·5 cm ............................... {\b 105. Stipa}
\par
96 Glumes not more than 7 mm; awn not more than 1 cm  {\b 106. Achnatherum}
\par
92 Lemma not strongly indurate when mature
\par
97 Lemma unawned
\par
98 Glumes shiny, swollen and coriaceous below ..................... {\b 88. Gastridium}
\par
98 Glumes not shiny, swollen and coriaceous below 
\par
99 Ligule a row of hairs
\par
100 Perennial; rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes ..... {\b 122. Sporobolus}
\par
100 Annual; rhachilla disarticulating below the glumes .............. {\b 123. Crypsis} 
\par
99  Ligule membranous
\par
101 Glumes shorter than floret; lemma and palea chartaceous,
\par
    purplish, scabrid
\par
102 Inflorescence 4-13 cm; leaves 2-7 mm wide ................... {\b 25. Arctagrostis}
\par
102 Inflorescence 1-4 cm; leaves not more than 2 mm wide ....... {\b 22. Phippsia}
\par
101 Glumes longer than floret; lemma and palea membranous
\par
    or scarious, hyaline, smooth
\par

\par
120}
\par