{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 138 Lemma densely tuberculate ................................................... {\b 10. Castellia} 
\par
138 Lemma smooth, scabridulous or hairy, but not tuberculate
\par
139 Lemma with an awn extending at least 2 mm beyond the
\par
    apex of the spikelet 
\par
140 Annual
\par
141 Glumes distinctly shorter than the spikelet and not enclosing 
\par
    the florets; awn usually terminal or from the sinus 
\par
    of the 2-dentate apex of the lemma, usually straight 
\par
142 Glumes subequal ............................................................... {\b 9. Micropyrum} 
\par
142 Glumes very unequal
\par
143 Lemma with 3 keels, at least in the lower part ..................... {\b 15. Vulpiella}
\par
143 Lemma rounded on the back or with 1 keel
\par
144 Ovary and grain densely hairy at apex
\par
145 Lemma awned from the sinus ................................................. {\b 44. Bromus}
\par
145 Lemma awned from the apex ..................................................... {\b 6. Vulpia}
\par
144 Ovary and grain glabrous
\par
146 Grain adherent to palea; hilum at least ¾ as long as grain ......... {\b 6. Vulpia}
\par
146 Grain ± free from palea; hilum less than ½ as long as grain . {\b 7. Ctenopsis}
\par
141 Glumes nearly as long as to longer than the florets and 
\par
    ± enclosing them; awn usually dorsal, often geniculate 
\par
147 Glumes awned .......................................................................... {\b 83. Holcus}
\par
147 Glumes unawned
\par
148 Spikelets 10 mm or more
\par
149 Spikelets pendent ...................................................................... {\b 60. Avena}
\par
149 Spikelets erect to erecto-patent ............................................ {\b 67. Ventenata}
\par
148 Spikelets not more than 9 mm
\par
150 Rhachilla glabrous; callus hairy or glabrous
\par
151 Spikelets with 2 florets; rhachilla not prolonged;
\par
    lemma shortly 2-dentate at apex ...................................................... {\b 76. Aira}
\par
151 Spikelets with 2 or more florets; rhachilla prolonged;
\par
    lemma 2-dentate to 2-fid at apex
\par
152 Lemma 2-fid at apex, the teeth aristate; palea 3- to
\par
    4-dentate at apex .............................................................. {\b 72. Parvotrisetum}
\par
152 Lemma 2-dentate at apex, the teeth not aristate;
\par
    palea 2-fid at apex ............................................................... {\b 69. Lophochloa}
\par
150 Rhachilla and callus hairy
\par
153 Both glumes 3-veined .......................................................... {\b 71. Trisetaria}
\par
153 Lower glume 1-, the upper 3-veined
\par
154 Lemma 2-dentate at apex, the teeth not aristate ............... {\b 69. Lophochloa}
\par
154 Lemma 2-fid at apex, the teeth aristate ................................. {\b 70. Trisetum}
\par
140 Perennial
\par
155 Ovary and grain densely hairy at apex or with a hairy appendage
\par
156 Lemma with a usually straight awn arising from apex or sinus
\par
157 Lemma very deeply 2-dentate; lodicules 3, hairy ..... {\b 63. Danthoniastrum}
\par
157 Lemma shallowly 2(-5)-dentate; lodicules 2, glabrous
\par
158 Inflorescence dense, spike-like; spikelets often 
\par
    bluish or silvery ......................................................................... {\b 36. Sesleria}
\par
158 Inflorescence a panicle with easily visible branches;
\par
    spikelets green or purplish
\par
159 Awn at apex of lemma; ovary with a hairy apex ...................... {\b 4. Festuca}
\par
159 Awn from or below the sinus of the 2-dentate apex of 
\par
    lemma; ovary with a hairy appendage ....................................... {\b 44. Bromus}
\par
156 Lemma with a dorsal, usually geniculate awn
\par
160 Leaves with 2 distinct lines of bulliform cells along
\par
    the midvein on the upper surface .............................................. {\b 62. Avenula}
\par
160 Leaves without 2 distinct lines of bulliform cells 
\par
    along the midvein on the upper surface
\par
161 Awn of the lowest floret arising from the lower 1/3 
\par
    of the lemma; leaves not ribbed on the upper surface;
\par
    lowest floret usually male .............................................. {\b 64. Arrhenatherum}
\par
161 Awn of the lowest floret arising at or above the 
\par
    middle of the lemma; leaves distinctly ribbed on the
\par
    upper surface; lowest floret hermaphrodite
\par
162 Spikelets with 2-4 fertile florets, usually all awned;
\par
    lemma glabrous; rhachilla disarticulating between the
\par
    fertile florets .................................................................... {\b 61. Helictotrichon}
\par
162 Spikelets with 2 fertile florets, the upper without 
\par
    an awn; lemma hairy; rhachilla disarticulating above
\par
    the glumes only ...................................................... {\b 65. Pseudarrhenatherum}
\par
155 Ovary and grain glabrous or with a very few hairs at the apex
\par
163 Glumes a little shorter to longer than the florets 
\par
    and ± enclosing them; lemma with a dorsal awn
\par
164 Glumes shiny, a little shorter than the florets ................ {\b 74. Deschampsia}
\par
164 Glumes not shiny, longer than the florets ................................ {\b 83. Holcus}
\par
163 Glumes distinctly shorter than and not enclosing the
\par
    florets; lemma usually with an apical awn or awned 
\par
    from the sinus or close below
\par
165 Inflorescence with usually not more than 10 spikelets;
\par
    lemma with 7-9 prominent veins ......................................... {\b 41. Schizachne}
\par

\par
122}
\par