{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 23 Leaves 0·4-0·5 mm wide; veins 5, 1 projecting as a rib,
\par
   rarely with 1-2 indistinct lateral ribs; upper glume 
\par
   acute; ovary glabrous or almost so ............................................. {\b 20. elegans}
\par
20 Ligule usually not more than 1 mm, opaque, truncate or rounded
\par
24 Stems 65-105 cm × 1·3-4 mm; ligule truncate; panicle 9-13 cm . {\b 22. valida}
\par
24 Stems not more than 80 cm × 1·8 mm; ligule rounded;
\par
   panicle usually less than 9 cm
\par
25 Leaves 0·3-0·7(-0·8) mm wide, with 5-7 veins
\par
26 Stems (6-)10-20(-37) cm; spikelets 7-9(-10) mm; upper
\par
   glume 4·5-5·5 mm
\par
27 Upper glume oblong-lanceolate, with narrow scarious 
\par
   margin; keels of the palea ciliolate; anthers 1/4-1/3
\par
   as long as palea ............................................................................. {\b 26. sardoa}
\par
27 Upper glume ovate-lanceolate, with wide scarious margin;
\par
   keels of palea long-ciliate; anthers ½ as long as palea .......... {\b 27. quadriflora}
\par
26 Stems 30-55 cm; spikelets 9-14·5 mm; upper glume 3·9-6·1 mm
\par
28 Leaves pungent; panicle dense; palea scabrid only 
\par
   towards apex ................................................................................ {\b 23. gautieri}
\par
28 Leaves not or scarcely pungent; panicle lax; palea 
\par
   scabrid in upper ½
\par
29 Lowest leaves 1/40-1/70 as long as upper, rather flaccid,
\par
   with 5 veins; ligule 0·5-1(-1·5) mm; spikelets bright yellow . {\b 24. flavescens}
\par
29 Lowest leaves 1/10-1/6 as long as upper, rather rigid,
\par
   with 7 veins; ligule 0·8-1·7(-2) mm; spikelets green,
\par
   variegated with violet .......................................................... {\b 25. scabriculmis}
\par
25 Leaves more than 0·7 mm wide, with 7-9, rarely more veins
\par
30 Sclerenchyma absent from ribs on upper surface of leaves
\par
31 Lowest leaves usually 1/4-1/3 as long as the upper .............. {\b 28. versicolor}
\par
31 Lowest leaves usually less than ¼ as long as the upper
\par
32 Lemma lanceolate, long-acuminate; palea slightly scabrid
\par
   above, with minutely ciliolate keels ........................................ {\b 29. acuminata}
\par
32 Lemma broadly ovate-lanceolate, shortly acuminate;
\par
   palea scabrid all over, with distinctly ciliate keels .......................... {\b 30. varia}
\par
30 Sclerenchyma present in the ribs on upper surface of 
\par
   some or all the leaves
\par
33 Sclerenchyma present in the ribs on the upper surface 
\par
   of all leaves
\par
34 Panicle-branches hairy
\par
35 Leaf 0·4-0·85(-1) mm wide; upper glume rounded; palea
\par
    ¾ as long as lemma, shortly tomentose ................................ {\b 40. adamovicii}
\par
35 Leaf 0·5-1·1 mm wide; upper glume acuminate; palea as 
\par
   long as lemma, scabrid .............................................................. {\b 41. galicicae}
\par
34 Panicle-branches glabrous, rarely sparsely hairy,
\par
   often scabrid
\par
36 Ligule densely setulose; panicle nodding; palea setulose 
\par
   over whole surface ....................................................................... {\b 36. pindica}
\par
36 Ligule glabrous; panicle erect; palea shortly hairy in
\par
   upper part ................................................................................... {\b 39. cyllenica}
\par
33 Sclerenchyma present in the ribs on the upper surface 
\par
   of some leaves, absent in others on the same plant
\par
37 Lemma ovate, shortly acuminate or obtuse; awn not more
\par
   than 0·5 mm
\par
38 Leaves rigid, pungent, 0·4-0·95 mm wide, the lowest 1/25-1/8 as 
\par
   long as the uppermost; ligule 0·6-1·2(-1·5) mm; 
\par
   spikelets 9-10·5 mm ........................................................................ {\b 31. calva}
\par
38 Leaves flaccid, not pungent, 0·4-0·75 mm wide, the 
\par
   lowest 1/10-1/3 as long as the uppermost; ligule 0·9-1·6 mm;
\par
   spikelets 9-14 mm
\par
39 Leaves with not more than 7 veins and 3-5 ribs; upper
\par
   glume 5·6 × 2 mm; lemma 6·5-7·5 × 2·5-3·4 mm, unawned,
\par
   sometimes mucronate; palea scabrid only in upper part ............ {\b 32. xanthina} 
\par
39 Leaves with 7-9 veins and 5-7 ribs; upper glume 4·6 × 1·7 mm;
\par
    lemma 5·3-6·3 × 2·3 mm; awn 0-0·3 mm; palea scabrid 
\par
   all over ...................................................................................... {\b 33. balcanica} 
\par
37 Lemma lanceolate, long-acuminate; awn usually more than 0·5 mm
\par
40 Leaves with 7-9 veins; ribs often without sclerenchyma ............ {\b 37. graeca}
\par
40 Leaves with 7-13 veins; ribs usually with sclerenchyma
\par
41 Panicle erect, the branches puberulent ..................................... {\b 35. penzesii}
\par
41 Panicle nodding, the branches scabrid
\par
42 Leaves pungent; ribs usually with sclerenchyma; awn c. ½ as
\par
   long as lemma ............................................................................ {\b 34. bosniaca}
\par
42 Leaves scarcely pungent; ribs often without sclerenchyma;
\par
   awn not more than 1/6 as long as lemma ................................ {\b 38. rechingeri} 
\par
11 Ovary ellipsoid or oblong; grain adnate to palea
\par
43 Rhachilla visible between the florets at anthesis;
\par
   ribs of leaves with inflated epidermal cells
\par
44 Leaves flat, at least when fresh, with (5-)7 ribs;
\par
   sheaths closed, decaying into longitudinal fibres
\par
45 Leaves not more than 5 cm × 0·5 mm; lemma 7 mm, with
\par
   awn not more than 1·5 mm ...................................................... {\b 45. morisiana}
\par
45 Leaves up to 22  cm × 2·5 mm; lemma 4-6 mm, with 
\par
   awn 2·5-4 mm ........................................................................ {\b 46. henriquesii}
\par
44 Leaves plicate (rarely the cauline flat), with 3-5(-7) ribs;
\par
   sheaths open to base, not decaying into longitudinal fibres
\par
46 Stems up to 90 cm, leaves 7-veined; glumes shortly
\par
   acuminate (Portugal and Spain) ..................................................... {\b 42. ampla}
\par
46 Stems not more than 60 cm; leaves 5(-7)-veined; glumes
\par
   very long-acuminate (Açores)
\par
47 Panicle-branches densely pubescent; spikelets 6-7 mm;
\par
   lemma mucronate ......................................................................... {\b 43. petraea}
\par
47 Panicle-branches scabrid; spikelets 9-10 mm; lemma awned ..... {\b 44. jubata}
\par
43 Rhachilla hidden by the florets at anthesis; ribs of 
\par
   leaves with epidermal cells of normal size
\par
48 Free part of margins of sheaths infolded; leaves with 
\par
   sclerenchyma-strands some of which are contiguous
\par
49 Panicle linear; upper glume narrowly lanceolate
\par
50 Sheaths closed almost to mouth, with infolded margin 
\par
   of 2 rows of cells; veins 7-8; ribs 5-6; panicle-
\par
   branches scabrid ........................................................................ {\b 47. queriana}
\par
50 Sheaths closed for ½-¾ of their length, with infolded 
\par
   margin of 1 row of cells; veins 5-7; ribs 1-3(-5); 
\par
   panicle-branches shortly hairy ............................................... {\b 48. capillifolia}
\par
49 Panicle ovate-oblong; upper glume usually ovate or
\par
   ovate-lanceolate
\par
51 Leaves of non-flowering shoots plicate, the cauline 
\par
   flat; upper glume obtuse to very shortly acuminate
\par
52 Leaves scabrid near apex, with 13 veins; lemma c. 6·2 mm,
\par
   lanceolate, rather long-acuminate .................................................. {\b 49. porcii}
\par
52 Leaves smooth, with 5-9(-13) veins; lemma 4·2-4·6 mm,
\par
   ovate-lanceolate, shortly acuminate ............................................... {\b 50. tatrae}
\par
51 All leaves plicate; upper glume acuminate
\par
53 Stems 30-105 cm; panicle 6-22 cm; awn not more than 1·2 mm
   .............................................................................................. {\b 55. amethystina}
\par
53 Stems 10-55(-68) cm; panicle less than 5(-10) cm; awn
\par
   at least 1·5 mm
\par
54 Stems 22-68 cm × 1·4 mm; upper glume 5·8-6 × 1·4-1·7 mm,
\par
   oblong-lanceolate, long-acuminate ............................................... {\b 54. norica}
\par

\par
127}
\par