{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 197 Non-flowering shoots terete; lemma rounded or weakly
\par
    keeled on back .............................................................................. {\b 4. Festuca}
\par
195 Lemma without an awn
\par
198 Glumes 1-veined; lemma with 7-9 prominent, ± parallel
\par
    veins .......................................................................................... {\b 42. Glyceria}
\par
198 At least the upper glume 3-veined, the lateral veins
\par
    sometimes short; lemma with not more than 5, often
\par
    obscure veins
\par
199 Inflorescence a dense, raceme-like panicle 5-15 mm,
\par
    with distichously arranged spikelets on short branches ......... {\b 37. Oreochloa}
\par
199 Inflorescence not a dense, raceme-like panicle with
\par
    distichously arranged spikelets
\par
200 Callus with rigid hairs 0·3-1·2 mm
\par
201 Panicle-branches aculeolate; leaves setiform,
\par
    0·3-0·8 mm in diameter ................................................... {\b 17. Bellardiochloa}
\par
201 Panicle-branches smooth and glabrous; leaves usually 
\par
    flat, 2-10 mm wide ................................................................ {\b 20. Arctophila}
\par
200 Callus glabrous or with very short or soft, flexuous hairs 
\par
202 Lemma 3-veined    
\par
203 Panicle cylindrical to ovoid, the branches densely
\par
    puberulent; lemma with obscure veins ..................................... {\b 68. Koeleria}
\par
203 Panicle diffuse, the branches glabrous; lemma with
\par
    prominent veins ...................................................................... {\b 30. Catabrosa}
\par
202 Lemma 5-veined
\par
204 Lemma rounded on the back or weakly keeled near apex
\par
205 Lemma 1·4-4·2 mm, usually hairy near the base, obtuse
\par
    or acute; grain with a sub-basal punctiform hilum,
\par
    without a ventral furrow ....................................................... {\b 21. Puccinellia}
\par
205 Lemma 2·5-7 mm usually glabrous, acuminate; grain with
\par
    a long, linear hilum and ventral furrow ....................................... {\b 4. Festuca}
\par
204 Lemma strongly keeled throughout its length
\par
206 Non-flowering shoots very strongly compressed .................. {\b 26. Dactylis}
\par
206 Non-flowering shoots terete
\par
207 Panicle-branches aculeolate; lemma mostly herbaceous .............. {\b 16. Poa}
\par
207 Panicle branches smooth
\par
208 Stems bulbous at base; lemma with the distal half 
\par
    membranous ....................................................................... {\b 19. Catabrosella}
\par
208 Stems not bulbous at base; lemma mostly herbaceous ................. {\b 16. Poa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe     {\b Arundinarieae}   Steudel
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Woody often monocarpic perennials. Stems hollow; internodes terete or flattened and grooved on alternate sides. Leaves flat, linear to oblong-lanceolate, often with a petiole-like base, those on the main stems ({\i stem-sheaths}) with lamina reduced or absent; sheaths often with bristles at the mouth ({\i oral setae}). Spikelets all similar, with 1-many florets. Glumes 2, sometimes more. Lemmas similar to the glumes but longer, unawned or with a short terminal awn, 5- to many-veined. Palea usually 2-keeled. Lodicules usually 3. Stamens 3-6; filaments sometimes connate. Styles 2-3; fruit a caryopsis.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Numerous species of this tribe, mostly from China, Japan and the Himalayan region, are cultivated in S. & W. Europe for ornament and for use as canes in horticulture etc. Many of these with long rhizomes show a tendency to spread in semi-natural vegetation, and to persist long after the garden or park in which they have been planted is abandoned, but it is very difficult to decide which should be regarded as fully naturalized; moreover, partly for this reason and partly on account of difficulties in identification, references in the literature are scanty. The species described below are known to have spread freely into natural vegetation, at least in Britain or Ireland; there are probably others whose naturalization elsewhere has not come to our notice.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Flowering in Europe occurs rarely in most species; attention, therefore, has been given mainly to vegetative characters in the descriptions.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: C. E. Hubbard in P. M. Synge (ed.),{\i  Supplement to the Dictionary of Gardening }ed. 2. Oxford. 1969. A.H. Lawson,{\i  Bamboos}. London. 1968.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.           Sasa}              Makino & Shibata 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D. McClintock & J. do Amaral Franco. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizomes far-creeping. Stems ascending, fairly slender, terete, somewhat pruinose below the nodes; stem-sheaths persistent, glabrous. Branches 1 at each node. Leaves broadly lanceolate or oblong, relatively large; oral setae scabrid. Spikelets with several florets. Stamens 6.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. palmata} (Burbidge) E. G. Camus,{\i  Bambus.} 25 (1913). Stems up to 2(-3) m × 12 mm. Leaves 15-30(-40) cm × 50-70 (-95) mm, broadly lanceolate, acuminate, shining green above, paler beneath, with (7-)10-13(-16) veins on each side of the midrib.{\i  Widely naturalized in Britain, Ireland and the Channel Islands.} [Br Ga Hb.] ({\i Japan, Sakhalin}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b S. veitchii} (Carrière) Rehder,{\i  Jour. Arnold Arb. }{\b 1}: 58 (1919), from S. Japan, is frequently cultivated, but less fully naturalized. It has stems not more than 1·2 m, leaves not more than 25 cm × 60 mm, greyish-green and usually with withered, whitish margins, more abruptly tapered to the apex, and with only 6-9 veins on each side of the midrib.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.      Arundinaria}    Michx   
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D. McClintock & J. do Amaral Franco. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizomes far-creeping or short; stems erect or arching, terete; sheaths persistent or deciduous. Branches 1 or several at each
\par

\par
124}
\par