{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 node. Leaves linear-lanceolate to narrowly oblong; oral setae smooth. Spikelets with 2-many florets. Stamens 3(-4).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The genus is here maintained in a comprehensive sense, as the limits of the segregate genera which have been established in this century by Japanese botanists do not seem to be generally agreed. These segregate names are, however, indicated in synonymy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The information on the number of branches at each node refers to mature stems; on younger stems they may be fewer.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem-sheaths deciduous; branches several at each node
\par
2 Rhizomes far-creeping; stems not more than 15 mm in diameter,
\par
  the older ones arching ...................................................................... {\b 1. anceps}
\par
2 Rhizomes short; stems up to 40 mm in diameter, all stiffly
\par
  erect ............................................................................................... {\b 2. fastuosa}
\par
1 Stem-sheaths persistent
\par
3 Branches several at each node; leaves ± glaucous on half of
\par
  lower surface .................................................................................. {\b 4. simonii}
\par
3 Branches single at each node
\par
4 Rhizomes usually very short; stems up to 7 m; leaves
\par
  ± glaucous on most of lower surface ................................................... {\b 3. japonica}
\par
4 Rhizomes far-creeping; stems not more than 1·25 m;
\par
  leaves concolorous beneath ............................................................. {\b 5. vagans}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. anceps} Mitf.,{\i  Bamboo Garden} 181 (1896). Rhizomes far-creeping. Stems up to 4 m × 15 mm, greenish or brownish, the older ones arching. Stem-sheaths deciduous. Branches numerous at each node. Leaves (5-)7-10(-15) cm × (4-)7-8(-18) mm, linear-lanceolate, with 2-4(-6) veins on each side of the midrib; lower surface pale, concolorous.{\i  Locally naturalized in Britain and the Channel Islands.} [Br Ga.] ({\i W. Himalaya.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. fastuosa} (Latour-Marliac ex Mitf.) Lehaie,{\i  Bambou} ({\i Mons}) {\b 2}: 215 (1907) ({\i Semiarundinaria fastuosa} (Latour-Marliac ex Mitf.) Makino). Rhizomes shortly creeping. Stems up to 8 m × 40 mm, stiffly erect, very thin-walled, usually terete, but sometimes unilaterally flattened on upper internodes. Stem-sheaths deciduous (rarely over-wintering in a partly decayed condition). Branches several at each node, short, erect, crowded. Leaves 10-20 cm × 15-20(-30) mm, narrowly oblong or lanceolate, long-acuminate, glabrous, with 4-8(-10) pairs of veins on each side of the midrib; lower surface dull green, concolorous.{\i  Locally naturalized in Britain and Ireland}. [Br Hb.] ({\i C. & S. Japan}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. japonica} Siebold & Zucc. ex Steudel,{\i  Syn. Pl. Glum. }{\b 1}: 334 (1855) ({\i Sasa japonica} (Siebold & Zucc. ex Steudel) Makino, {\i Pseudosasa japonica} (Siebold & Zucc. ex Steudel) Makino). Rhizomes usually very short. Stems up to 7 m × 20 mm, erect, thin-walled, leafless and without branches below; upper nodes each with a single branch. Stem-sheaths long-persistent, rough. Leaves 8-33 cm × (10-)20-40(-55) mm, narrowly lanceolate, long-acuminate, glabrous, with 4-8(-10) veins on each side of midrib; lower surface ¼ green, ¾ more or less glaucous. Oral setae often absent.{\i  Frequently naturalized in W. Europe.} [?Az Br Ga Hb.] ({\i Japan, Korea}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. simonii} (Carrière) A. & C. Rivière, Bambous 286 (1878) (Pleioblastus simonii (Carrière) Nakai. Rhizomes creeping. Stems up to 7 m × 20 mm, the older ones arching. Stem-sheaths persistent. Branches several at each node. Leaves 5-30 cm × (5-)15-35 mm, narrowly lanceolate, with 4-6(-9) veins on each side of the midrib; lower surface ½ green, ½ more or less glaucous.{\i  Locally naturalized in Britain.} [Br.] ({\i China and Japan}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. vagans} Gamble, {\i Kew Bull.}{\b  1915}: 350 (1915). Rhizomes far-creeping. Stems up to 1·25 m × 5 mm, slightly zig-zag. Stem-sheaths persistent. Branches 1 at each node. Leaves 12-20 cm × (5-)10-25(-30) mm, narrowly lanceolate, sparsely hairy above, pubescent beneath, with (3-)5-6 veins on each side of the midrib; lower surface concolorous.{\i  Locally naturalized in Britain.} [Br.] ({\i Origin unknown}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.           Phyllostachys}                 Siebold & Zucc.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J. do Amaral Franco. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stems erect; internodes unilaterally flattened and grooved, the groove alternating at each node between the two sides of the stem. Stem-sheaths deciduous. Branches 2 at each node, unequal, patent; sometimes a very small third branch present. Leaves narrowly oblong-lanceolate, relatively small, serrulate on one margin, green above, glaucous beneath. Spikelets with few florets. Stamens 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A taxonomically difficult genus, of which several species, all from China, are widely cultivated, especially in the W. Mediterranean region. For none of them is there clear evidence of thorough naturalization, but a few can be met with in seminatural vegetation in neglected parks and similar situations. Of these, the following appear to be the most widespread.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b P. nigra} (Loddiges) Munro, {\i Trans. Linn. Soc. London}{\b  26}: 38 (1868). Stems up to 8 m, purplish-black when mature. Leaves 9-15 mm wide.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b P. bambusoides} Siebold & Zucc., {\i Abh. Akad. Wiss.} ({\i München}) {\b 3}: 746 (1843) (incl.{\i  P. quilioi} A. & C. Rivière). Rhizomes short. Stems up to 12(-20) m × 70(-125) mm, green, with basal internodes not conspicuously shorter than those above. Stem-sheaths concolorous, or spotted with purple. Leaves 8-32 mm wide.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b P. aurea} (Carrière) A. & C. Rivière, {\i Bull. Soc. Acclim.} ({\i Paris}) ser.3, {\b 5}: 716 (1878). Like {\i P. bambusoides} but stems pale yellowish-green, with one or more basal internodes much shorter than those above, and with leaves 6-22 mm wide.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b P. viridiglaucescens} (Carrière) A. & C. Rivière, {\i Bambous} 245 (1878). Rhizomes far-creeping. Stems not more than 6 m, very thin-walled, yellowish-green. Stem-sheaths longitudinally striped with purple. Leaves 8-20 mm wide.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe        {\b  Poeae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves linear, flat, plicate or convolute; silica-bodies rounded or oblong; 2-celled micro-hairs absent; ligule membranous. Inflorescence a panicle, rarely a spike or raceme. Spikelets all hermaphrodite or rarely some sterile, laterally compressed or terete, with (1-)2-many florets. Rhachilla usually disarticulating above the glumes and between the florets. Glumes shorter than the spikelet. Lemma herbaceous, unawned or with a terminal awn, with (3-)5-13 veins, usually keeled. Palea 2-keeled. Lodicules 2, entire or lobed. Stamens 3, rarely 2 or 1. Ovary glabrous or hairy at apex; styles 2. Grain with punctiform or linear hilum; starch-grains compound. Chromosomes large; basic number 7, very rarely 5, 6 or 11.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.            Festuca}           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By I. Markgraf-Dannenberg. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Caespitose or rhizomatous perennials. Leaves plicate, involute, or flat; sheaths open or closed. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets pedicellate, with (2-)4-several florets, laterally compressed. Glumes 2, the lower usually 1-veined, the upper wider, usually 3-veined. Lemma with rounded back, not carinate, with or without a terminal or subterminal awn. Palea with 2 keels, scarious. Ovary oblong or obovoid; grain obovoid-oblong, ventrally sulcate, free or adnate to palea and lemma; hilum
\par

\par
125}
\par