{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 linear, about as long as the grain, rarely elliptical and half as long.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In the following account the width of plicate leaves indicates the transverse measurement in cross-section, and the length of a spikelet is measured from the base of the lower glume to the apex of the fourth lemma (excluding the awn).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants with proliferating spikelets occur particularly among species related to{\i  F. ovina,} e.g. {\b 107} and {\b 148}, but are also found in {\b 67},{\b  68}, {\b 87} and {\b 90} and in many hybrids. Such plants occur mostly on high mountains and in the north; in identifying them reliance has to be placed mainly on vegetative characters and they are not accounted for in the key, except for{\i  F. vivipara}, which always has proliferating spikelets
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: B. Achtarov, {\i Izv. Bot. Inst.} ({\i Sofia}){\b  3}: 3-89 (1953). E. Alexeev,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  12}: 11-43 (1975). P. Auquier,{\i  Biosystématique, Taxonomie et Nomenclature du groupe de} Festuca ovina L., s.l. (Poaceae){\i  en Belgique et dans quelques Régions voisines}. Thesis, Univ. Liège. 1973-1974. M. Bidault,{\i  Essai de Taxonomie expérimentale et numérique sur} Festuca ovina L., s.l.{\i  dans le sud-est de la France.} Thesis, Univ. Paris, Fac. Sci. Orsay. 1967;{\i  Rev. Cytol. Biol. Végét.}{\b  31}: 217-356 (1968). E. Hackel,{\i  Monographia Festucarum europaearum}. Kassel & Berlin. 1882. W. O. Howarth,{\i  Rep. Bot. Exch. Club Brit. Is.}{\b  13}: 338-346 (1948). A. Huon,{\i  Les Fétuques de l'Ouest de la France, recherche de Biosystématique et de Biogéographie. Botanica Rhedonica} sér. A, no. 9: 7-298. Thesis, Univ. Rennes. 1970. M. Kerguélen,{\i  Lejeunia} nov. ser., {\b 75}: 9-16, 32-44, 145-182 (1975). V. Krajina, {\i Acta Bot. Bohem.}{\b  9}: 184-220 (1930);{\i  Spisy Vydáv. Prir. Fak. Karlovy Univ.}{\b  106}: 1-44 (1930). R. de Litardière,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Belg. }{\b 55}: 92-133, 149-154 (1923);{\i  Condollea}{\b  10}: 103-146 (1945);{\i  Agron. Lusit.}{\b  14}: 31-51 (1952). I. Markgraf-Dannenberg,{\i  Ber. Bayer. Bot. Ges. }{\b 28}: 195-211 (1950); {\i Veröff. Geobot. Inst. Rübel }({\i Zürich}) {\b 25}: 114-142 (1952); {\b 56}: 92-176 (1976); Festuca,{\i  Schlüssel der Schweizer Arten. Kartierung der Schweizer Flora, Bestimmungsschlüssel zu kritischen Sippen.} Bern. 1967. E. I. & A. Nyárády,{\i  Studii Cerc. Biol.} ({\i Ser. Bot}.) {\b 16}: 105-172 (1964). E. Patzke,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  108}: 505-507 (1961). S. Rauschert,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  63}: 251-283 (1960). A. St-Yves,{\i  Annu. Cons. Jard. Bot. Genève}{\b  17}: 1-218 (1913);{\i  Tentamen Clavis analyticae Festucarum veteris Orbis }({\i Subgen.} Eu-Festucarum). Rennes. 1927;{\i  Candollea}{\b  3}: 321-466 (1928). R. de Soó, {\i Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung. }{\b 18}: 363-377 (1973). G. Stohr,{\i  Wiss. Zeitschr. Univ. Halle}{\b  9}: 393-414 (1960). N. N. Tzvelev, {\i Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc. }({\i Leningrad}){\b  9}: 15-46 (1972).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem with swollen tuberous base; ovary with rigid hairs
\par
2 Sheaths thin, without fibres or ribs; stem 2·5-3 mm in
\par
  diameter, the thickened base less than 10 mm in diameter;
\par
  leaves flat; panicle-branches very slender, flexuous ....................... {\b 1. triflora}
\par
2 Sheaths thick, ribbed or breaking down into longitudinal
\par
  fibres; stem 1-2 mm in diameter, the thickened base 
\par
  10-20 mm in diameter; leaves convolute or plicate at 
\par
  least in part; panicle-branches stout, not flexuous
\par
3 Leaves plicate throughout, with 3 low ribs above; lower
\par
  glume 3-veined; lemma ovate, obscurely veined .......................... {\b 4. durandii}
\par
3 Leaves not plicate throughout, with numerous prominent 
\par
  ribs above; lower glume 1-veined; lemma lanceolate, 
\par
  strongly veined
\par
4 Sheaths soon decaying into fibres; leaves plicate only 
\par
  near base; panicle linear; lemma c. 2 mm wide ..................... {\b 2. coerulescens}
\par
4 Sheaths tardily or not decaying into fibres, longi-
\par
  tudinally ribbed; leaves plicate to the middle; panicle
\par
  ovate to oblong; lemma at least 2·9 mm wide ............................ {\b 3. paniculata}
\par
1 Stem without swollen tuberous base; ovary glabrous, scabrid
\par
   or with short, soft hairs, very rarely with long, rigid hairs
\par
5 Ovary with long, rigid hairs ...................................................... {\b 5. spectabilis}
\par
5 Ovary without long, rigid hairs
\par
6 Wider leaves at least 5 mm wide, flat or canaliculate,
\par
  convolute in bud
\par
7 Mouth of sheath without auricles; ligule short but distinct;
\par
  lemma soft; ovary scabrid
\par
8 Densely caespitose, not rhizomatous; lemma with 3(-5)
\par
  veins, acute ................................................................................... {\b 6. altissima}
\par
8 Laxly caespitose, rhizomatous; lemma with 5 veins, 
\par
  obtuse or rounded-subacute ........................................................... {\b 7. drymeja}
\par
7 Mouth of sheath with auricles; ligule usually a minute
\par
  rim, lemma hard; ovary glabrous or with few long hairs
\par
9 Leaves up to 18 mm wide, flaccid, glossy beneath, flat,
\par
  not canaliculate; panicle-branches very long, nodding;
\par
  awn at least 10 mm ....................................................................... {\b 8. gigantea}
\par
9 Leaves 3-10 mm wide, not flaccid, not glossy beneath,
\par
  canaliculate; panicle-branches not nodding; awn not 
\par
  more than 4 mm
\par
10 Leaves almost smooth above; auricles glabrous; panicle-
\par
   branches 2 at the lowest node, one with 1-3, the other
\par
   with 4-6 spikelets ........................................................................ {\b 9. pratensis}
\par
10 Leaves distinctly ribbed above; auricles ciliate;
\par
   panicle-branches 2-3 at the lowest node, each with
\par
   5-15 spikelets ....................................................................... {\b 10. arundinacea}
\par
6 All leaves less than 5 mm wide, usually plicate
\par
11 Ovary obovoid; grain usually free from palea
\par
12 Grain adnate to palea ................................................................ {\b 15. scariosa}
\par
12 Grain free from palea
\par
13 Non-flowering shoots extravaginal; rhizomatous; outer
\par
   basal leaves without lamina
\par
14 Stolons medium to long; panicle-branches filiform
\par
15 Leaves with 13-15 veins; ligules of cauline leaves not
\par
   auriculate ................................................................................... {\b 13. calabrica}
\par
15 Leaves with 7 veins; ligules of cauline leaves auriculate
\par
16 Panicle rather lax; spikelets dirty green; upper glume
\par
   less than 6 mm .................................................................................. {\b 11. laxa}
\par
16 Panicle dense, narrow, except at anthesis; spikelets
\par
   yellow-green; upper glume more than 7 mm ........................... {\b 12. dimorpha}
\par
14 Stolons very short; panicle-branches usually not filiform
\par
17 Ligule 2-6 mm, lacerate; leaves plicate
\par
18 Outer basal leaves without lamina; ligule 2-3 mm;
\par
   leaves smooth, angular in transverse section, glabrous
\par
   or nearly so on inner surface; lemma 3-veined ...................... {\b 14. pseudeskia}
\par
18 Outer basal leaves with lamina; ligule 4-6 mm; leaves
\par
   scabrid, terete, with short conical hairs on inner 
\par
   surface; lemma 5-veined ............................................................. {\b 15. scariosa}
\par
17 Ligule a short rim, or absent; leaves flat or rarely
\par
   slightly convolute
\par
19 Densely caespitose and with long stolons; ligule a 
\par
   ciliate rim; sheaths open almost to base; panicle-
\par
   branches patent only at anthesis ................................................ {\b 16. carpatica}
\par
19 Laxly caespitose, with short stolons; ligule absent;
\par
   sheaths open only above the middle; panicle-branches 
\par
   always patent ............................................................................. {\b 17. pulchella}
\par
13 Non-flowering shoots intravaginal; rhizomes absent;
\par
   outer basal leaves with lamina
\par
20 Ligule 2-5(-7) mm, translucent, acute
\par
21 Sheaths corrugated, forming a thick base to the non-flowering
\par
   shoots; anthers more than ½ as long as palea ............................. {\b 21. burnatii}
\par
21 Sheaths smooth and thin; anthers c. ½ as long as palea
\par
22 Leaves with 9-11(-13) veins; sclerenchyma present on
\par
   upper surface of leaves; spikelets 9-10 mm .................................... {\b 18. eskia}
\par
22 Leaves with 5-9 veins; sclerenchyma absent on upper
\par
   surface of leaves; spikelets 6-9 mm 
\par
23 Leaves 0·6-0·9 mm wide, veins 7-9, 5-7 projecting as low ribs; 
\par
   upper glume subobtuse; ovary very densely hispid ................... {\b 19. alpestris}
\par

\par
126}
\par