{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 103 Rhachilla disarticulating above the persistent glumes ......... {\b 87. Agrostis}
\par 103 Rhachilla disarticulating below the glumes, the 
\par    spikelet falling entire ............................................................. {\b 89. Polypogon}
\par 97  Lemma awned
\par 104 Awn with 3 branches arising near its base
\par 105 Branches of awn not plumose .............................................. {\b 114. Aristida}
\par 105 At least the central branch of the awn plumose .............. {\b 115. Stipagrostis}
\par 104 Awn simple
\par 106 At least 1 glume awned 
\par 107 Upper glume unawned ................................................... {\b 92. Chaetopogon}
\par 107 Both glumes awned
\par 108 Awns short, terminal ............................................................... {\b 93. Phleum}
\par 108 Awns long, dorsal .............................................................. {\b 89. Polypogon}
\par 106 Glumes unawned
\par 109 Spikelets 12-14 mm ......................................................... {\b 90. Ammophila}
\par 109 Spikelets less than 10 mm
\par 110 Glumes shiny, swollen and coriaceous below ................... {\b 88. Gastridium}
\par 110 Glumes not shiny, swollen and coriaceous below
\par 111 Lemma with a geniculate awn from near the base and 
\par    2 long apical setae ................................................................. {\b 86. Triplachne}
\par 111 Lemma without 2 long apical setae 
\par 112 Ligule a row of hairs ............................................................. {\b 123. Crypsis} 
\par 112 Ligule membranous
\par 113 Rhachilla disarticulating below the glumes, the 
\par    spikelet falling entire; inflorescence usually dense,
\par    ovoid or cylindrical .............................................................. {\b 94. Alopecurus}
\par 113 Rhachilla disarticulating above the persistent glumes;
\par    inflorescence a ± lax panicle   
\par 114 Annual
\par 115 Glumes with pectinately arranged hairs along the 
\par    veins, ± prickly between the veins ...................................... {\b 69. Lophochloa}
\par 115 Glumes glabrous, not prickly
\par 116 Awn usually at least 4 mm; upper glume 3-veined;
\par    palea about as long as lemma ....................................................... {\b 32. Apera}
\par 116 Awn not more than 3 mm; upper glume usually 1-veined;
\par    palea much shorter than lemma ................................................ {\b 87. Agrostis} 
\par 114 Perennial
\par 117 Callus with hairs more than 1/2 as long as lemma ......... {\b 91. Calamagrostis}
\par 117 Callus glabrous or with hairs not more than 1/2 as 
\par    long as lemma
\par 118 Rhachilla prolonged beyond the floret ......................... {\b 91. Calamagrostis}
\par 118 Rhachilla not prolonged beyond the floret 
\par 119 Lemma membranous or scarious; leaves less than     10 mm wide .............................................................................. {\b 87. Agrostis} 
\par 119 Lemma herbaceous; leaves mostly 10-20 mm wide .................. {\b 31. Cinna}
\par 87  Spikelets with 2 or more florets, sometimes some sterile
\par 120 Ligule a row of hairs
\par 121 Rhachilla, callus or lemma with conspicuous, long, silky hairs
\par 122 Stems not more than 60 cm; sheaths tight ...................... {\b 143. Tricholaena}
\par 122 Stems at least 80 cm; sheaths loose
\par 123 Lemma with long hairs; rhachilla glabrous ........................... {\b 108. Arundo}
\par 123 Lemma glabrous; rhachilla with long hairs ..................... {\b 109. Phragmites}
\par 121 Rhachilla and lemma without conspicuous, long, silky hairs
\par 124 Spikelet with 2 florets, the lower male or sterile,
\par    the upper hermaphrodite ......................................................... {\b 132. Panicum}
\par 124 Spikelet with 2-many florets, the lowest hermaphrodite
\par 125 Glumes up to 2(-2 8) mm .................................................. {\b 121. Eragrostis}
\par 125 At least the larger glume 3 mm or more
\par 126 Annual; inflorescence a small, dense panicle .................... {\b 112. Schismus}
\par 126 Perennial; inflorescence a lax panicle
\par 127 Lemma 7- to 9-veined, 2-dentate at apex ......................... {\b 111. Danthonia}
\par 127 Lemma 3-veined or apparently veinless
\par 128 Flowering stems with only 1 node; glumes subequal ........... {\b 113. Molinia}
\par 128 Flowering stems with several nodes; glumes unequal .. {\b 120. Cleistogenes} 
\par 120 Ligule membranous
\par 129 Lowest floret male or sterile
\par 130 Glumes much shorter than the florets ..................................... {\b 129. Oryza}
\par 130 At least the upper glume longer than the florets
\par 131 Spikelets with 2 male or sterile florets and a single 
\par    terminal hermaphrodite floret, the sterile florets 
\par    often reduced to small lemmas
\par 132 Inflorescence a lax panicle; lower florets male ................. {\b 81. Hierochloe}
\par 132 Inflorescence a dense often ovoid or cylindrical 
\par    panicle lower florets sterile
\par 133 Lemmas unawned; plant not smelling of coumarin ................ {\b 99. Phalaris}
\par 133 Lemmas awned; plant smelling of coumarin ............... {\b 82. Anthoxanthum}
\par 131 Spikelets with the lowest floret male or sterile and
\par    the second floret hermaphrodite or female
\par 134 Lower floret male, with a geniculate, dorsal awn ....... {\b 64. Arrhenatherum}
\par 134 Lower floret sterile, reduced to a hyaline lemma
\par 135 Inflorescence a dense, cylindrical panicle ........................... {\b 144. Imperata}
\par 135 Inflorescence a lax panicle ............................................... {\b 145. Saccharum}
\par 129 Lowest floret hermaphrodite
\par 136 Awn articulated near the middle, with a ring of short
\par    hairs at the joint, thickened towards apex ........................ {\b 84. Corynephorus}
\par 136 Awn, if present, not articulated near the middle, not
\par    thickened towards apex
\par 137 Lemma orbicular to broadly ovate, cordate at base .................... {\b 35. Briza}
\par 137 Lemma usually lanceolate to ovate, not cordate at base
\par
\par 121}
\par