{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 165 Inflorescence usually with more than 10 spikelets;
\par
    lemma with 3-5 veins, or veins obscure
\par
166 Non-flowering shoots strongly compressed; spikelets
\par
    strongly compressed, densely clustered in a usually 
\par
    ± lobed panicle .......................................................................... {\b 26. Dactylis}
\par
166 Non-flowering shoots ± terete; inflorescence usually 
\par
    a dense, ovoid or cylindrical panicle
\par
167 Lemma usually obtuse, awned from the apex ....................... {\b 68. Koeleria}
\par
167 Lemma 2-fid, the teeth usually setose, awned from 
\par
    below the sinus ......................................................................... {\b 70. Trisetum}
\par
139 Lemma unawned or with an awn extending less than 2 mm
\par
    beyond the apex of the spikelet 
\par
168 Annual
\par
169 Spikelets 10 mm or more, pendent ........................................... {\b 60. Avena}
\par
169 Spikelets usually less than 10 mm, erect to patent
\par
170 Spikelets subsessile, in racemes on the branches of a
\par
    sparingly branched inflorescence
\par
171 Lemma strongly veined in upper half ............................... {\b 23. Sclerochloa}
\par
171 Lemma obscurely veined
\par
172 Glumes with a rounded hyaline apex .............................. {\b 11. Narduroides}
\par
172 Glumes with an acute herbaceous apex ............................ {\b 9. Micropyrum}
\par
170 Spikelets usually distinctly pedicellate, in a richly
\par
    branched inflorescence
\par
173 Spikelets with 2 florets
\par
174 Lower 1-2 whorls of panicle branches almost or entirely 
\par
    without spikelets ..................................................................... {\b 79. Periballia}
\par
174 All whorls of panicle-branches with spikelets
\par
175 Lemma 5- to 7-veined, 2-fid at apex
\par
176 Glumes about as long as florets; lemma obscurely veined .......... {\b 76. Aira}
\par
176 Glumes shorter than florets; lemma conspicuously veined
    .............................................................................................. {\b 77. Molineriella}
\par
175 Lemma ± obscurely 3-veined, 3-fid at apex
\par
177 Panicle very lax; branches patent or deflexed ...................... {\b 80. Antinoria}
\par
177 Panicle rather dense; branches ± erect ................................... {\b 78. Airopsis}
\par
173 Some or all spikelets with more than 2 florets
\par
178 Longest glume not more than 1 mm .................................. {\b 14. Sphenopus}
\par
178 Longest glume at least 2 mm
\par
179 Panicle dense, usually ovoid or cylindrical ...................... {\b 69. Lophochloa}
\par
179 Panicle lax, with obvious branches
\par
180 Panicle-branches stout, rigid
\par
181 Panicle-branches not divaricate ........................................ {\b 12. Desmazeria}
\par
181 Panicle-branches divaricate at maturity ................................ {\b 13. Cutandia}
\par
180 Panicle-branches slender, flexuous 
\par
182 Lemma awned ...................................................................... {\b 85. Avellinia}
\par
182 Lemma unawned
\par
183 Pedicels mostly shorter than spikelets ........................................... {\b 16. Poa}
\par
183 Pedicels much longer than spikelets ................................... {\b 18. Eremopoa} 
\par
168 Perennial
\par
184 Ovary and grain densely hairy at apex
\par
185 Lemma rounded on the back ..................................................... {\b 4. Festuca}
\par
185 Lemma distinctly keeled
\par
186 Panicle spicate, dense, ovoid or cylindrical;
\par
    spikelets usually bluish or silvery .............................................. {\b 36. Sesleria}
\par
186 Panicle lax, with long branches; spikelets not bluish
\par
    or silvery
\par
187 Ovary and grain without an appendage; styles inserted
\par
    apically ............................................................................... {\b 101. Scolochloa}
\par
187 Ovary and grain with a hairy terminal appendage;
\par
    styles inserted laterally
\par
188 Stems solid; lemma villous on the back in the lower ½ 
    ...................................................................................... {\b 107. Ampelodesmos}
\par
188 Stems hollow; lemma glabrous .............................................. {\b 44. Bromus}
\par
184 Ovary and grain glabrous
\par
189 Glumes almost as long as to longer than the florets
\par
190 Sheaths closed to the mouth; 2-3 sterile lemmas 
\par
    forming an apical, clavate structure ............................................ {\b 40. Melica}
\par
190 Sheaths open for most of their length; sterile lemmas,
\par
    if present, not forming an apical, clavate structure
\par
191 Glumes not or scarcely longer than the florets
\par
192 Awn dorsal; lemma glabrous on back ............................ {\b 74. Deschampsia}
\par
192 Awn apical; lemma usually hairy on back in lower half ...... {\b 24. Dupontia}
\par
191 Glumes about twice as long as the florets
\par
193 Spikelets 1·5-2 mm .............................................................. {\b 80. Antinoria}
\par
193 Spikelets at least 4 mm
\par
194 Panicle-branches flexuous, mostly patent or deflexed ......... {\b 75. Vahlodea}
\par
194 Panicle-branches not flexuous, mostly erect to erecto-patent .. {\b 83. Holcus}
\par
189 Glumes much shorter than the spikelet, usually about
\par
    as long as the lowest floret
\par
195 Lemma with an awn
\par
196 Callus with rigid hairs 0·3-0·5 mm; rhachilla with 
\par
    rigid hairs 0·4-0·6 mm at apex ........................................ {\b 17. Bellardiochloa}
\par
196 Callus glabrous or subglabrous; rhachilla often ± 
\par
    hairy but without long, rigid hairs at apex
\par
197 Non-flowering shoots very strongly compressed; lemma
\par
    strongly keeled .......................................................................... {\b 26. Dactylis}
\par

\par
123}
\par