{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 2 Leaves subopposite (or alternate on non-flowering 
\par
  branches) sheaths free from the leaf-base, stipuliform;
\par
  male flowers without a perianth; female flowers with a
\par
  cupular perianth ...................................................................... {\b 2. Zannichellia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.       Althenia}      Petit
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious or dioecious. Stems elongated, slender. Leaves alternate; sheaths auriculate. Flowers axillary, solitary. Male flowers with a 3-dentate, shallowly cupular perianth; stamens 1-3; anthers 1- or 2-thecous. Female flowers with a perianth of 3 segments; carpels 3; styles simple.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. filiformis} Petit,{\i  Ann. Sci. Obs.}{\b  1}: 452 (1829) (incl. {\i A. barrandonii} Duval-Jouve). Monoecious. Leaves less than 0·5 mm wide, setaceous, acute, entire; sheaths long-auriculate. Stamen 1; anther 1-thecous. Styles elongated, filiform; stigma infundibular. Fruitlets 2-3 mm (excluding the beak), stipitate, ellipsoid or oblong-ellipsoid, smooth, beaked.{\i  Brackish water near the sea. S. & W. Europe, from W. France to N.W. Jugoslavia.} ?Co Ga Hs It Ju ?Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A record from S.E. Russia requires confirmation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.     Zannichellia}          L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious. Stems elongated, slender. Sheaths free from or adnate to the leaf-base. Flowers axillary, solitary. Male flowers without a perianth, the peduncle simulating a filament; stamens 1-2; anthers 2-thecous. Female flowers with a cupular perianth; carpels 1-9; styles simple.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: G. Reese,{\i  Biol. Zentr.}{\b  86 }({\i Suppl.}): 277-306 (1967).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. Z. palustris} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 969 (1753) (incl.{\i  Z. major} (Hartman) Boenn. ex Reichenb.,{\i  Z. pedunculata} Reichenb.,{\i  Z. pedicellata }(Wahlenb. & Rosén) Fries). Leaves up to 2 mm wide but usually narrower, subopposite (or alternate on non-flowering branches), acute, entire, sheaths free from the leaf-base, stipuliform, tubular when young, membranous, evanescent. Stamens 1-2. Carpels 2-9 (usually 4); stigmas peltate, with an irregularly crenate margin. Fruitlets 3-6 mm, stipitate or subsessile, laterally compressed, often curved, crenate-dentate, beaked. 2n = 12, 24, 28, 32, 34, 36. {\i Still, fresh or brackish water. Almost throughout Europe.} All except Al Az Fa Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in some flower- and fruit-characters, but not vegetatively. The male flowers may consist of one (2-thecous) anther or of two united anthers simulating a single 4-thecous anther. In the female flowers there is variation in the number of carpels and the shape of the stigmas, also in the degree of stipitation, the beak-length and the dentition of the fruitlets. Because of this many supposed taxa have been described at specific and infraspecific levels, and have been arranged in various conflicting ways, none of which appears satisfactory. The plants are here regarded as forming a single variable species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.         Cymodocea}       C. Konig
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dioecious, marine. Leaves 2-7 together on short shoots; sheaths auriculate. Flowers solitary. Perianth absent. Male peduncle simulating a filament; stamens 2; anthers 2-thecous. Female flowers sessile; carpels 2; styles divided into 2 filiform stigmas. Fruitlets with bony pericarp.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: C. den Hartog,{\i  The Sea-grasses of the World} 160-176. Amsterdam & London. 1970.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. nodosa} (Ucria) Ascherson,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin }{\b 1869}: 4 (1869) ({\i C. aequorea }C. Konig). Stems with annular scars at the nodes left by fallen leaves. Leaves up to 40 cm × 4 mm, rounded-obtuse, 7- to 9-veined, spinulose-dentate towards the apex. Peduncles of male flowers 7-10 cm; anthers 11-15 mm. Fruitlets 8 mm (excluding the short beak), laterally compressed, semicircular.{\i  Coasts of the Mediterranean region, extending to S. Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 182.       NAJADACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.H. Valentine. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Submerged, aquatic, annual herbs; stems elongated. Leaves opposite (sometimes apparently in whorls of 3), linear, sheathing at the base. Flowers unisexual, small, axillary. Male flowers with a 2-lipped perianth closely applied to the anther; stamen 1; anther subsessile, 1- to 4-thecous, opening at the apex. Female flowers without a perianth; ovary 1-locular, with 1 basal ovule. Fruit indehiscent; seeds without endosperm; testa areolate; embryo straight.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.          Najas}           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious or dioecious. Leaves conspicuously or minutely dentate at the margins; sheath with or without auricles. Flowers solitary or few together, ebracteate or with a spathe-like bract, pedunculate or subsessile. Style 2- to 4-branched.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Dioecious; leaves 1-6 mm wide including the teeth, conspicu-
\par
  ously spinose-dentate; stems spinose-dentate or smooth ................ {\b 1. marina}
\par
1 Monoecious; leaves less than 1 mm wide including the 
\par
  teeth, minutely spinose-dentate; stems smooth
\par
2 Leaf-sheaths with long, narrow or conspicuous, rounded 
\par
  to truncate auricles
\par
3 Auricles long, narrowly triangular; fruit 1·75-2·25 mm .............. {\b 6. graminea}
\par
3 Auricles conspicuous, rounded to truncate; fruit 2·5-3·5 mm ... {\b 5. gracillima}
\par
2 Leaf-sheaths with short auricles or none
\par
4 Leaf-sheaths with sloping shoulders, not auriculate;
\par
  leaves with 20-36 minute teeth on each margin .............................. {\b 2. flexilis}
\par
4 Leaf-sheaths with short, rounded-truncate auricles;
\par
  leaves with 5-17 teeth on each margin
\par
5 Areoles of seeds wider than long; leaves up to 3 cm ....................... {\b 3. minor}
\par
5 Areoles of seeds longer than wide;
     leaves not more than 1·2 cm ................................................... {\b 4. tenuissima}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. NAJAS. Dioecious. Stems spinose-dentate or smooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. marina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1015 (1753) ({\i N. major} All.). Leaves up to 4·5 cm, 1-6 mm wide including the teeth, conspicuously
\par

\par
13}
\par