{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 most; ribs 7-9, the lateral always with sclerenchyma; sclerenchyma forming a ring; sheaths scabridulous; ligule 1·5-3·2 mm. Panicle 4-10 cm, erect, somewhat interrupted, the branches glabrous or slightly hairy. Spikelets 9-13 mm, with 4-5 florets, yellowish-green slightly variegated with violet. Upper glume 4·6-7·1 × 2·2-2·9 mm. Lemma 6·5-9·1 × 2·6-3·4 mm, oblong-lanceolate to lanceolate, acuminate, with a scarious margin; awn 0·2-2·2 mm. Palea as long as lemma, shortly hairy and whitish above. Anthers more than ½ as long as palea. {\i Calcareous rocks,} 800-2000{\i  m. Mountains of Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Panicle dense; upper glume almost entirely scarious .. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b cyllenica}
\par
1 Panicle lax; upper glume with a narrow scarious margin
\par
2 Palea scabrid over whole surface ...................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b pangaei}
\par
2 Palea scabrid only in upper 1/3 ............................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b thasia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cyllenica}: Veins (7-)9(-10); sheaths closed for 1/3 of their length. Panicle dense. Upper glume almost entirely scarious, acuminate. Lemma 6·5-9·1 × 2·3-3·4 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, smooth, with a narrow scarious margin. Palea scabrid near the apex; keels ciliate in upper ½.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except the north-east}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pangaei} Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i Veröff. Geobot. Inst. Rübel} ({\i Zürich}) {\b 56}: 159 (1916): Veins 7-9; sheaths closed for 1/6 of their length. Panicle lax. Upper glume acuminate, with a narrow scarious margin. Lemma 7·1-8·5 × 2·7-3·4 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, with a wide scarious margin. Palea scabrid over whole surface; keels ciliate throughout. •{\i  N.E. Greece} ({\i Pangaion}.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b thasia} Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  op. cit.} 161 (1976): Veins 9(-10); sheaths open to the base. Panicle lax. Upper glume with a narrow scarious margin, rounded. Lemma 7-8·4 × 2·9-3 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, with a narrow scarious margin. Palea scabrid over whole surface: keels long-ciliate in upper 1/3. •{\i  Thasos}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. F. adamovicii} (St-Yves) Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 326 (1918) ({\i F. varia} var.{\i  adamovicii} St-Yves). Stems 30-80 cm, scabrid above. Leaves (0·4-)0·7-1 mm wide, smooth, pungent, the lowest (1/25-)1/10-1/5 as long as the uppermost; veins 7-9(-10); ribs 7-9, somewhat prominent, usually with a thick sclerenchyma-strand above; sclerenchyma forming a ring; ligule 1·3-2·5 mm. Panicle 7·5-8 cm, erect, slightly interrupted, the branches densely and shortly hairy. Spikelets 8·5-11(-12) mm, with 3-4 florets, distinctly variegated with violet. Upper glume 5·8-6·2 × 2-2·6 mm, ovate-lanceolate, rounded, with a wide scarious margin. Lemma 6·3-7·8 × 2·3-2·7 mm, lanceolate, shortly acuminate, with a scarious margin above; awn 0-1 mm. Palea distinctly shorter than lemma, densely hairy and whitish, ciliate in the upper 2/3. Anthers little more than ½ as long as palea.{\i  Calcicole. • Jugoslavia and Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. F. galicicae} I. Horvat ex Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  op. cit. }324 (1978). Stems 40-65 cm. Leaves 0·5-1·1 mm wide, smooth, pungent, the lowest 1/20-1/9 as long as the uppermost; veins 7-11; ribs 5-7, with a thin sclerenchyma-strand above, except on midvein; sclerenchyma forming a ring; ligule (0·6-)1·5-2·3 mm. Panicle 6-8 cm, scarcely nodding, slightly interrupted, the branches rather short, minutely hairy. Spikelets 8·5-11·7 mm, with 3-4 florets, pale green, slightly variegated with violet. Upper glume 5·2-6·9 × 2·1-2·6 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 6·2-7·8 × 2·6-2·9 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, with a narrow scarious margin above; awn 0·2-0·8 mm. Palea about as long as lemma, scabrid, the keels ciliate throughout. Anthers more than ½ as long as palea.{\i  Alpine meadows,} 1680-2250{\i  m; calcicole. • S.W. Jugoslavia} ({\i Galicica Planina, S. of Ohrid}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   (D) Stem-base not tuberous. Leaves less than 3 mm wide. Ovary ellipsoid or oblong; grain adnate to palea.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   (a) Rhachilla visible between the florets. Ribs of leaves with bulliform epidermal cells. Ligule a very narrow rim. Sheaths decaying into fibres or not.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. F. ampla} Hackel,{\i  Cat. Rais. Gram. Port.} 26 (1880). Stems 30-90 cm. Leaves (0·4-)0·6-0·9 mm wide, plicate, or the cauline sometimes flat, scabrid at apex; veins 7, with sclerenchyma-strands above and beneath; ribs 5-7, prominent, pyriform in cross-section; sheaths yellowish, open to the base, not decaying into fibres. Panicle 10-20 cm, more or less spreading. Spikelets 8-11 mm, with 4-9 florets, greenish or more or less purplish. Lemma 5-7·1 × 1·7-2 mm, conspicuously 3-veined; awn 0·15-0·2(-0·3) mm. Ovary usually glabrous. 2n = 28, 42, 56.{\i  Rocks, river-gravels and pastures. Portugal, C. & S. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. F. petraea} Guthnick ex Seub.,{\i  Fl. Azor.} 20 (1844). Caespitose; stems 30-60 cm. Leaves 0·6-0·8 mm wide, plicate, rigid, more or less erect, with many short conical and some longer hairs on upper surface; veins 5(-7), the main lower sclerenchyma-strands contiguous with the veins; ribs 3-5, with sclerenchyma present above, contiguous only with the midrib; sheaths purplish to brownish-grey, open to the base, not decaying into fibres. Panicle 3-8 cm, rather thick and dense, the branches densely pubescent. Spikelets 6-7 mm. Lemma c. 5 × 1·75 mm, long acuminate, with rather long hairs; awn 0·5-1·5 mm. Palea scabrid. Anthers slightly less than ½ as long as palea. Ovary glabrous.{\i  Rocks, mainly coastal. • Açores.} Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. F. jubata} Lowe, {\i Trans. Cambr. Philos. Soc.}{\b  6}: 530 (1838). Caespitose; stems up to 60 cm. Leaves 0·3-0·6 mm wide, plicate, recurved, smooth; veins 5, with sclerenchyma-strands on both sides, the marginal stouter than the others; ribs 5, prominent, pyriform in cross-section, with lower sclerenchyma-strands contiguous with all veins, the upper sclerenchyma only in 2 ribs; sheaths greyish, open to the base, not decaying into fibres. Panicle 3-10 cm, slender, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 7-8 (-10) mm. Lemma 6-7·5 × 1·5-1·8 mm, long-acuminate, glabrous to puberulent; awn 3-5(-8) mm. Palea with long hairs. Anthers less than 1/2 as long as palea. Ovary glabrous. {\i Açores.} Az. ({\i Madeira.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. F. morisiana} Parl.,{\i  Gior. Bot. Ital.}{\b  1}: 1 (1809). Caespitose; stems 10-30 cm, slender. Leaves 0·2-0·5 mm wide, flat, smooth; veins 7; ribs 7, rather wide, not very prominent, with inflated cells and sclerenchyma-strands above; lower sclerenchyma-strands present at midrib and margin; sheaths closed, decaying into longitudinal fibres. Panicle more or less spike-like. Spikelets 7-7·7 mm. Lemma c. 5·5 mm, scarious near apex. Anthers 2·5 mm. Ovary hairy. •{\i  C. Sardegna} ({\i Mte Gennargentu}). Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. F. henriquesii} Hackel,{\i  Monogr.} 126 (1882). Caespitose; stems 20-40 cm. Leaves 2-2·5 mm wide, flat, becoming plicate when dry; veins 7-9; sclerenchyma-strands at the ridges of all ribs; lower sclerenchyma-strands present only at midrib and margin. Panicle short, lax, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 7-8·5(-9) mm. Lemma 4-6 × 1·9 mm, long-acuminate; awn 2·5-4 mm. Palea scabrid. Anthers 3·4 mm. Ovary glabrous.{\i  Mountain grassland. • N.C.Portugal} ({\i Serra da Estrêla}). Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  (b) Rhachilla hidden by the florets. Ribs of leaves without bulliform epidermal cells.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  (i) Sheaths with deeply infolded thin margins, not or scarcely decaying into fibres, usually closed for ½-¾.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. F. querana} Litard., {\i Cavanillesia}{\b  8}: 54 (1936). Densely caespitose; stems (16-)25-40 cm; non-flowering shoots intravaginal. Leaves plicate, somewhat pungent; veins 7-8, with very stout, more or less laterally confluent sclerenchyma-strands below each vein, some or all contiguous with the veins; ribs 5-6, very
\par

\par
137}
\par