{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 118 Spikelets (4·2-)4·7-6 mm; lemma 2·6-3·4 mm ................ {\b 155. pseudovina}
\par
118 Spikelets (6-)6·5-8·1 mm; lemma 3·1-3·9(-4·6) mm .............. {\b 156. illyrica}
\par
117 Leaves with 5-7 veins; plant pruinose; lemma 4-5·2 mm
\par
119 Stems pubescent; spikelets 6·5-7·5(-8) mm, not 
\par
    pruinose; lemma 4·6-5·2 mm ................................................... {\b 157. wagneri}
\par
119 Stems weakly scabrid above; spikelets 5-6·5 mm, ± 
\par
    pruinose; lemma 4-4·5(-5) mm ......................................... {\b 158. makutrensis}
\par
103 Leaves usually not laterally compressed, with 
\par
    sclerenchyma in a complete ring, smooth or scabrid
\par
120 At least most leaves acute; panicle-branches thickened
\par
    below the spikelets
\par
121 Leaves very short, rigid, curled; awn 1/5-1/3 as long
\par
    as lemma ................................................................................. {\b 154. indigesta}
\par
121 Most or all leaves long, not very rigid, not curled;
\par
    awn usually more than 1/3 as long as lemma
\par
122 Leaves usually pruinose, with 7(-9) veins; upper 
\par
    glume ovate, subobtuse; lemma usually densely pubescent ...... {\b 151. glauca}
\par
122 Leaves usually not pruinose, with 7-9 veins; upper 
\par
    glume lanceolate, acuminate; lemma glabrous, scabrid
\par
    or ciliate above
\par
123 Stem pubescent above; lemma 4·6-5·5 mm; awn not more
\par
    than 1/3 as long as lemma ................................................ {\b 152. vasconcensis}
\par
123 Stems glabrous above; lemma 5·5-7·1 mm; awn ½ as 
\par
    long as lemma ....................................................................... {\b 153. durissima}
\par
120 Most leaves obtuse; panicle-branches not thickened 
\par
    below spikelets
\par
124 Spikelets proliferating .......................................................... {\b 150. vivipara}
\par
124 Spikelets not proliferating
\par
125 Leaves 0·2-0·6(-0·8) mm wide
\par
126 Leaves rigid, curved; sclerenchyma-ring often thickened at base
\par
127 Leaves with 5 veins; sheaths closed in lower ¼; awn
\par
    1½ times as long as lemma ....................................................... {\b 109. sipylea}
\par
127 Leaves with 7 veins; sheaths closed for ¼-½ their length
\par
128 Leaves strongly scabrid throughout; awn more than ½
\par
    as long as lemma ..................................................................... {\b 110. lapidosa}
\par
128 Leaves smooth or scabrid towards apex; awn not more 
\par
    than 1/3 as long as lemma .................................................... {\b 111. occitanica}
\par
126 Leaves not rigid, straight; sclerenchyma ring not 
\par
    thickened at base
\par
129 Lemma unawned, sometimes mucronate ........................... {\b 102. tenuifolia}
\par
129 Lemma awned
\par
130 Leaves scabrid throughout; sheaths open almost or 
\par
    quite to base 
\par
131 Stems 10-15(-20) cm ........................................................... {\b 105. niphobia} 
\par
131 Stems (10-)20-45(-70) cm
\par
132 Spikelets (4-)4·8-6·3(-7·3) mm ................................................. {\b 103. ovina}
\par
132 Spikelets (6·8-)7-7·5(-7·9) mm ..................................... {\b 104. ophioliticola}
\par
130 Leaves usually smooth, except near apex; sheaths 
\par
    closed in lower 1/4-1/3 
\par
133 Leaves keeled beneath; panicle lax, the branches numerous,
\par
    patent ......................................................................................... {\b 108. eggleri}
\par
133 Leaves rounded beneath; panicle dense, with few branches
\par
134 Leaves scabrid, at least near apex; lemma twice as 
\par
    long as wide ............................................................................. {\b 106. airoides}
\par
134 Leaves smooth or weakly scabrid near apex; lemma 3 
\par
    times as long as wide .......................................................... {\b 107. armoricana}
\par
125 Leaves (0·3-)0·5-0·85(-1·35) mm wide
\par
135 Sclerenchyma-ring uniform or slightly thickened at base
\par
136 Sheaths open to base
\par
137 Panicle rather dense; upper glume rather abruptly acuminate
\par
138 Pruinose; stems 12-32 cm; sheaths glabrous or puberulent;
\par
    upper glume 3·9-4·9 mm ................................................... {\b 134. oviniformis}
\par
138 Not pruinose; stems 30-57 cm; sheaths with patent 
\par
    hairs 2 mm; upper glume 5·2-6·2 mm ............................. {\b 135. hirtovaginata}
\par
137 Panicle rather lax; upper glume very gradually acuminate
\par
139 Panicle-branches scabrid; awn not more than ½ as 
\par
    long as lemma ....................................................................... {\b 136. ticinensis}
\par
139 Panicle-branches densely hairy; awn at least ½ as 
\par
    long as lemma
\par
140 Lemma 6·9-7·3 mm, shortly setulose above; awn c. ½ 
\par
    as long as lemma ............................................................ {\b 137. grandiaristata}
\par
140 Lemma 5·5-6·7 mm, with long hairs above; awn at least
\par
     2/3 as long as lemma .............................................................. {\b 138. thracica}
\par
136 Sheaths usually closed below
\par
141 Sclerenchyma-ring uniform
\par
142 Lemma 6·2-7·5 mm; awn at least 2/3 as long as
\par
     lemma ............................................................................ {\b 139. hercegovinica}
\par
142 Lemma 5-6·5 mm; awn c. ½ as long as lemma .............. {\b 140. robustifolia}
\par
141 Sclerenchyma-ring unevenly thickened or sclerenchyma 
\par
    in separate stout strands
\par
143 Leaves angular in cross-section
\par
144 Leaves 0·3-0·6 mm wide; sheaths closed in lower 1/4-1/3;
\par
    awn more than 1/2 as long as lemma .................................... {\b 41. panciciana}
\par
144 Leaves (0·5-)0·6-0·9 mm wide; sheaths closed in lower
\par
    1/3-1/2; awn not more than 1/2 as long as lemma
\par
145 Leaves not pruinose; spikelets 8-9·4 mm;
\par
     lemma 5·2-6·9 mm ................................................................ {\b 142. apuanica}
\par
145 Leaves pruinose; spikelets (8-)9·5-10 mm;
\par
    lemma (5·5-)6·5-7·8 mm .................................................. {\b 143. koritnicensis}
\par
143 Leaves not angular in cross-section
\par
146 Leaves circular in cross-section, rigid, slender
\par
147 Leaves smooth; veins 7 ............................................................ {\b 146. polita}
\par
147 Leaves scabrid above; veins usually 5
\par
148 Lemma 3·8-4·7 mm; awn 1/4-1/3 as long as lemma .......... {\b 144. pohleana}
\par
148 Lemma 4·9-6·5 mm; awn about as long as lemma .......... {\b 145. macedonica}
\par
146 Leaves laterally compressed, soft, stout
\par
149 Leaves with 7 veins; sheaths closed for at least 2/5 their 
\par
    length; spikelets 7·2-7·3 mm .............................................. {\b 149. igoschiniae}
\par
149 Leaves with 7-9(-12) veins; sheaths closed for not
\par
    more than 1/3 their length; spikelets (7·5-)8-11 mm
\par
150 Usually pruinose; upper glume lanceolate, long-acuminate .. {\b 147. curvula}
\par
150 Not pruinose; upper glume ovate-lanceolate, shortly 
\par
    acuminate .......................................................................... {\b 148. pachyphylla}
\par
135 Sclerenchyma-ring uniform or slightly thickened at sides
\par
151 Sheaths closed in at least the lower ¼
\par
152 Leaves scabrid, at least above
\par
153 Stems pubescent above; leaves scabrid throughout;
\par
    lemma usually pubescent or ciliate ........................................... {\b 133. degenii}
\par
153 Stems smooth or weakly scabrid above;
\par

\par
130}
\par