{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200      leaves ± scabrid above; lemma scabrid above
\par
154 Leaves with 1 rib, often with 2 indistinct lateral 
\par
    ribs; panicle dense; awn 1·6-1·7 mm ...................................  {\b 131. brigantina}
\par
154 Leaves with 3 distinct ribs; panicle lax; awn up to 0·7 mm {\b 132. valentina}
\par
152 Leaves smooth
\par
155 Stems (5-)12-35(-44) cm; non-flowering shoots with 
\par
    numerous leaves
\par
156 Stems (5-)12-25(-44) cm; ribs 1(-3); sheaths closed 
\par
    in the lower 1/4-1/3 .................................................................... {\b 127. huonii}
\par
156 Stems 20-35 cm; ribs 3; sheaths closed in the lower ½ ....... {\b 128. gracilior}
\par
155 Stems (20-)35-60 cm; non-flowering shoots with very 
\par
    few leaves
\par
157 Stems smooth; upper glume 3·6-4·6 mm .............................  {\b 129. liviensis}
\par
157 Stems mostly pubescent above; upper glume 4·5-5 mm .. {\b 130. ochroleuca}
\par
151 Sheaths open for most of their length
\par
158 Leaves scabrid, rarely pruinose
\par
159 Leaves of the same non-flowering shoot differing 
\par
    greatly in width (0·45-1·35 mm); spikelets (7-)7·5-
\par
    8·1(-9·5) mm .................................................................... {\b 112. heteropachys}
\par
159 Leaves of the same non-flowering shoot uniform in 
\par
    width (0·6-0·85 mm); spikelets 5·5-7·5 mm
\par
160 Leaves 0·6-0·7(-0·85) mm wide; rib 1(-3); veins 7 .......... {\b 113. guestfalica}
\par
160 Leaves (0·43-)0·62-0·79(-1·14) mm wide; ribs (1-)2-3;
\par
    veins (5-)7(-9) ........................................................................... {\b 114. lemanii}
\par
158 Leaves smooth or scabrid above, always pruinose
\par
161 Leaves smooth
\par
162 Veins 9-13; sheaths usually pubescent
\par
163 Spikelets 4·3-6·5 mm; lemma ovate, rounded at apex;
\par
    awn absent or very short ......................................................... {\b 118. vaginata}
\par
163 Spikelets 6·2-8 mm; lemma oblong-ovate or acuminate,
\par
    shortly awned .................................................................. {\b 119. psammophila}
\par
162 Veins 7(-9); sheaths usually glabrous
\par
164 Spikelets (6·4-)7·2-8·5(-9·4) mm; awn 1/3-1/2 as long
\par
    as lemma ............................................................................ {\b 115. arvernensis}
\par
164 Spikelets 5·5-7·7 mm; awn not more than ½ as long 
\par
    as lemma
\par
165 Ligule glabrous; sheaths open to base; upper glume 
\par
    ovate-lanceolate; awn 1/4-1/3 as long as lemma .................. {\b 116. longifolia}
\par
165 Ligule pubescent; sheaths closed in lower ¼-½;
\par
    upper glume lanceolate; awn usually absent ............................... {\b 117. inops}
\par
161 Leaves usually scabrid above
\par
166 Lemma 5·2-5·8 mm; spikelets with 5-9 florets ................. {\b 120. pannonica}
\par
166 Lemma 2·5-5·4 mm; spikelets with 3-6 (-7) florets
\par
167 Leaves obtuse, not deciduous; sheaths glabrous;
\par
    stems glabrous or scabrid above
\par
168 Stems 18-35 cm; sheaths closed in the lower 1/5-1/4;
\par
    awn not more than 1/3 as long as lemma .................................. {\b 125. cinerea}
\par
168 Stems 30-40 cm; sheaths open to base; awn often at 
\par
    least 1/3 as long as lemma ......................................................... {\b 126. pallens}
\par
167 Leaves acuminate, deciduous; sheaths often pubescent;
\par
    stems pubescent
\par
169 Spikelets (5-)6·5-7·5(-8) mm; awn usually more than 1 mm
\par
170 Leaves ± pungent; sclerenchyma forming an even ring;
\par
    ribs 5-7(-9); upper glume 2·9-4·4 mm .................................... {\b 122. polesica}
\par
170 Leaves not pungent; sclerenchyma forming an inter-
\par
    rupted or uneven ring; ribs 3(-5); upper glume 4-4·8 mm ...... {\b 123. javorkae}
\par
169 Spikelets (4·5-)5·5-7 mm; awn usually less than 1 mm
\par
171 Leaves with 7-9 veins; sclerenchyma ring of even thickness .{\b 121. beckeri}
\par
171 Leaves with 7-11(-13) veins; sclerenchyma-ring often
\par
    thickened basally ................................................................... {\b 124. arenicola}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (A) Stem-base usually tuberous. Ovary with rigid hairs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. triflora} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl. }{\b 1}: 87 (1798). Densely caespitose; stems 50-90 cm × 2·5-3 mm, with tuberous base c. 8 mm in diameter. Leaves 6-15 cm × 2-3·5 mm, flat, convolute in bud, glaucous, scabrid above and on the margin; veins 11, with sclerenchyma-strands above and below, running from upper to lower epidermis at the 3 main veins, with bulliform cells between the ribs; sheaths closed for ¼ of their length, thin; ligule 1·5-2 mm, truncate. Panicle 10-20 cm, lax, nodding; branches glabrous, very slender, flexuous. Spikelets 12 mm, often violet-tinged. Glumes broadly lanceolate, scarious, 3-veined. Lemma 7-9 × 2·3-2·5 mm, long-acuminate, scabrid, with 5 stout veins. 2n = 14. {\i Shady places. Mountains of S., S.E. & C. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. F. caerulescens} Desf.,{\i  loc. cit. }(1798). Like {\b 1} but stems with   tuberous base c. 20 mm in diameter; leaves up to 25 cm × 1-2 mm, plicate   only near base; veins 7-11; sheaths soon decaying into longitudinal fibres, forming a dense felt; ligule not more than 1 mm; panicle very narrow, the branches densely hairy; spikelets 10 mm; glumes lanceolate; lemma 6-7 × 2·1 mm, mucronate. 2n = 14.{\i  S. Spain, Sicilia.} Hs ?It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. F. paniculata} (L.) Schinz & Thell.,{\i  Viert. Naturf. Ges. Zürich }{\b 58}: 40 (1913) ({\i F. aurea} Lam.,{\i  F. spadicea} L.). Like {\b 1} but stems with tuberous base 10-20 mm in diameter; leaves with numerous veins, those of non-flowering shoots plicate to the middle; sheaths persistent, not or very tardily decaying into fibres; ligule not more than 0·5 mm on non-flowering shoots; panicle lax at anthesis, the branches smooth or scabrid; lower glume 1-veined; lemma 6·5-11 × 2·9-3·4 mm.{\i  Rocky ground and dry grassland, mainly in the mountains. S. Europe, eastward to Bulgaria, and extending northwards to S. Austria.} Al Au Bu Ga He Hs It Ju Lu Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves 2·2-4 mm wide (when flat); lemma less than 8 mm
  ......................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b paniculata} 
\par
1 Leaves 1·5-3 mm wide (when flat); lemma more than 8 mm
\par
2 Spikelets not more than 12 mm; lemma golden-yellow .. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b spadicea}
\par
2 Spikelets more than 12 mm; lemma green ......................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b baetica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b paniculata}: Leaves 2·2-4 mm wide, flat from middle to apex. Spikelets (8-)9·3-11 mm; lemma 6·5-7·5 × 2·9 mm, golden-yellow. 2n = 14.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except most of the Iberian peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b spadicea} (L.) Litard., {\i Candollea}{\b  10}: 111 (1945)  ({\i F. consobrina} Timb.-Lagr.): Leaves 1·5-3 mm wide, flat from  middle to apex on flowering stems, filiform on non-flowering shoots. Spikelets 10-12 mm; lemma 8·3-9·4 × 3·2-3·4 mm, golden-yellow. 2n = 42. •{\i  From W. Portugal to S.C. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b baetica} (Hackel) Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 326 (1978) ({\i F. spadicea} var. baetica Hackel): Leaves 1·5 mm wide, flat only near apex. Spikelets 12-14 mm; lemma 9·1-11 × 3·4 mm, pale green.{\i  S. Spain.} ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par
131}
\par