{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves scabrid above; spikelets green, variegated with 
\par
  violet ............................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b rhodopensis}
\par
1 Leaves smooth; spikelets yellowish, not or slightly
\par
  variegated with violet
\par
2 Lemma 5·3-6·3 mm; palea very densely hairy ............... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b balcanica}
\par
2 Lemma 4·6-5·6 mm; palea sparsely hairy ......................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b neicevii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b balcanica}: Leaves smooth. Spikelets yellowish slightly variegated with violet. Lemma 5·3-6·3 × 2·3-2·5 mm. Palea very densely hairy and long-ciliate on the keels.{\i  W. & C. Stara Planina.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b neicevii} (Acht.) Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 327 (1978) ({\i F. xanthina} subsp. {\i neicevii} Acht.): Leaves smooth. Spikelets yellowish. Lemma 4·6-5·6 × 2·6-2·7 mm. Palea sparsely hairy, densely long-ciliate on the keels. {\i C. Stara Planina}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b rhodopensis} Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  op. cit.} 324 (1978): Leaves scabrid above. Spikelets green, variegated with violet. Lemma 4·6-5·5 × 2-2·1 mm. Palea sparsely hairy, densely short-ciliate on the keels.{\i  Rodopi}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. F. bosniaca} Kummer & Sendtner, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 32}: 756 (1849) ({\i F. pungens} Kit., non Lam., {\i F. varia} subsp. {\i pungens} (Kit.) Hegi). Stems 1·7-2·6 mm in diameter, scabrid above. Leaves smooth, mostly pungent, the lowest (1/17-)1/12-1/6(-1/4) as long as the uppermost; ribs 7-9, not prominent; sclerenchyma forming a ring; ligule 0·3-1·2(-1·6) mm. Panicle rather lax, nodding, the branches slender, often flexuous. Spikelets 8·4-13 mm, variegated with violet. Upper glume 4·1-7·8 × 1·7-2·3 mm, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, shortly acuminate to somewhat rounded. Lemma lanceolate to narrowly lanceolate, long-acuminate, with a narrow scarious margin above; awn (0·8-) 1·4-2·1 mm. Palea subglabrous. Anthers more than ½ as long as palea. {\i Calcicole. • Mountains of Balkan peninsula and S. Italy.} Al Bu It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Panicle-branches smooth .............................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b pirinensis}
\par
1 Panicle-branches scabrid
\par
2 Leaves with 9-11 veins .................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b bosniaca}
\par
2 Leaves with 7(-8) veins ................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b chlorantha}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b bosniaca}: Stems 30-88 cm. Leaves 0·3-1·2 mm wide; veins 9-11; all ribs with sclerenchyma on upper surface; ligule 0·4-1·6 mm. Panicle (6-)7-9·5 cm, the branches scabrid. Lemma 6·5-8·8 × 2·5-3·3 mm. {\i W. Jugoslavia and N. Albania; S. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b chlorantha} (G. Beck) Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 326 (1978) ({\i F. pungens} var. {\i chlorantha} G. Beck): Stems not more than 62 cm. Leaves 0·3-0·75(-0·9) mm wide; .veins 7(-8); ribs usually with sclerenchyma on upper surface; ligule 0·3-1(-1·2) mm. Panicle 6-7 cm, the branches scabrid. Spikelets yellowish. Lemma 5·5-8·4 × 2·3-2·7 mm.{\i  Jugoslavia and N. Albania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b pirinensis} (Acht.) Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  op. cit.} 327 (1978) ({\i F. varia} subsp. {\i pirinensis }Acht.): Stems not more than 62 cm. Leaves 0·5-0·7(-0·8) mm wide; veins 7-9(-11); ribs usually without sclerenchyma on upper surface; ligule 0·3-1(-1·2) mm. Panicle 6-7 cm, the branches smooth. Spikelets variegated with bright violet. Lemma 6-7·3 × 2·3 mm. {\i S.W. Bulgaria} ({\i Pirin}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. F. penzesii} (Acht.) Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i op. cit.} 326 (1978) ({\i F. pungens} var.{\i  penzesii} Acht.). Stems 30-50 cm × 0·7-1·3 mm. Leaves 0·4-0·75(-0·95) mm wide, rather soft, subpungent, smooth, glaucous, the lowest 1/8-1/3 as long as the uppermost; veins 7-11; ribs 6-8, not very prominent; sclerenchyma forming a ring; rib sclerenchyma present, rarely absent from the middle rib; sheaths smooth or densely hispid; ligule 0·7-2·2 mm, rounded. Panicle 5-9·5 cm, erect, interrupted, the branches slender, flexuous, minutely hairy. Spikelets 9·1-11·5 mm, with 4 florets, yellowish-green or slightly variegated with violet. Upper glume 4·7-6·7 × 2-2·5 mm, ovate-lanceolate, shortly acuminate to subobtuse, broadly scarious above. Lemma 5·8-7·5 mm × 2·6-3 mm, lanceolate, long-acuminate, with a narrow scarious margin; awn 0·4-1·6 mm. Palea as long as lemma, scabrid above.{\i  Calcicole. • Mountains of E. Macedonia.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. F. pindica} (Markgr.-Dannenb.) Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 326 (1978) ({\i F. cyllenica} subsp.{\i  pindica} Markgr.-Dannenb.). Stems 50-60 cm. Leaves 0·5-0·8(-1) mm wide, smooth, subpungent, the lowest 1/7-1/3 as long as the uppermost; veins 7-9; ribs 5-7, not prominent; sclerenchyma forming a ring; rib sclerenchyma always present; sheaths often setulose; ligule 0·7-2·2 mm, densely setulose. Panicle 5-7·5(-9) cm, nodding, interrupted, the branches slender, flexuous, scabrid. Spikelets 9-11·3 mm, with 3-4 florets, slightly variegated with violet. Upper glume 4·6-6·4 × 2-2·9 mm, oblong, subacuminate to rounded, with a wide scarious margin. Lemma 5·5-7·5 × 2·3-2·9 mm, lanceolate, long-acuminate, with a narrow scarious margin; awn 0-1 mm. Palea minutely setulose. Anthers more than ½ as long as palea. {\i Serpentine rocks, }1600-2000{\i  m. Mountains of N. Greece }({\i Pindhos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. F. graeca} (Hackel) Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i Veröff. Geobot. Inst. Rübel} ({\i Zürich}){\b  56}: 162 (1976) ({\i F. varia} subsp. {\i eu-varia} var. {\i genuina }subvar. {\i graeca }Hackel). Stems 30-50(-60) cm. Leaves (0·35-)0·4-0·75(-0·85) mm wide, smooth, subpungent, glaucous, often pruinose, the lowest 1/6-1/3 as long as the uppermost; veins 7(-9); ribs 5, rounded, not prominent, hairy; sclerenchyma forming a ring; sheaths setulose; ligule 0·4-1·1(-2·3) mm, densely setulose. Panicle 5-6 cm, slightly nodding and interrupted, the branches slender, flexuous, weakly scabrid. Spikelets 8·5-12 mm, scarcely violet-tinged, sometimes pruinose. Upper glume 4·1-6 × 2·5-2·7 mm, ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, scabrid. Lemma 5·8-7·1 × 2·6-3·1 mm, ovate-lanceolate, long-acuminate, scabrid on the back, with a wide scarious margin; awn 0·1-1·1 mm. Palea as long as lemma. Anthers more than ½ as long as palea.{\i  Calcicole. Mountains of Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b graeca}: Leaf-ribs with or without sclerenchyma; sheaths closed for up to 1/3 of their length. Panicle 5-6(-9) cm, dense. Palea scabrid.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except Olimbos}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pawlowskiana} Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i op. cit.} 164 (1976): Leaf-ribs always with sclerenchyma; sheaths closed for of their length. Panicle 4-5·3 cm, lax.{\i  Palea nearly smooth. • Olimbos}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. F. rechingeri} Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  op. cit.} 166 (1976). Stems 50-60 cm. Leaves 0·45-0·8 mm wide, subpungent, smooth, the lowest 1/7-1/4 as long as the uppermost; veins 7-13; ribs 9, not very prominent, somewhat angular, with or without sclerenchyma-strands, rather densely hairy; sclerenchyma forming a ring; sheaths closed for 1/3 of their length, setulose; ligule (0·4-)0·5-0·7(-1) mm, rounded, setulose. Panicle 5·5-6·5 cm, nodding, lax, the branches slender, flexuous, scabrid. Spikelets 8·7-10·2 mm, with 3-4 florets strongly variegated with violet, somewhat shiny. Upper glume 5-5·6 × 2·1-2·6 mm, broadly ovate, rounded, rarely subacuminate; lemma 6·5-7·1 × 2·5-2·9 mm, lanceolate, rather long-acuminate, with a wide scarious margin above; awn 0·3-1·1 mm. Palea as long as lemma, scabridulous and ciliate above. Anthers more than ½ as long as palea. 1600-2200{\i  m; calcifuge. • Mountains of W. Macedonia. }Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. F. cyllenica} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 13}): 58 (1853) ({\i F. varia }subsp.{\i  cyllenica} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Hayek). Stems 25-80 cm. Leaves 0·4-1(-1·15) mm wide, rather rigid and pungent, smooth, the lowest 1/7-1/3 as long as the upper-
\par

\par
136}
\par