{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 prominent; epidermal cells rarely bulliform; sheaths closed almost to mouth, scarcely fibrous in decay, with infolded margin of 2 rows of cells; ligule very short, minutely auriculate. Panicle 6-8·5 cm, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 8-8·6 mm. Upper glume c. 4·8 × 1·3 mm, linear-lanceolate, shortly acuminate. Lemma 4·5-5·3 × 1·7-2 mm, lanceolate, acuminate. Anthers more than ½ as long as palea. Ovary sparsely hairy.{\i  Mountain heaths. • N.W. Spain} ({\i prov. Léon}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. F. capillifolia} Dufour in Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 735 (1817) ({\i F. scaberrima} Lange, non Steudel). Densely caespitose; stems 35-60 cm; non-flowering shoots intravaginal. Leaves plicate, very slender, strongly scabrid, slightly pungent; veins 5-7, with a sclerenchyma-strand below but not touching each vein and at the margins; ribs 1-3(-5), not very prominent; epidermal cells large; sheaths closed for ½-¾ of their length, not decaying into fibres, with infolded margin of 1 row of cells; ligule minutely auriculate. Panicle 6-10 cm, the branches shortly hairy. Spikelets 7·5-9 mm. Upper glume 5·1-5·8 × 1·3-1·6 mm, narrowly lanceolate, long-acuminate. Lemma 5·2-6·2 × 1·7-2 mm, lanceolate, long-acuminate. Anthers c. ½ as long as palea. Ovary glabrous. {\i Woods and scrub; calcicole. S. & S.E. Spain. }Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. F. porcii} Hackel,{\i  Monogr.} 147 (1882). Laxly caespitose; stems up to 90 cm; non-flowering shoots extravaginal. Leaves 0·7-1·2 mm wide, the lower plicate, the upper flat; veins 13, with a sclerenchyma-strand below and usually touching each vein; ribs 7, alternately very prominent and lower, the more prominent ribs with contiguous sclerenchyma-strands on either side; epidermal cells bulliform; sheaths closed for 2/3 of their length, not decaying into fibres, with infolded margin of 1 row of cells; ligule very short, densely ciliate. Panicle 13-18 cm, lax, the branches rather long-setose. Spikelets c. 9·4 mm. Upper glume c. 4·9 × 1·4 mm, obovate, obtuse to very shortly acuminate. Lemma c. 6·2 × 2·1 mm, lanceolate, shortly acuminate. Anthers c. ½ as long as palea. Ovary glabrous or subglabrous. 2n = 14.{\i  Mountain meadows; calcicole. • E. & S. Carpathians}; Cz Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. F. tatrae} (Csakó) Degen,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  3}: 171 (1904) ({\i F. amethystina} var.{\i  tatrae} Csakó). Densely caespitose; stems up to 45 cm; non-flowering shoots intravaginal. Leaves 0·7-0·9(-1·3) mm wide, plicate; veins (5-)9-11(-13) with 7-9 sclerenchyma-strands, some touching the veins from below; ribs (5-)7-11, prominent; sheaths closed for 1/2-2/3 of their length, with infolded margin of 1 row of cells; ligule minutely auriculate, densely ciliate. Panicle c. 10 cm, the branches sparsely hairy. Spikelets 7·9-8·6 mm. Upper glume 3-3·4 × 1·4-1·6 mm, ovate-lanceolate, shortly acuminate. Lemma 4·2-4·6 × 2·3-2·4 mm, ovate-lanceolate, shortly acuminate. Anthers more than ½ as long as palea. Ovary glabrous or subglabrous. 2n = 14. {\i Mountain grassland; calcicole. • W. Carpathians.} Cz Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. F. peristerea} (Vetter) Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i Veroff. Geobot. Inst. Rübel} ({\i Zürich}) {\b 56}: 138 (1976) ({\i F. ovina} subsp.{\i  frigida }var. {\i peristerea} Vetter). Densely caespitose; stems 30-55 cm; non flowering shoots intravaginal. Leaves 0·4-0·73 mm wide, plicate, rigid, scabridulous above; veins 5, with sclerenchyma below, but not touching them; ribs 3, prominent; sheaths closed for  c. ½ their length, persistent, ribbed, with infolded margin of 1 row of cells; ligule minutely auriculate, shortly ciliate. Panicle 7-9 cm, lax, the branches glabrous or shortly and rather densely hairy. Spikelets c. 8·5 mm. Upper glume 3·6-5 × 1·4-1·7 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 4·9-6 × 2·1-2·3 mm, ovate-lanceolate; awn 3-4 mm. Anthers slightly more than ½ as long as palea. Ovary subglabrous.{\i  Mountain meadows; calcifuge. • W. Macedonia; one station in S.C. Bulgaria.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. F. korabensis} (Jáv. ex Markgr.-Dannenb.) Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 326 (1978) ({\i F. violacea} var.{\i  korabensis} Jáv. ex Markgr.-Dannenb.). Densely caespitose; stems (10-)15-30(-40) cm, densely hairy below the panicle; non-flowering shoots intravaginal. Leaves 0·2-0·5(-0·65) mm wide, plicate, rather rigid; veins 5-7; ribs 3, prominent, with slender sclerenchyma-strands below, but not touching the ribs; sheaths closed for 1/2-2/3 of their length, with infolded margin of 2 rows of cells (rarely 1 row in the middle part); ligule minutely auriculate, ciliolate. Panicle 3-5(-6) cm, dense, the branches densely hairy. Spikelets 6·8-7·5 mm. Upper glume 3·4-4·8 × 1·3-2 mm, ovate-lanceolate, rather shortly acuminate. Lemma 4·6-5·5 × (1·7-)1·9-2·4 mm; awn 1·5-2·7 mm. Anthers more than as long as palea. Ovary subglabrous.{\i  Alpine grassland; calcicole. • N.W. Macedonia and E. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. F. borderi} (Hackel) K. Richter, {\i Pl. Eur.}{\b  1}: 97 (1890). Densely caespitose; stems 10-30 cm; non-flowering shoots intravaginal. Leaves (0·5-)0·6-0·85 mm wide, plicate, pungent, often curved; veins 5-7, with a sclerenchyma-strand below each vein, that of mid-vein and margin touching the vein; ribs 5, very prominent, occasionally with sclerenchyma; sheaths closed for 2/3 of their length, scarcely fibrous, with infolded margin of 2 rows of cells; ligule short, ciliate. Panicle c. 5 cm, dense, the branches glabrous. Spikelets 7-7·6 mm. Upper glume 4·3-4·9 × 1·3-1·6 mm, ovate-lanceolate, shortly acuminate. Lemma 5·2-5·8 × 1·6-2 mm, acuminate. Anthers less than ½ as long as palea. Ovary glabrous or subglabrous. 2n = 14.{\i  Siliceous rocks, }2300-2700{\i  m. • Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. F. norica} (Hackel) K. Richter, {\i op. cit.} 99 (1890) ({\i F. violacea} subsp. {\i norica }(Hackel) Hegi). Densely caespitose; stems 22-68 cm; non-flowering shoots mostly intravaginal. Leaves 0·6 0·7 mm wide, plicate; veins 5-9, with sclerenchyma-strands extending from main veins to either epidermis; ribs 5-7, prominent and almost touching laterally; sheaths closed for ½ their length, sometimes decaying into fibres a little, with infolded margin of 1 row of cells; ligule very short, without auricles. Panicle 5-10 cm, lax, nodding. Spikelets 6·7-10 mm. Upper glume 5·8-6 × 1·4-1·7 mm, oblong-lanceolate, shortly acuminate. Lemma 4·3-6·5 × 2-2·7 mm, lanceolate, acuminate. Anthers much more than ½ as long as palea. Ovary rarely glabrous. {\i Dry mountain grassland,} 1600-2500{\i  m. • E. Alps.} Au Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. F. amethystina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 74 (1753). Densely caespitose; stems 30-105 cm. Leaves plicate, veins with sclerenchyma-strands below and rarely confluent with them; ribs 3-5, rather low to prominent; sheaths closed for 1/2(-4/5) of their length, persistent, not decaying into fibres, ribbed, often violet; ligule minutely auriculate, ciliolate. Panicle-branches shortly hairy. Anthers more than ½ as long as palea. Ovary glabrous or subglabrous.{\i  Dry places. Alps, C. Europe and Balkan peninsula.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Extravaginal non-flowering shoots few; panicle dense; leaves scabrid 
\par
2 Upper glume 3-4·2 × 0·9-1·1 mm, lanceolate ............ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b amethystina}
\par
2 Upper glume 3·5-5·4 × 1-1·6 mm, ovate-lanceolate ....... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b kummeri}
\par
1 Extravaginal non-flowering shoots numerous; panicle lax;
\par
  leaves smooth
\par
3 Stems 75-100 cm; panicle 14-17 cm; upper glume lanceolate
\par
  ............................................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b ritschlii}
\par
3 Stems 30-60 cm; panicle 4-15 cm; upper glume lanceolate
\par
  to ovate-lanceolate ........................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b orientalis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b amethystina}: Stems 45-80 cm × 1·3-2·3 mm; extravaginal non-flowering shoots few. Leaves 0·25-0·6(-0·7) mm
\par

\par
138}
\par