{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 4·5-5·8 × 1·7 mm, minutely awned; palea with rather dense, long cilia on the keels.{\i  Rocks, screes and pastures. • S.E. Alps.} It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. F. elegans} Boiss., {\i Elenchus }92 (1838). Stems (40-)60-90 cm × 1·5-2·2 mm, scabrid above. Leaves 0·4-0·5 mm wide, strongly scabrid, acute, the lowest as long as the uppermost; veins 5, the sclerenchyma forming a ring; rib 1, rarely with 2 indistinct lateral ribs; sheaths open, very scabrid, stramineous or violet-tinged; ligule (2-)2·5-4 mm, acute. Panicle 8-14 cm, slightly interrupted, the branches densely hispid. Spikelets (6·5-)7-8 mm, greenish or slightly variegated with violet. Upper glume 3-3·9 × 1·3-1·7 mm, ovate-lanceolate, broadly scarious. Lemma 3·9-4·8 × 2·2-2·3 mm, ovate, with a wide scarious margin, unawned. Anthers slightly more than ½ as long as palea. Ovary glabrous or sparsely hairy. 2n = 28.{\i  Mountain woods and scrub; calcifuge. Spain, N. Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. F. burnatti} St-Yves,{\i  Annu. Cons. Jard. Bot. Genève}{\b  15/16}: 347 (1913). Stems 15-25 cm × 1·2 mm, scabrid above. Leaves 0·5-0·7(-0·9) mm wide, smooth, slightly pungent; veins 5-7; ribs 3-5, prominent, the lateral with sclerenchyma above, the main sclerenchyma forming a ring; sheaths of non-flowering shoots more or less transversely corrugated; ligule 5-7 mm, silvery-scarious. Panicle 4-7 cm, lax, the branches patent at anthesis, scabrid, filiform. Spikelets 9-10 mm, shining, yellowish-green variegated with violet. Upper glume 5-5·5 × 2-2·5 mm, ovate-lanceolate, broadly scarious. Lemma 5·5-6 × 2-2·7 mm, lanceolate, narrowly scarious above, with an awn 2-3 mm. Palea subglabrous on the surface, densely ciliolate on 2/3 of the keels. Anthers much more than ½ as long as palea. 2n = 14.{\i  Limestone rocks. • Mountains of N. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. F. valida} (Uechtr.) Pénzes,{\i  Borbásia }{\b 3}: 13 (1941) ({\i F. varia }subsp. {\i valida} Uechtr.). Stems 65-106 cm × 1·3-4 mm. Lowest leaf (1/28)1/25-1/6 as long as the uppermost; veins (7-)9-11, the sclerenchyma forming a ring; ribs 7-9, prominent, all with a sclerenchyma strand above; ligule (0·7-)1-1·8(-2·5) mm, truncate. Panicle 9-13 cm, lax, nodding, much interrupted, the branches slender, shortly hairy. Spikelets greenish, slightly variegated with violet. Upper glume 6-7 × 2·3-2·6 mm, ovate-lanceolate, broadly scarious, usually obtuse. Lemma 7·1-9·1 × 2·8-3·2 mm, oblong-lanceolate, long-acuminate, broadly scarious above; awn 1-1·8 mm.{\i  Siliceous rocks and open pinewoods,} 1500-2600 {\i m. • W. Bulgaria and N. Greece.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b valida}: Leaves scabrid or smooth above, (0·45-)0·55-1·5 mm wide. Spikelets 9-13 mm. Anthers c. ½ as long as palea.{\i  W. Bulgaria.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b leilaensis} Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  Veröff. Geobot. Inst. Rübel} ({\i Zürich}) {\b 56}: 167 (1976): Leaves smooth, 0·45-1·15 mm wide. Spikelets 12·5-14 mm. Anthers distinctly more than ½ as long as palea.{\i  N. Greece} ({\i mountains N. of Serrai}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. F. gautieri} (Hackel) K. Richter,{\i  Pl. Eur. }{\b 1}: 105 (1890). Stems 20-50 cm × 0·9-1·7 mm. Leaves (0·3-)0·4-0·7 mm wide, smooth, pungent, often curved, the lowest at least ½ as long as the uppermost; veins 5-7; rib 1, in the upper ½ of the leaf only, low; sclerenchyma in separate strands or in a ring; sheaths closed for at least 2/3 of their length; ligule 0·5-1 mm, rounded, densely and shortly ciliate. Panicle 4·5-7 cm, dense, with few spikelets, the branches shortly hairy. Spikelets 9-12 mm, yellow-green to stramineous. Upper glume (4·3-)4·9-5·8 mm, ovate-lanceolate, shortly acuminate. Lemma 6-7·3 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, unawned or mucronate. Palea scabrid near apex, densely ciliolate on the keels. 2n = 14, 28.{\i  Rocks and scrub. • S.W. France and N.E. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. F. flavescens} Bellardi,{\i  App. Fl. Pedem.} 11 (1792). Stems 30-50 cm × 0·8-1·2 mm, stramineous, scabrid below the panicle. Leaves (0·3-)0·4-0·5 mm wide, soft, scabrid, slightly recurved, the lowest 1/70-1/40 as long as the uppermost; veins 5; rib 1, in the upper ½ of the leaf only; sclerenchyma usually in separate strands; sheaths open nearly to base; ligule 0·6-1·1(-1·3) mm, ciliolate. Panicle (4-)7-9·5 cm, lax, slightly interrupted, the branches minutely hairy. Spikelets 9-11 mm, usually bright green. Upper glume 5·3 × 1·4 mm, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, shortly acuminate to subobtuse, broadly scarious. Lemma 5·5-7 × 2·5 mm, shortly acuminate; awn 0-0·8 mm. Palea distinctly shorter than the lemma, scabrid on the surface above, densely fine ciliate on the keels. 2n = 14. {\i Shady rocks. • S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. F. scabriculmis} (Hackel) K.Richter, {\i Pl. Eur.}{\b  1}: 104 (1890). Stems (25-)33-55 cm. Leaves (0·3-)0·4-0·6(-0·8) mm wide, subpungent; rib 1 (rarely with 1-2 low, lateral ribs); sclerenchyma usually in a ring; sheaths closed for less than 4 of their length; ligule 0·8-1·7 mm, ciliolate. Panicle lax, erect to slightly nodding, the branches scabrid. Spikelets (9-) 10·3-14·5 mm, green, variegated with violet. Upper glume long-acuminate, with a narrow scarious margin. Lemma long-acuminate, with an awn up to 1·7 mm. Palea as long as the lemma, scabrid on the surface above, long-ciliate on the keels. Anthers c. ½ as long as palea. •{\i  S. Alps.} Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b scabriculmis}: Stems 1-1·5 mm in diameter, shortly setose below the panicle. Leaves scabrid or smooth, the lowest 1/10-1/6(-1/4) as long as the uppermost; sclerenchyma-ring unequally thickened, or sclerenchyma in separate strands; veins 5-7. Panicle 3-7·5 cm. Spikelets (9·5-)10·3-14·5 mm, with many florets. Upper glume 5·1-6·1 × 2-2·5 mm; lemma 6·1-9·5 × 2·9-3·6 mm. {\i S.W. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  (b) Subsp. {\b luedii} Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i Bot.Jour.Linn. Soc. }{\b 76}: 324 (1978): Stems 0·6-1·3 mm in diameter, smooth. Leaves smooth, the lowest 1/27-1/8 as long as the uppermost; sclerenchyma-ring thickened at base; veins 7. Panicle 4·5-10 cm. Spikelets mostly with 4 florets. Upper glume 3·9-5·6 × 1·5-2 mm; lemma 6-7·6 (-8) × 2-2·9 mm. {\i S.C. & S.E. Alps, eastwards to} c. 10° 45' {\i E}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. F. sardoa} (Hackel ex Barbey) K. Richter,{\i  Pl. Eur.}{\b  1}: 104 (1890). Stems 12-37 cm × 0·5-0·7 mm, strongly scabrid above. Leaves 0·3-0·4 mm wide, smooth, the lowest (1/4-)1/3-1/2 as long as the uppermost; veins 5-7; rib 1; sclerenchyma in a ring; sheaths closed for up to ¼ of their length; ligule 0·5-1 mm, ciliolate. Panicle 2-5 cm, rather lax, slightly interrupted, the branches minutely hairy. Spikelets 8-10 mm, bright green. Upper glume c. 4·6 × 1·7 mm, oblong-lanceolate, long-acuminate to subobtuse, with a narrow scarious margin. Lemma 5·2-5·8 × 2-2·1 mm, oblong-lanceolate, with a narrow scarious margin; awn up to 1·2 mm. Palea as long as lemma, scabrid on the surface and margin, shortly ciliate on keels. 2n = 14.{\i  Mountain rocks, }1200-2700{\i  m. • Corse, Sardegna.} Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. F. quadriflora} Honckeny, {\i Vollst. Syst. Verz.} 268 (1782) ({\i F. pumila} Vill.). Stems (6-)10-20(-30) cm, scabrid below the panicle. Leaves (0·5-)0·6(-0·8) mm wide, scabrid above, scarcely pungent, the lowest 1/6-1/4 as long as the uppermost; veins 5(-7); ribs 1, sometimes with low lateral ribs; sclerenchyma usually in separate strands; sheaths slightly scabrid; ligule 0·5-1 mm, truncate. Panicle 2-4 cm, lax, erect, with few spikelets, the branches scabrid. Spikelets (7-)8-9(-10) mm, usually glaucous, variegated with intense violet. Upper glume 3·8-5·2 × 1·5-2 mm, ovate-lanceolate, long-acuminate. Lemma 4-6 × 2·27 mm, broadly lanceolate, acuminate, with a scarious margin above; awn 0·2-1·3 mm. Palea strongly scabrid on the surface, long-ciliate on the keels. Anthers at least ½ as long as palea. 2n = 14.
\par

\par
134}
\par