{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 wide, strongly scabrid; veins 5-7. Panicle 8-13 cm, dense. Spikelets 6·9-8·5 mm. Upper glume 3-4·2 × 0·9-1·1 mm, lanceolate, long-acuminate. Lemma 4·4-5·6 × 1·7-2·1 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate; awn 0-0·2 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  On limestone. • Alps and C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b kummeri} (G. Beck) Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 326 (1978) ({\i F. amethystina} var.{\i  kummeri} G. Beck): Stems 60-105 cm × (1·3-)1·6-2·7 mm; extravaginal non-flowering shoots few. Leaves (0·35-)0·4-0·75(-0·82) mm wide, strongly scabrid,rigid; veins 7. Panicle(7·5-)10-15 cm, dense. Spikelets (7·3-)8-8·6 mm. Upper glume 3·5-5·4 × 1-1·6 mm, ovate-lanceolate long-acuminate. Lemma (4·2-)4·9-6·3 × 1·7-2·5 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate.{\i  On serpentine. • C. Jugoslavia and W. Bulgaria}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b ritschlii} (Hackel) Lemke ex Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  op. cit.} 327 (1978) ({\i F. amethystina} var.{\i  ritschlii} Hackel): Stems 75-100 cm × 1·8-3·5 mm; extravaginal non-flowering shoots rather numerous. Leaves 0·35-0·75 mm wide; veins usually 7. Panicle 14-17 cm, lax. Spikelets 8-9·4(-10) mm. Upper glume 3·2-5·1 × 1·2-1·4 mm, lanceolate, long-acuminate. Lemma 4·6-5·9 × 1·7-2·3 mm; awn 0-1 mm. •{\i  N.C. Europe.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b orientalis} Krajina,{\i  Acta Bot. Bohem.}{\b  9}: 214 (1930): Stems 30-60 cm × 1-2·1 mm; extravaginal non-flowering shoots numerous. Leaves 0·3-0·75(-0·8) mm wide, smooth, not rigid; veins 5-7. Panicle 4-15 cm, rather lax. Spikelets 6·5-8·6 mm. Upper glume 3·2-5·3 × 1-1·5 mm, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, rather shortly acuminate. Lemma 4·2-5·5 × 1·6-2·4 mm, broadly ovate-lanceolate, shortly acuminate, glabrous or hispidulous near apex; awn 0-0·4 mm.{\i  E. & S. Carpathians; W. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  (ii) Sheaths without deeply infolded thin margins. Ligule without auricles; sheaths usually closed to the mouth, usually decaying into fibres.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. F. heterophylla} Lam.,{\i  Fl. Fr. }{\b 3}: 600 (1779). Densely caespitose; stems 60-120(-150) cm × 1-1·9 mm; non-flowering shoots mostly intravaginal. Cauline leaves 2-3 mm wide, flat when fresh, with 7-11 veins; basal leaves (0·2-)0·4-0·6 mm wide, plicate, scabrid, rather flaccid, triangular in cross-section, with 1 rib, 3(-5) veins and 5 very slender sclerenchyma-strands; sheaths closed to the mouth, scarcely fibrous in decay; ligule very short. Panicle 6-17 cm, the branches scabrid, patent at anthesis. Spikelets 8-11·5 mm, with (3-)4-6 florets. Upper glume 4·6-7 × 1·1-1·4 mm, oblong-lanceolate, more or less shortly acuminate. Lemma 5-8·4 × 1·7-2 mm, lanceolate to narrowly oblong-lanceolate, scabridulous above; awn up to 6 mm. Anthers c. ½ as long as palea. Ovary hairy at apex. 2n = 28. {\i Mainly in woods. From S. England and Poland southwards to N.W. Spain and Greece.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W) ?Si Tu [Da Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. F. plicata} Hackel,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  27}: 48 (1877). Stems 12-26 cm. Leaves 0·4-0·6 mm wide, acute; veins 3; sclerenchyma-strands 5, the central stout and often reaching the vein; rib 1; sheaths closed to the mouth, slightly fibrous in decay; ligule very short, not auriculate, ciliolate. Panicle 2-4 cm, dense. Spikelets c. 7·5 mm, pale green, slightly violet-tinged and shiny. Upper glume c. 3·9 × 1·1 mm, lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 4·6-4·9 × 1·6 mm; awn at least as long as lemma. Anthers more than ½ as long as palea. Ovary subglabrous.{\i  Calcareous rocks. Mountains of S. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. F. violacea} Schleicher ex Gaudin, {\i Alpina} ({\i Winterthur}) {\b 3}: 57 (1808). Rather densely caespitose; stems 15-30 cm, slender. Basal leaves rather soft; veins 5; ribs 3; sclerenchyma-strands 7, unequal in width, slender; sheaths closed to the mouth, soon decaying into fibres; ligule a minute rim. Panicle 3-6 cm, rather lax, the branches slender, often flexuous, glabrous or with short, dense hairs. Spikelets 7-7·5(-8) mm, shiny. Upper glume lanceolate, acute to acuminate. Lemma lanceolate, glabrous or scabrid above. Ovary sparsely hairy to glabrous. •{\i  Alps, Appennini and mountains of Balkan peninsula.} Ga Gr He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lemma 5·3-5·5 × 2-2·1 mm ......................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b macrathera}
\par
1 Lemma 4·3-4·7 × 1·6-2 mm
\par
2 Spikelets pinkish-violet; epidermal cells small ............... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b violacea}
\par
2 Spikelets green; epidermal cells large .............................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b handelii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b violacea}: Leaves (0·2-)0·25-0·4(-0·5) mm wide; sclerenchyma-strands slender or very slender; epidermal cells rather small. Spikelets pinkish-violet. Upper glume 3·6-5·3 × 1-1·7 mm. Lemma 4·3-4·7 × 1·6-2 mm; awn 1-1·6(-2·8) mm. Anthers 2·3-2·8 mm. 2n = 14. {\i Calcifuge. S.W. & C. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b macrathera} (Hackel ex G. Beck) Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 326 (1978) ({\i F. violacea} var.{\i  macrathera} Hackel ex G. Beck): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but leaves up to 0·6 mm wide; sclerenchyma-strands mostly rather stout or stout; epidermal cells large; upper glume 3·8-5·5 × 1·4-2 mm; lemma 5·3-5·5 × 2-2·1 mm; awn (2·1-)2·5-3·5 mm; anthers (2-)3·2-3·7 mm.{\i  Calcicole. C. & S. Italy; C. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b handelii} Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i Veröff. Geobot. Inst. Rübel} ({\i Zürich}) {\b 56}: 139 (1976): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but leaves 0·4-0·55 mm wide; some sclerenchyma-strands stout; epidermal cells very large; spikelets green.{\i  Calcicole. E. Greece} ({\i Olimbos}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. F. nitida} Kit. in Schultes,{\i  Österreichs Fl.} ed. 2,{\b  1}: 239 (1814) ({\i F. violacea} var. {\i minor} Hackel). Rather densely caespitose; stems 20-40 cm. Leaves slender; veins 5; ribs 3; sclerenchyma-strands 7, very slender; sheaths closed to the mouth, decaying irregularly into fibres; ligule short, auriculate, glabrous. Panicle 4-5 cm, secund, the branches tomentose, patent at anthesis. Spikelets 6·9-8 mm, shiny. Upper glume 3·2-5·5 × 1·3-1·7 mm, linear-oblong, long-acuminate. Anthers more than ½ as long as palea. Ovary densely hairy. {\i Calcicole. • S.E. Alps and mountains of N.W. Jugoslavia; E. & S. Carpathians. }Au It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nitida}: Stems more or less densely and shortly hairy above. Leaves 0·2-0·45 mm wide. Panicle oblong, slightly secund and nodding. Spikelets violet. Lemma 4·9-5·8 × 1·5-1·8 mm, mucronate or very shortly awned, usually glabrous; awn 0·3-1·2 mm.{\i  S.E. Alps and mountains of N.W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b flaccida} (Schur) Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 326 (1978) ({\i F. flaccida} Schur): Stems densely lanate above. Leaves (0·25-)0·3-0·6 mm wide. Panicle wider and laxer. Spikelets yellowish-green, rarely slightly pinkish. Lemma 4·3-6 × 1·6-2·1 mm, lanceolate, hirtellous; awn up to ½ as long as lemma.{\i  E. & S. Carpathians}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. F. iberica} (Hackel) K.Richter,{\i  Pl. Eur. }{\b 1}: 99 (1890). Rather densely caespitose; stems 20-50 cm. Leaves (0·3-)0·4-0·6(-0·7) mm wide, strongly scabrid; veins 5(-7); ribs 3; sclerenchyma-strands 7, unequal in width; sheaths closed to the mouth, decaying into fibres. Panicle 3-7 cm, lax, erect or slightly nodding, the branches glabrous or minutely hairy. Spikelets 7-7·6(-8) mm, with 4-7 florets, glaucous, dirty violet. Upper glume 3-4 × 1-1·3 mm, acuminate. Lemma 4·2-5·5 × 1·5-2 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, scabrid above; awn 1·3-2·7 mm. Anthers more than ½ as long as palea. Ovary glabrous.{\i  Siliceous screes. • Pyrenees and mountains of Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. F. puccinellii} Parl.,{\i  Fl. Ital.}{\b  1}: 440 (1850) ({\i F. violacea} subsp.{\i  nigricans} (Hackel) Hegi). Rather densely caespitose; stems 30-50 cm, usually glabrous above. Basal leaves 0·25-0·6 mm wide; veins 5; ribs 3; sclerenchyma-strands 7, slightly unequal in width, rather stout; cauline leaves wider, with 7-9 veins; sheaths closed to the mouth, scarcely decaying into fibres.
\par

\par
139}
\par