{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. F. durandii} Clauson in Billot,{\i  Annot.} 163 (1859). Like {\b 1} but stems with tuberous base c. 10 mm in diameter; leaves with sclerenchyma-strands not contiguous with veins, those of non-flowering shoots 0·6-0·8 mm wide, plicate throughout; sheaths not decaying into fibres, longitudinally ribbed; ligule very short; panicle 6-14 cm, lax at anthesis; spikelets 8·4-9·5 mm; lemma 5·5-6·5 × 3·4 mm, indistinctly veined. 2n = 28.{\i  Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. F. spectabilis} Jan,{\i  Elench. Hort. Parm.} 2 (1827) ({\i F. sieberi }Tausch). Caespitose; stems 80-110 cm, not tuberous at base. Leaves flat, convolute in bud, glaucous and scabrid above, with many prominent veins and ribs; sclerenchyma-strands of all veins running from upper to lower epidermis, with bulliform cells between the ribs; basal sheaths leafless, persistent, longitudinally ribbed. Panicle nodding, with scabrid branches. Glumes scarious, the upper 3-veined, lanceolate. Lemma lanceolate, long-acuminate, unawned, scabrid, strongly 5-veined. 2n = 42. •{\i  S. Alps, N. Appennini and mountains of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b spectabilis} (incl. subsp.{\i  carniolica} (Hackel) Hayek): Leaves scarcely plicate when dry. Panicle 15-30 cm, lax. Spikelets c. 7 mm. Lemma 5·8-6·9 mm. Ovary with very long hairs.{\i  S. Alps, N. Appennini, mountains of Slovenia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b affinis} (Boiss. & Heldr. ex Hackel) Hackel,{\i  Monogr.} 189 (1882) ({\i F. affinis} Boiss. & Heldr. ex Hackel): Leaves always plicate when dry. Panicle 9-15 mm, dense. Spikelets 9-10 mm. Lemma 7·5-7·6 mm. Ovary with short hairs.{\i  From N.E. Italy to S.C. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  (B) Stem-base not tuberous. Leaves at least 3 mm wide, usually convolute in bud.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  (a) Ligule short, but distinct. Lemma soft. Ovary minutely aculeolate or setose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. F. altissima} All., {\i Auct. Fl. Pedem.} 43 (1789) ({\i F. sylvatica} (Pollich) Vill., non Hudson). Densely caespitose; stems 50-120(-200) cm. Leaves flat, 4-14 mm wide, scabridulous on margins and sometimes on surface; sheaths persistent, open, the basal leafless; ligule 1-5 mm, denticulate, without clasping auricles. Panicle 10-18 cm, lax, nodding, the branches more or less smooth. Spikelets 5-8 mm, with 2-5 florets. Glumes subequal, scarious, the upper 3-4·1 × 1·2-1·5 mm. Lemma 4-6 × 1·6-1·7 mm, linear-lanceolate, acute, unawned, 3(-5)-veined, scabridulous. Anthers c. ½ as long as palea. Ovary setose. 2n = 14, 42.{\i  Deciduous woods. From C. Norway, Estonia and C. Ural southwards to N. Spain, N. Greece and S.C. Russia. }Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. F. drymeja} Mert. & Koch in Röhling,{\i  Deutschl. Fl.} ed. 3, {\b 1}: 670 (1823) ({\i F. montana} Bieb., non Sternb. & Hoppe). Laxly caespitose and rhizomatous; stems 70-110 cm. Leaves flat, (4-)6-15 mm wide, scabridulous on margins and surface; sheaths decaying into fibres, open, the basal leafless; ligule 1·5-3 mm, fimbriate. Panicle 10-30 cm, lax, nodding. Spikelets 7-8 mm, with 4-6 florets. Glumes scarious, the upper 3·6-3·9 × 1·4-1·6 mm. Lemma 4·2-5 × 1·6-1·7 mm, ovate-lanceolate, obtuse or subacute, strongly 5-veined, scabridulous. Anthers more than ½ as long as palea. Ovary setose to subglabrous. 2n = 14.{\i  Deciduous woods. E.C. Europe and Balkan peninsula; S. Italy and Sicilia.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  (b) Ligule a minute rim. Lemma hard. Ovary glabrous or with a few long hairs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. F. gigantea} (L.) Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  2}: 110 (1787). Forming small tufts; stems 45-150 cm. Leaves flat, 6-18 mm wide, glossy beneath, with scabrid margin; sheaths thin, open, decaying into fibres; ligule up to 2·5 mm, with clasping auricles. Panicle 10-50 cm, very lax, nodding, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 8-13 mm, with 3-10 florets. Glumes subequal, with a scarious margin, the upper 5-8 mm. Lemma 6-9 × 2·1-2·6 mm, ovate-lanceolate, 5-veined; awn 10-18 mm, often flexuous. Anthers less than ½ as long as palea. Ovary glabrous. 2n = 42.{\i  Woods and scrub. Most of Europe except the extreme north, but rare in the Iberian peninsula and much of the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (?N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. F. pratensis} Hudson, {\i Fl. Angl.} 37 (1762) ({\i F. elatior} subsp.{\i  pratensis} (Hudson) Hackel). Laxly caespitose; stems 30-120 cm, stout. Leaves not very rigid, more or less smooth above, with sclerenchyma-strands all or mostly at the upper surface; old sheaths brown, decaying into fibres; ligule a short rim, with glabrous, clasping auricles. Panicle 10-20 cm; branches aculeolate; lowest node of the panicle with 2 branches, the longer with 4-6, the shorter with 1-3 spikelets. Spikelets (8·5-)11-12(-15) mm, with 5-12 florets. Glumes obtuse, broadly scarious towards the apex, the upper 3·2-7 × 2·4 mm. Lemma (5·3-)6·5-7(-7·5) × 2·5-3 mm. Ovary glabrous. 2n = 14 (42).{\i  Meadows and other grassy places. Most of Europe, but rare in parts of the Mediterranean region and south-west, and doubtfully native in parts of the north}. All except Bl Cr Lu Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pratensis}: Stems usually 30-70 cm. Leaves 3-5 mm wide, dark green; sheaths open. Spikelets 9-11 mm. Lemma obtuse, not 2-dentate at apex, unawned. 2n = 14. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b apennina} (De Not.) Hegi, {\i Ill. Fl. Mitteleur. }{\b 1}: 343 (1908) ({\i F. apennina} De Not., {\i F. arundinacea} var.{\i  megalostachys} Stebler): Stems usually 70-90 cm. Leaves 5-8 mm wide, slightly glaucous above; sheaths closed up to the middle. Spikelets 9-13(-15) mm. Lemma distinctly 2-dentate at apex, with an awn c. ½ as long as lemma.{\i  Calcicole. • Alps, Appennini, Sicilia; mountains of N. W. Jugoslavia; E. & S. Carpathians}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. F. arundinacea} Schreber,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Lips.} 57 (1771) ({\i F. elatior} subsp.{\i  arundinacea} (Schreber) Hackel). Like {\b 9}({\b a}) but stems up to 200 cm; leaves prominently ribbed above, rather rigid, with sclerenchyma-strands on both sides of all or most veins; old sheaths pale, not decaying into fibres; ligule with ciliate auricles. Lowest node of panicle with 2-3 branches, each with 5-15 spikelets. Spikelets with 4-5 florets. Lemma 4-9 × 1·8-2·7 mm. 2n = 28, 42, 70.{\i  Damp grassland, river-banks and seashores. Most of Europe, but absent from most of N., C. & E. Russia.} All except Fa Is Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spikelets 5-9 mm
\par
2 Ribs of leaf subequal; lemma 2-dentate at apex, unawned .. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b fenas}
\par
2 Main ribs of leaf distinctly higher than the lateral;
\par
  lemma acuminate, awned ............................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b atlantigena}
\par
1 Spikelets 10-12 mm
\par
3 Lemma entire; glumes subulate ..................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b orientalis}
\par
3 Lemma 2-dentate; glumes lanceolate
\par
4 Panicle lax, wide; lemma ± unawned ........................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b arundinacea}
\par
4 Panicle dense, narrow; lemma with awn 1·5-2·6 mm
\par
  ................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b uechtritziana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b arundinacea}: Sheaths and upper part of stem smooth. Leaves 5-10 mm wide, with prominent ribs; auricles with sparse, short cilia. Panicle lax, wide. Spikelets 10-12 mm; glumes subequal, broadly lanceolate, the upper 4·5-5 × 1·8 mm. Lemma 6·3-8 × 2·2 mm, ovate-lanceolate, 2-dentate, more or less unawned. 2n = 42.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species except the S. half of the U.S.S.R}.
\par

\par
132}
\par