{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b uechtritziana} (Wiesb.) Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur. }{\b 1}: 345 (1908) ({\i F. uechtritziana }Wiesb.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but sheaths and upper part of stem scabrid; leaves 3-7 mm wide; panicle dense, narrow; glumes very unequal, the upper 5·6-7·3 mm; lemma 7·1-8·8 mm, ovate, with awn 1·5-2·6 mm. •{\i  S.E. France; naturalized in C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b atlantigena} (St-Yves) Auquier,{\i  Soc. Éch. Pl. Eur. Occ. Médit.}{\b  16}: 142 (1976) ({\i F. elatior} subsp.{\i  arundinacea} var. {\i atlantigena }St-Ives): Main ribs of leaf distinctly higher than the smaller; auricles with sparse, long cilia. Panicle narrowly linear, rigid. Spikelets 5-8·6 mm. Glumes unequal, the upper c. 5·3 × 2·1 mm. Lemma 4-6·5 × 1·75-2·7 mm, long-acuminate, with awn 1·5-2·5 mm. Ovary with some long hairs. 2n = 56.{\i  S.W. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b fenas} (Lag.) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} ed. 2, 61 (1894) ({\i F. fenas} Lag., {\i F. arundinacea} subsp.{\i  interrupta }(Desf.) Tzvelev): Leaves 3-4 mm wide, with subequal, low ribs; auricles with dense, short cilia. Panicle narrowly linear, rigid, interrupted. Spikelets 5-7(-9) mm; glumes subequal, the upper 4·5 × 0·8 mm; lemma 5-6·5 × 1·6-1·8 mm, broadly lanceolate, 2-dentate, unawned. Ovary glabrous. 2n = 28.{\i  S. & S.E. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b orientalis} (Hackel) Tzvelev,{\i  Sched. Herb. Fl. URSS}{\b  18}: 17 (1970) ({\i F. orientalis} A. Kerner ex Hackel): Leaves 5-10 mm wide, with prominent ribs. Panicle lax, wide. Spikelets 10-12 mm; glumes subequal, subulate; lemma c. 6 mm, entire at apex, with awn c. 1·5 mm.{\i  S.E. & E.C. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  (C) Stem-base not tuberous. Leaves less than 3 mm wide, usually plicate in bud. Ovary obovoid; grain usually free from palea.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  (a) Non-flowering shoots extravaginal; stolons with scalelike sheaths present.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. F. laxa} Host, {\i Gram. Austr.}{\b  2}: 58 (1802). Laxly caespitose and rhizomatous; stems up to 60 cm. Basal leaves plicate, hairy above, the cauline flat; veins 7; sclerenchyma-strands contiguous, extending to each epidermis; ribs 7, prominent; sheaths closed only at base, the outer sheaths on non-flowering shoots leafless, the others with leaves gradually increasing in length; ligule short, subauriculate. Panicle 6-10 cm, lax, nodding, with glabrous, filiform branches. Spikelets 8-9 mm, violet-tinged. Glumes scarious, ovate, shortly acuminate; upper glume 5-5·5 × 2-2·3 mm. Lemma 5·8-7·7 × 2·6 mm, broadly lanceolate, shortly acuminate, with 5 indistinct veins, unawned. 2n = 14, 28, 42. {\i Mountain rocks and screes. • S.E. Alps.} Au Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. F. dimorpha} Guss.,{\i  Pl. Rar.} 34 (1826). Like {\b 11} but more densely caespitose; leaves glaucous, shortly pubescent, the margins scabrid towards the apex; ligule very short, ciliate; spikelets usually with 3 florets, those with 4 florets 9-11 mm, yellowish; glumes both 3-veined, the upper 7·3-7·5 × 1·7-2·5 mm; lemma 7·3-7·5 × 2·1-2·7 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Stony mountain pastures. • C. & S. Appennini; Maritime Alps.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. F. calabrica} Huter, Porta & Rigo ex Hackel,{\i  Monogr.} 190 (1882). Like {\b 11} but leaves convolute, glaucous; veins 13-15; outer sheaths of non-flowering shoots decaying into fibres; ligule 6-10 mm; panicle-branches strongly scabrid, flexuous, not spreading; spikelets 9·5-11 mm, yellowish-green; upper glume 6·9 × 2·5 mm; lemma 7·3 × 2·9 mm, lanceolate, distinctly 5-veined. •{\i  S. Italy.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. F. pseudeskia} Boiss., {\i Elenchus} 91 (1838). Densely caespitose, with short rhizomes; stems up to 40 cm. Leaves plicate, glaucous, rigid, pungent; veins 9-15, the larger with sclerenchyma-strands on both sides, the smaller without sclerenchyma above; ribs 7; non-flowering shoots with long-persistent leafless sheaths; sheaths closed at the base only, violet; ligule 2-3 mm, obtuse, lacerate. Panicle linear-oblong, slightly wider at anthesis. Spikelets c. 5·8 mm, green variegated with violet. Glumes scarious, broadly ovate, obtuse. Lemma 3·5-3·9 × 2·3 mm, ovate-lanceolate, indistinctly 3-veined, unawned. Hilum about as long as grain.{\i  Screes and rocky pastures. • Mountains of S. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. F. scariosa} (Lag.) Ascherson & Graebner,{\i  Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 502 (1900) ({\i F. granatensis} Boiss.). Like {\b 14} but stems 60-100 cm; cauline leaves more or less flat when old, acute but not pungent, rather thin; veins 13-17, the main sclerenchyma-strands forming a ring, the smaller veins with or without sclerenchyma above; non-flowering shoots without leafless sheaths; ligule 4-6 mm; spikelets 5-6·6 mm, greenish-silvery; glumes shortly acuminate; lemma 3·5-4·2 × 1·6-1·7 mm, 5-veined, obtuse; hilum about ½ as long as grain. 2n = 14.{\i  Mountains of S. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. F. carpatica} F. G. Dietr., {\i Vollst. Lexic., Nachtr.}{\b  3}: 333 (1817). Densely caespitose, with creeping rhizomes; stems up to 70 cm. Leaves flat when fresh, becoming convolute, glaucous, scabrid above and on margin; veins and ribs numerous, with bulliform cells between the ribs; veins with sclerenchyma-strands extending to each epidermis; outer sheaths on the stout non-flowering shoots leafless, scale-like, orbicular, persistent; ligule a short, ciliate rim. Panicle lax, nodding, with smooth branches. Spikelets 7-9 mm, pale. Upper glume 6·3-6·5 × 2·1-2·5 mm, lanceolate, shortly acuminate. Lemma (5-)6·9-7·5 × 2·7 mm, lanceolate, distinctly 5-veined, hispid or scabrid, unawned. 2n = 28.{\i  Rocks and stony slopes; calcicole. • Carpathians.} Cz Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. F. pulchella} Schrader, {\i Fl. Germ. }336 (1806). Laxly caespitose, with short rhizomes; stems up to 55 cm. Leaves usually flat or convolute, flaccid, with numerous veins; sclerenchyma-strands contiguous to the main veins only; non-flowering shoots slender, with thin leafless sheaths; sheaths closed to the middle or above; ligule absent. Panicle lax, wide, with flexuous branches. Spikelets (6-)7-8 mm, few, green variegated with violet. Glumes subequal, long-acuminate, the upper 4·6-4·9 × 1·2-1·4 mm. Lemma (5-)5·8-6 × 2·1 mm, lanceolate, scabrid. Ovary glabrous or subglabrous. 2n = 14.{\i  Damp places; calcicole. • Alps and Jura}; ?{\i E. Carpathians.} Au Ga Ge He It Ju ?Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  (b) Non-flowering shoots intravaginal; stolons absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. F. eskia} Ramond ex DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 3}: 52 (1805) ({\i F. varia} subsp.{\i  eskia} (Ramond ex DC.) Hackel). Stems 32-50 cm × 1-2·2 mm. Leaves very rigid and pungent, 0·7-1·6 mm wide, often curved, smooth, glaucous, the lowest 1/16-1/10(-1/4) as long as the uppermost; veins 9-11 (-13); ribs 5-11, very prominent, all with sclerenchyma-strands above; sheaths smooth, glabrous; ligule 3-7 mm. Panicle 5-9·5 cm, lax, nodding, interrupted; branches slender, glabrous or minutely hairy. Spikelets 9-10·5 mm, more or less variegated. Upper glume 5·1 × 2 mm, ovate-lanceolate, shortly acuminate. Lemma 6-6·9 × 2·6 mm; awn 0-1·5 mm. Palea subglabrous on the surface, ciliolate on the keels in the upper part. 2n = 14.{\i  Screes and rocky pastures; calcifuge. • Pyrenees.} Ga Hs ?Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. F. alpestris} Roemer & Schultes, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 722 (1817) ({\i F. varia} subsp.{\i  alpestris} (Roemer & Schultes) Hackel). Like {\b 18} but stems 25-55 cm × 0·8-1·8 mm; leaves 0·6-0·9 mm wide, the lowest 1/16-1/8 as long as the uppermost; veins 7-9; ribs 5-7, not very prominent, the sclerenchyma forming a ring, rarely with sclerenchyma-strands above; panicle 3-7 cm, the branches minutely hairy; spikelets (7·7-)8-9·1 mm, yellowish-green, sometimes slightly variegated; upper glume 3·5-4·9 mm; lemma
\par

\par
133}
\par