{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Rocks, screes and stony pastures; somewhat calcicole. • Mountains of Europe, from the Jura to the Pyrenees and N.W. Jugoslavia}. Au Ga Ge He Hs It Ju.
\par

\par
Records from C. & S. Jugoslavia and Romania are erroneous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. F. versicolor} Tausch, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 4}: 559 (1821). Stems 15-50 cm, more or less rigid. Leaves 0·4-1·2 mm wide, acute, the lowest 1/5-1/2 as long as the uppermost; veins (5-)7-9 (-11); ribs 3-5(-9), prominent, with bulliform cells between the ribs; sclerenchyma in a complete or somewhat interrupted ring; sheaths closed in lower 1/3; ligule 0·2-1·8(-2·1) mm. Panicle 3-8(-10) cm, nodding. Glumes broadly scarious. Lemma 4·2-6·5 × 1·7-3 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, with an awn 0-1·3 mm. Palea as long as lemma. •{\i  Carpathians, Sudeten Mts. and E. Alps.} Au Cz Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ligule 1·6-2·1 mm; panicle-branches scabrid ................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b dominii}
\par
1 Ligule 0·2-1·5 mm, panicle-branches smooth or hairy
\par
2 Panicle-branches hairy ..................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b pallidula}
\par
2 Panicle-branches glabrous
\par
3 Palea sparsely setose, indistinctly ciliate on keels ......... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b versicolor}
\par
3 Palea densely white-setose, densely ciliate on keels ({\b b}) subsp. {\b brachystachys}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b versicolor}: Sheaths closed for ¼ their length; ligule 0·2-1·5 mm. Panicle 3-6 cm, the branches smooth. Spikelets 6·5-10 mm, with 4-6 florets. Upper glume 3·2-5·2 × 1·3-2·4 mm, ovate-oblong. Palea shortly but not densely setose.{\i  Carpathians and Sudeten Mts}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b brachystachys} (Hackel) Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 325 (1978) ({\i F. varia} subsp.{\i  eu-varia }var.{\i  brachystachys }subvar.{\i  typica} Hackel,{\i  F. varia} subsp. {\i brachystachys} (Hackel) Hegi): Sheaths closed for 1/3 their length; ligule 0·4-0·7(-1·3) mm; ribs prominent, glabrous above. Panicle 2·5-6·5 cm, nodding, the branches smooth. Spikelets 8-10 mm distinctly violet-tinged, with 2-4(-6) florets. Upper glume (2·5-)3·5-5·2 × 1·5-2 mm, ovate-oblong, the lateral veins reaching its length. Lemma long-acuminate; awn (0-)0·3-1·3 mm. Palea densely and shortly setose. 2n = 14. 1600-2050{\i  m; calcicole. Mountains of E. Austria}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b pallidula} (Hackel) Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  op. cit. }326 (1978) ({\i F. varia} subsp.{\i  eu-varia} var. {\i brachystachys} subvar.{\i  pallidula} Hackel,{\i  F. varia} subsp.{\i  brachystachys} (Hackel) Hegi): Sheaths closed for 1/4-1/3 their length; ligule 0·4-1·1 mm; ribs not prominent, long-hairy above. Panicle 2·5-5·5 cm, rigid, the branches hairy. Spikelets (6·6-)7-9·4(-10·9) mm, pale, glaucous, with 3-6 florets. Upper glume 3·6-4·5 × 1·3-2·3 mm, ovate, the lateral veins reaching 2/3-3/4 its length. Lemma shortly acute; awn 0(-0·4) mm. Palea densely and shortly setose. 600-1300{\i  m; calcicole. Mountains of E. Austria}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b dominii} Krajina,{\i  Spisy Vydav. Prir. Fak. Karlovy Univ.}{\b  106}: 42 (1930): Sheaths closed for ¼ of their length; ligule 1·6-2·1 mm. Panicle 6-8 cm, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 9·5-10·8 mm, with 6-9 florets. Upper glume 4·3-4·7 × 1·9-2·1 mm, ovate-lanceolate; palea sparsely setose towards the apex.{\i  E. Carpathians} ({\i Muntii Rodnei}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. F. acuminata} Gaudin,{\i  Agrost. Helv. }{\b 1}: 272 (1811). Stems (20-)25-50 cm, rather rigid, more or less scabrid above. Leaves (0·3-)0·4-0·7(-0·9) mm wide, smooth, glaucous, acute, more or less pungent, the lowest 1/10-1/6 as long as the uppermost; veins 7-9; ribs (3-)5(-7), not prominent; sclerenchyma forming a ring; sheaths closed for up to 1/3 of their length; ligule 0·6-1·9 mm. Panicle 4-7·5(-8·5) cm, lax, nodding, with few spikelets, the branches with very dense short hairs. Spikelets 8·5-11 mm, with 4-9 florets, pale yellow, variegated with violet. Upper glume ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, shortly acuminate to sub-obtuse. Lemma 5·1-6·5 × 2-2·7 mm, lanceolate, long-acuminate, mucronate or with an awn up to 0·6 mm. Palea as long as lemma, scabrid on the surface above, ciliolate on the keels. Anthers c. ½ as long as palea.{\i  Siliceous rocks. • Alps, eastwards to} c. 10° 20' {\i E.} Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. F. varia} Haenke in Jacq., {\i Collect. Bot.}{\b  2}: 94 (1789). Stems (15-)25-55 cm, more or less scabrid above. Leaves 0·4-1 mm wide, smooth, more or less pungent, the lowest (1/15-)1/11-1/4(1/3) as long as the uppermost; veins (5-)7(-9); ribs 3-7, not very prominent; sclerenchyma forming a ring; sheaths closed for up to 1/3 of their length; ligule (0·4-)0·6-2(-2·3) mm. Panicle (3-)3·5-7(-9) cm, rather lax, with few spikelets, the branches with very dense short hairs. Spikelets 8-11 mm, with (3-)4-7(-8) florets, glaucous, variegated with violet. Upper glume (3·4-)3·7-6 × 1·7-2·8 mm, broadly lanceolate to broadly ovate-lanceolate, shortly acuminate, with a wide scarious margin. Lemma 4·5-7·2 × 1·9-3·1 mm, ovate-lanceolate, scabrid above, ciliolate, with narrow scarious margin near apex; awn up to 1·2 mm. Palea as long as or slightly longer than the lemma, scabrid on the whole surface. Anthers slightly more than ½ as long as palea.{\i  Calcifuge. • E. Alps, westwards to} c. 11° 30' {\i E}. Au It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. F. calva} (Hackel) K. Richter, {\i Pl. Eur.}{\b  1}: 104 (1890) ({\i F. varia} subsp. {\i calva} (Hackel) Hegi). Stems 32-55 cm, glabrous. Leaves (0·4-)0·5-0·95 mm wide, very pungent, smooth, the lowest (1/25-)1/12-1/4 as long as the uppermost; veins 7-9; ribs 7, not very prominent, with or without sclerenchyma above; sclerenchyma forming a ring; ligule 0·6-1·2(-1·5) mm. Panicle 6-9 cm, nodding, the branches glabrous. Spikelets (8·4-)9-10·5 mm, with 4-5 florets, variegated with pale violet. Upper glume 4-6·6 × 1·7-2·7 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, with a wide scarious margin. Lemma 4·6-6·7 × 2-2·9 mm, broadly ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, with a wide scarious margin above; awn 0-0·2(-0·6) mm. Palea usually as long as lemma, scabrid above. Anthers 1/2-2/3 as long as palea.{\i  Calcicole. • E. Alps}. Au It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. F. xanthina} Roemer & Schultes, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 721 (1817). Stems 25-58 cm. Leaves 0·3-0·7 mm wide, soft, smooth, subobtuse, the lowest 1/8-1/3 as long as the uppermost; veins 7; ribs 3-5; sclerenchyma forming a ring; sheaths usually retrorsely scabrid, closed for less than ¼ of their length; ligule 0·4-2 mm. Panicle 4-9·5 cm, lax, slightly nodding, the branches with more or less dense, short hairs. Spikelets 8-14(-15) mm, with 3-4 florets, yellowish-green or variegated. Upper glume 5-6 mm, elliptical, rounded. Lemma 4·6-8·5 × 2-3·4 mm, ovate-lanceolate, shortly acuminate, broadly scarious, unawned or mucronate. Palea shorter than to as long as lemma, shortly setose above. Anthers at least ½ as long as palea.{\i  Calcicole. • Mountains of S.W. Romania and E. Jugoslavia.} Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. F. balcanica} (Acht.) Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 326 (1978) ({\i F. cyllenica} subsp.{\i  balcanica} Acht.). Stems 20-50 cm, glabrous. Leaves 0·4-0·7(-0·8) mm wide, scarcely pungent, the lowest 1/6-1/3 as long as the uppermost; veins 7-9; ribs 5-7, not very prominent, with or without sclerenchyma above; sclerenchyma forming a ring; ligule 1-2·3 mm. Panicle 4-6 cm, rather dense, nodding, the branches glabrous or with dense short hairs. Spikelets 9-11 mm, with 3-5 florets, variegated with pale violet. Upper glume c. 4·6 × 1·7 mm, ovate-lanceolate, subobtuse, with a wide scarious margin. Lemma 5·3-6·3 × 2·3 mm, ovate-lanceolate, abruptly acuminate; awn 0-0·3 mm. Palea slightly shorter than lemma, scabrid. Anthers c. ½ as long as palea. {\i Calcifuge. • Mountains of Bulgaria.} Bu.
\par

\par
135}
\par