{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 late, long-acuminate. Lemma(4·2-)4·6-5·5 × 1·6-2·1 mm, lanceolate, long-acuminate, minutely hairy and sparsely ciliate; awn 1½ times as long as lemma.{\i  Limestone rocks and screes,} 1500-2400{\i  m. Kriti.} Cr. ({\i W. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 110. F. lapidosa} (Degen) Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  96}: 271 (1975) ({\i F. ovina }var.{\i  lapidosa} Degen, non{\i  F. cinerea} var. {\i lapidosa} Stohr). Densely caespitose. Stems 15-30 cm, smooth or scabrid above. Leaves 0·35-0·6 mm wide, glaucous, pruinose, rigid, curved, strongly scabrid; veins 7; sclerenchyma forming a complete ring, often much thickened laterally; rib usually 1; sheaths closed for not more than the lower ¼, densely and minutely hairy. Panicle 3-5 cm, dense, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 6·5-7 mm, with (3-)5-7 florets, pale green, pruinose. Upper glume (3-)3·6-4·6 × 1-1·3 mm, subulate-lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma (3·8-)4·2-5·5 × 1·4-1·6 mm, narrowly lanceolate, acuminate; awn more than ½ as long as lemma.{\i  Limestone rocks. • N.W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 111. F. occitanica} (Litard.) Auquier & Kerguelen,{\i  Lejeunia} nov. ser., {\b 75}: 39 (1975). Densely caespitose. Stems 15-44 cm, nearly or quite smooth above. Leaves (0·3-)0·4-0·75 mm wide, green or glaucous, smooth or scabrid near apex, often curved; veins ( ?5-)7; sclerenchyma in a continuous or slightly interrupted ring; ribs 1-3; sheaths closed in the lower 1/3-1/2, glabrous. Panicle (2-)4-12 cm, the branches more or less hairy. Spikelets (5·5-)6·2-8·4 mm, with 4-6(-8) florets, green, sometimes violet-tinged. Upper glume (2·5-)3·3-4·6 × 0·8-1·6 mm, linear-lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 4·2-5·5 × 1·4-1·8 mm, linear-lanceolate, mucronate or with an awn up to 1/3 as long as lemma. 2n = 14.{\i  Dwarf scrub on limestone. • S.E. France.} Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 112. F. heteropachys} (St-Yves) Patzke ex Auquier in De Langhe et al.,{\i  Nouv. Fl. Belg.} 759 (1973). Densely caespitose. Stems 30-72 cm, usually scabrid above. Leaves 0·45-1·35 mm wide, usually varying greatly in width within the same non-flowering shoot, green or glaucous, usually scabrid above, rather rigid; veins 7(-9); sclerenchyma in a continuous or slightly interrupted ring; ribs 1 or 2-3(-5), low; sheaths open to the base, usually densely hairy. Panicle 6-15 cm, lax, often interrupted, the branches strongly scabrid. Spikelets (7-)7·5-8·1(-9·5) mm, with 3-6 florets, green or glaucous, sometimes slightly violet-tinged. Upper glume (3·5-)3·9-5(-6·3) × 1·2-1·5 mm, oblong-lanceolate or lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 4·6-6·2(-7) × 1·8-2(-2·3) mm, oblong-lanceolate or lanceolate, acuminate, scabrid or hairy above; awn c. ½ as long as lemma. 2n = 28. •{\i  From Belgium to S. Germany and N. Switzerland.} Be Ga Ge He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 113. F. guestfalica} Boenn. ex Reichenb., {\i Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 140 (3) (1831) ({\i F. ovina} var.{\i  firmula }(Hackel) Hegi,{\i  F. longifolia }auct., non Thuill.). Densely caespitose. Stems 30-60(-70) cm, usually scabrid or pubescent above. Leaves 0·6-0·7(-0·85) mm wide, glaucous, scabrid at least above; veins 7; sclerenchyma forming a complete ring; ribs 1(-3); sheaths open to the base, glabrous or densely villous. Panicle 5-12 cm, lax, the branches scabrid. Spikelets (5·5-)6-7·5 mm, with 3-7 florets. Upper glume (2-)2·8-4·4 × 1-1·4(-1·6) mm, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, smooth or weakly scabrid above. Lemma 3·6-5·3 × (1·4-)1·6-2·3 mm, ciliate, weakly scabrid or more or less pubescent above; awn up to ½ as long as lemma. 2n = 28.{\i  Dry places. N.W. & C. Europe}. Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho Po ?Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 114. F. lemanii} Bast.,{\i  Essai Fl. Maine Loire} 36 (1809) ({\i F. longifolia} auct., non Thuill., {\i F. duriuscula} auct., ?an L.). Caespitose. Stems (11-)25-50(-90) cm, glabrous, rarely puberulent above. Leaves (0·43-)0·62-0·79(-1·14) mm wide, rigid, usually scabrid above, glaucous, subpruinose, sometimes puberulent near base; veins (5-)7(-9); sclerenchyma in a usually uniform, continuous or slightly interrupted ring; ribs (1-)2-3; sheaths open nearly to base, glabrous or puberulent. Panicle (2-)4-7(-9) cm, usually lax, the branches scabrid. Spikelets (5·6-)6·5-7·2(-8·3) mm, with (2-)3-4(-7) florets, glaucous. Upper glume (2·8-)3·5-4(-5·2) mm, lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate. Lemma (3·6-)4·2-4·6(-5·5) × c. 1·8 mm, oblong-lanceolate; awn less than ½ as long as lemma. 2n = 42. {\i W. Europe.} Be Br Ga ?Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 115. F. arvernensis} Auquier, Kerguélen & Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i Lejeunia} nov. ser.{\b  89}: 15 (1977) ({\i F. glauca} Lam., non Vill.). Densely caespitose. Stems (22-)31-65(-76) cm, glabrous. Leaves (0·4-)0·55-1(-1·45) mm wide, smooth, glaucous, pruinose, irregularly curved; veins 7-9(-11); sclerenchyma in a continuous or slightly interrupted ring; ribs (1-)3-5; sheaths glabrous, closed at base or rarely in the lower 1/4-1/3; ligule minutely ciliate. Panicle (2·3-)4-6·5(-9·6) cm, dense, the branches weakly scabrid. Spikelets (6·4-)7·2-8·5(-9·4) mm, with 3-5(-7) florets, glaucous, slightly violet-tinged. Upper glume 3·4-4·9(-5·3) × 1·4-1·9 mm, ovate-lanceolate, subobtuse. Lemma (4-)4·5-5·7(-6·2) × 1·8-2·1 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, glabrous, or ciliate or pubescent above; awn 1/3-1/2 as long as lemma. 2n = 28. {\i Calcifuge. • Mountains of S.C. & S.W. France.} Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 116. F. longifolia} Thuill.,{\i  Fl. Paris} ed. 2, 50 (1800) ({\i F. caesia} Sm.). Densely caespitose. Stems 8-35(-45) cm, glabrous. Leaves (0·4-)0·6-0·9 mm wide, hard or soft, smooth, pruinose, pale green, irregularly curved; veins 7; sclerenchyma in a continuous or slightly interrupted thin ring; ribs 3-5; sheaths open to the base, glabrous; ligule glabrous. Panicle 2·5-7 cm, dense or rather lax, the branches scabridulous. Spikelets 5·5-7·5 mm, with 4-6(-8) florets. Upper glume 2·9-3·7 × 1-1·1 mm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, rather abruptly acuminate. Lemma (3·5-)4·2-5 × 1·4-1·5(-2) mm, lanceolate, acuminate; awn 1/4-1/3 as long as lemma. 2n = 14. •{\i  N. & N.C. France and E. England.} Br Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 117. F. inops} De Not.,{\i  Repert. Fl. Ligust.} 500 (1844). Densely caespitose. Stems (19-)25-50 cm, smooth or scabridulous above. Leaves 0·4-0·8 mm wide, hard, more or less smooth, pruinose; veins 7; sclerenchyma forming a complete ring; ribs 5; sheaths minutely ciliate, closed in the lower ¼-½. Panicle 3·5-6·5 cm, rather dense, the branches shortly hairy. Spikelets 6-7·7 mm, with 4-5(-7) florets, glaucous, violet-tinged. Upper glume 2·7-4·6 × 1-1·7 mm, ovate, shortly acuminate, usually glabrous. Lemma 3·9-5 × 1·6-2·1 mm, ovate-lanceolate, unawned or mucronate, rarely with an awn up to 1 mm. •{\i  N. & C. Appennini, Alpi Apuane}. It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 118. F. vaginata} Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd., {\i Enum. Pl. Horti Berol.} 116 (1809). Stems (15-)25-60 cm, glabrous. Leaves (0·5-)0·6-1·2(-1·4) mm wide, smooth; veins (8-)9-11(-13); sclerenchyma forming a complete ring; ribs 3-5; sheaths open to the base, strongly pruinose and violet-tinged, sometimes densely hairy. Panicle (7-)9-15(-20) cm, the branches glabrous or subglabrous. Spikelets with 3-7 florets, glaucous, strongly pruinose. Upper glume ovate. Lemma ovate, obtuse or very shortly acuminate. 2n = 14.{\i  Sandy soils. From S. Czechoslovakia and W. Ukraine southwards to E. Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b vaginata}: Panicle-branches always patent. Spikelets 4·3-5·7 mm. Upper glume 2·4-3 × 1·3-1·4 mm, obtuse; lemma 3-4·2 mm × 1·4-1·6(-2) mm, obtuse, unawned. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par
146}
\par