{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Panicle 6-9 cm, rather lax, the branches glabrous or hairy. Spikelets (7·8-)8-10 mm, dark violet or yellowish-green. Upper glume 3·3-6 × 0·9-1·7 mm, acuminate. Lemma (5·8-)6-7·1 × 1·6-2·5 mm, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, long-acuminate, smooth or slightly scabrid above; awn (2-)2·4-4·7 mm. Anthers more than ½ as long as palea. Ovary rarely glabrous.{\i  Stony mountain grassland,} 1050-2700{\i  m. • Alps and Jura.} Au Ga Ge He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. F. clementei} Boiss., {\i Elenchus} 90 (1838). Stems 15-22 cm, with 1 node near base, hidden by numerous sheaths. Leaves 0·5-0·7 mm wide, rigid, very scabrid, densely covered with rather long hairs; veins 5-7, with 5-7 stout sclerenchyma-strands, that of the mid-vein expanded laterally; ribs 3-5, with several sclerenchyma-cells at their crests; sheaths closed to the mouth, decaying into fibres. Panicle 3-5·5 cm, dense, rigid. Spikelets 5·6-6 mm, variegated with pale violet. Upper glume 2·9-3·1 × 1·1-1·4 mm, ovate-lanceolate, obtuse to very shortly acuminate, with a wide scarious margin. Lemma 4-4·5 × 2 mm, mucronate or with an awn up to 0·6 mm. Anthers more than ½ as long as palea. Ovary subglabrous. 2n = 14.{\i  Screes and rock crevices,} 3200-3460{\i  m; calcifuge. • S. Spain }({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 63. F. picta} Kit. in Schultes, {\i Österreichs Fl.} ed. 2,{\b  1}: 236 (1814) ({\i F. violacea} subsp.{\i  picta} (Kit.) Hegi). Rather densely caespitose; stems 25-40(-45) cm, shortly tomentose above. Leaves (0·3-)0·4-0·6(-0·75) mm wide, somewhat rigid; veins 5-7(-9); sclerenchyma-strands 7-9(-11), some rather stout; ribs 5-7; sheaths closed nearly to the mouth, decaying irregularly into fibres. Panicle 4-7(-8) cm, rather rigid, the branches shortly tomentose. Spikelets (6·3-)6·5-7·5(-8) mm, green, variegated with dark violet. Upper glume 3·4-3·9 × 1·4-1.-6 mm, ovate-lanceolate, obtuse to shortly acuminate. Lemma 4·2-5·2(-5·6) × (1·6-)2·1-2·2 mm, lanceolate, shortly acuminate; awn 1·2-2 mm. Anthers more than ½ as long as palea. Ovary hairy. 2n = 14.{\i  Usually calcicole. • E. Alps; Carpathians; mountains of Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. F. baffinensis} Polunin,{\i  Bull. Nat. Mus. Canada}{\b  92}{\i  Biol. Ser}.,{\b  24}: 91 (1940). Stems 10-20 cm, rigid, with dense, short hairs especially above. Leaves (0·3-)0·4-0·6(-0·7) mm wide, somewhat flattened, more or less densely hairy above; veins 5; ribs 3; sclerenchyma-strands 7, very slender, sheaths closed for ¼-½ their length, decaying into fibres; ligule ciliolate, minutely auriculate. Panicle 2-4 cm, dense, the branches with more or less dense, short hairs. Spikelets c. 7·6 mm (when they have 4 florets), dark reddish-violet, shiny, slightly scabrid. Upper glume c. 4·9 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 4·6-5·2 mm; awn 1·7-2 mm. Anthers c. 1/6 as long as palea. Ovary with sparse short hairs. 2n = 28.{\i  Svalbard.} Sb. ({\i Arctic-circumpolar.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  (iii) Sheaths without deeply infolded thin margins. Ligule without auricles; sheaths closed to the mouth, usually decaying into fibres. Non-flowering shoots extravaginal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. F. nigrescens} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  2}: 460 (1788). Densely caespitose; stems 30-90 cm; stolons absent or very short. Leaves soft; sheaths closed to the mouth, pinkish, decaying into fibres; ligule a minute rim. Panicle 4-10 cm, secund, the branches scabrid, patent only at anthesis. Upper glume ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate. Lemma lanceolate, rather long-acuminate. •{\i  S., W. & C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden.} Au Be Br Bu Cz *Da Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Rm Rs Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nigrescens}: Leaves 0·4-0·7(-1) mm wide, dark green, usually smooth; veins 5-7; ribs occasionally with sclerenchyma. Spikelets (6·5-)7-9·5 mm. Upper glume 3·3-5·2 × 1·3-1·6 mm. Lemma 4·6-6·2 × 2·1-2·3 mm, usually glabrous; awn as long as lemma. 2n = 28, 42.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b microphylla} (St-Yves) Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 327 (1978) ({\i F. rubra} subsp.{\i  microphylla} StYves): Leaves 0·4-0·5 mm wide, glaucous, scabrid above; veins 5; ribs without sclerenchyma. Spikelets (7·5-)8-9·1 mm. Upper glume c. 4·4 × 1·2 mm. Lemma 4·8-6 × 2-2·3 mm; awn slightly more than ½ as long as lemma.{\i  Mountains of S. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 66. F. rubra} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 74 (1753). Laxly, rarely densely caespitose, usually with more or less long rhizomes. Leaves of non-flowering shoots with 3-9 ribs, rarely with some sclerenchyma cells; main sclerenchyma in 7-11 separate strands; cauline leaves often flat; sheaths closed to the mouth, pinkish, decaying into fibres; ligule a minute rim. Panicle erect or slightly nodding, the branches glabrous or hairy, patent at anthesis. Lemma 4-9 mm; awn variable, but not more than ½ as long as lemma. 2n = 14, 28, 42, 56, 70. {\i Almost throughout Europe.} All except Bl Cr Sa Tu, but only as an alien in Az and Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant ± laxly caespitose
\par
2 Leaves rigid; veins (5-)7-9; sclerenchyma-strands cons-
\par
  picuously unequal; all ribs with sclerenchyma; spikelets
\par
  9-13 mm; lemma usually tomentose; stolons very long .... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b arenaria}
\par
2 Leaves not rigid; veins (5-)7; sclerenchyma-strands not
\par
  very unequal; ribs often without sclerenchyma; spikelets
\par
  7-11 mm; lemma not tomentose; stolons variable
\par
3 Stems up to 80(-110) cm; leaves 0·65-0·85 mm wide when 
\par
  plicate; spikelets 7-10 mm ..................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b rubra}
\par
3 Stems not more than 45 cm; leaves 0·5-0·7 mm wide;
\par
  spikelets 10-11 mm ............................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b litoralis}
\par
1 Plant ± densely caespitose; stolons short
\par
4 Leaves strongly scabrid throughout ............................. ({\b g}) subsp. {\b asperifolia}
\par
4 Leaves smooth or scabrid near apex only
\par
5 Stems not more than 44 cm; leaves glabrous or subglabrous;
\par
  veins 5-7; sclerenchyma-strands equal; ribs without 
\par
  sclerenchyma .................................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b pruinosa}
\par
5 Stems up to 65 cm; leaves usually with rather long,
\par
  dense hairs; sclerenchyma-strands unequal; ribs often 
\par
  with sclerenchyma
\par
6 Leaves smooth, obtuse; veins 7(-9); ribs nearly always 
\par
  with sclerenchyma; sheaths sometimes breaking down into
\par
  fibres; upper glume 3·2-6 × 1·6-2 mm, ovate-lanceolate .... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b juncea}
\par
6 Leaves slightly scabrid above, acute; veins 5-7(-9);
\par
  ribs nearly always without sclerenchyma; sheaths persistent;
\par
  upper glume 4-5·5 × 1·4-1·7 mm, subulate-lanceolate .. ({\b f}) subsp. {\b thassalica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rubra} ({\i F. rubra} subsp. {\i vulgaris} (Gaudin) Hayek): Stems up to 110 cm. Leaves 0·65-0·85 mm wide when plicate, smooth, rarely scabrid near the obtuse or abruptly acute apex, more or less hairy; veins (5-)7; sclerenchyma-strands not very stout; ribs usually without sclerenchyma; sheaths glabrous to sparsely hairy. Panicle 7-14 cm, lax. Spikelets 7-10 mm, bright green or glaucous, rarely pruinose. Upper glume 1·2-1·4(-1·6) mm wide, lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 5-7 × 1·9-2·3 mm, glabrous or subglabrous.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b litoralis} (G.F.W. Meyer) Auquier, {\i Bull. Jard. Bot. Nat. Belg.}{\b  38}: 191 (1968) ({\i F. rubra} var. {\i litoralis} G.F.W. Meyer): Stems not more than 45 cm. Leaves (0·4-)0·5-0·7(-0·8) mm wide, smooth, glabrous or very shortly hairy, obtuse; veins (5-)7; sclerenchyma-strands mostly rather thin; sheaths glabrous. Panicle 5·8-8 cm, rather dense, with few spikelets. Spikelets
\par

\par
140}
\par