{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 their length, brownish, often hairy, scarcely fibrous in decay; ligule shortly auriculate, ciliolate. Panicle 2-5 cm, simply racemose, the branches with rather dense, short hairs. Spikelets 7-8 mm, with 3-4 florets, pale violet or glaucous, somewhat pruinose. Upper glume 3·8-4 × 1·7-1·8 mm, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate; lemma 4-5 × 1·7-1·8 mm, lanceolate; awn 1·6-2·6 mm. Anthers 1·2-1·75 mm. •{\i  C. & E. Alps.} Au He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 83. F. riloensis} (Hackel ex Hayek) Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 327 (1978) ({\i F. halleri} subsp. {\i riloensis} Hackel ex Hayek). Stems up to 20 cm. Leaves 0·5-0·8(-0·9) mm wide, smooth, pruinose; veins 7; sclerenchyma-strands 3;  ribs 3; sheaths closed for c. 2/3 their length; ligule shortly auriculate. Panicle up to 3·5 cm. Spikelets 6·5-8·5 mm, dark violet. Upper glume 2·9-3·6 × 1·2-1·4 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 4·1-4·7 × 2-2·1 mm, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, scabrid above; awn 2·1-2·7 mm. Anthers c. ½ as long as palea. {\i Calcifuge. • Mountains of W. Jugoslavia and S.W. Bulgaria.} Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 84. F. halleri} All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem}{\b  2}: 253 (1785). Stems 6-15 cm. Leaves (0·3-)0·5-0·7 mm wide, smooth, glaucous, more or less pruinose; veins (5-)7; sclerenchyma-strands 3, stout, rarely 7, slender (var.{\i  bicknellii} (St-Yves) Markgr.-Dannenb.); sheaths closed for at least ½ their length, brownish; ligule shortly auriculate, ciliolate. Panicle 1-3 cm, dense, the branches glabrous or minutely hairy. Spikelets 6-7·6 mm, with 4-5 florets, violet-brownish. Upper glume lanceolate, rather abruptly acuminate. Lemma lanceolate, acuminate; awn up to c. 5 mm.{\i  Calcifuge. • Alps; mountains of C. & S.W. Jugoslavia.} Au Ga He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b halleri}: Leaves always with 3 ribs; sheaths glabrous. Upper glume 4-4·6 × 1·1-1·4 mm. Lemma 3·7-5 × 1·5-1·8 mm, scabridulous, at least above. 2n = 14. {\i Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b scardica} (Griseb.) Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 327 (1978) ({\i F. ovina} var.{\i  scardica} Griseb.): Leaves usually with 1 rib; sheaths with dense, short hairs. Upper glume 3·4-5·1 × c. 1·2 mm; lemma 4·9-5·7 × 1·7-1·8 mm, smooth.{\i  Mountains of C. & S.W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 85. F. glacialis} (Miégeville ex Hackel) K. Richter,{\i  Pl. Eur. }{\b 1}: 97 (1890). Stems (6-)8-20 cm. Leaves (0·3-)0·4-0·7 mm wide, smooth, pruinose; veins 5; sclerenchyma-strands 3, stout, often with 2 smaller lateral strands; ribs 3, rather prominent; sheaths closed to the mouth, brownish, persisting round the base of the non-flowering shoots; ligule rounded, auriculate, ciliolate. Panicle 2-3·5 cm, sparingly branched, dense, the branches shortly setose. Spikelets 6·3-6·5 mm, with 3-5 florets, light violet. Upper glume 3·9-4·3 × 1·2-1·3 mm, lanceolate, shortly acuminate to subobtuse. Lemma 4·5-4·7 × 1·7-1·8 mm, acuminate, mucronate or with an awn up to 1·3 mm. Anthers (2-)2·3-2·8 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Calcifuge. • Pyrenees. }Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 86. F. rupicaprina} (Hackel) A. Kerner, {\i Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung.}{\b  3}: 145 (1884). Stems 7-24(-30) cm. Leaves 0·3-0·6(-0·7) mm wide, smooth, soft, bright green; veins 5(7); sclerenchyma-strands 3, rather slender; rib 1; sheaths closed to the mouth, glabrous, brownish, decaying irregularly into fibres; ligule minutely auriculate, ciliolate. Panicle 2-4 cm, sparingly branched, the branches densely puberulent, patent at anthesis. Spikelets 5·8-7·5 mm, with (3-)4-6 florets, pruinose. Upper glume 2·7-3·9 × 0·8-1 mm, lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 3·8-4·9 × 1·4-1·7 mm, lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate; awn 1·1-1·6(-2·6) mm. Anthers (1·8-)2-2·6 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Calcicole. • C.& E.Alps.} Au Ge He Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 87. F. bucegiensis} Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 325 (1978) ({\i F. glacialis} auct., non (Miégeville ex Hackel) K. Richter). Stems 6-12(-20?) cm. Leaves 0·3-0·65(-0·7) mm wide; veins 5-7; sclerenchyma-strands 3, slender; ribs 3, rather prominent; sheaths closed to the mouth, brownish, decaying irregularly into fibres enveloping the base of the non-flowering shoots; ligule rounded, auriculate, glabrous or ciliolate. Panicle 1-2·5 cm, sparingly branched, the branches puberulent. Spikelets 5·2-6·2 mm, with 3 florets, pale violet. Upper glume 3-4·6 × 1-1·2 mm, lanceolate, long-acuminate. Lemma 3·8-4·7 × 1·6-2 mm, ovate-lanceolate; awn 1·6-2·1 mm. Anthers 1·8-2·3 mm. 2100-2500{\i  m; calcifuge. • S. Carpathians}. Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 88. F. frigida} (Hackel) K.Richter, {\i Pl. Eur.}{\b  1}: 97 (1890). Stems 4-7 cm. Leaves 0·25-0·5 mm wide, smooth, pruinose; veins 5; sclerenchyma-strands 3, slender; rib 1; sheaths closed to the mouth, partly decaying into fibres; ligule acute, auriculate, glabrous. Panicle 1 cm, simple, with glabrous branches. Spikelets (4·5-)5·6-6 mm, slightly pruinose. Glumes subequal, the upper 3-3·2 × 1·2 mm. Lemma 3-3·6 × 1·5 mm, oblong-lanceolate; awn 1·7-1·9 mm. c. 2950 {\i m; calcifuge. • S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 89. F. alpina} Suter, {\i Fl. Helv. }{\b 1}: 55 (1802). Stems 5-20(-28) cm. Leaves 0·2-0·4(-0·5) mm wide, smooth; veins 3(-5); sclerenchyma-strands 3, very slender; rib 1; sheaths closed to the mouth, brownish, decaying irregularly into fibres; ligule of non-flowering shoots shortly auriculate, glabrous. Panicle 1·5-3·5 cm, simple. Spikelets c. 6 mm, with 2-4 florets, yellowish-green, rarely slightly tinged with violet. Upper glume 3·2-3·6 × 0·8-1 mm, linear to oblong-lanceolate, long-acuminate. Lemma 3·6-4·2 × 1·3-1·5 mm, oblong-lanceolate; awn 3-4 mm. Anthers 0·7-1(-4) mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Calcicole. • Alps, extending to mountains of W.C. Jugoslavia; Pyrenees} ({\i Gavarnie}). Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  F. malyi} Widder,{\i  God. Biol. Inst. }({\i Sarajevo}) {\b 5}: 450 (1953), is probably a hybrid ({\b 89} × {\b 83}). It is recorded from W. Jugoslavia (Bjelasnica Pl., Hercegovina).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 90. F. olympica} Vetter, {\i Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  45}({\b 2}): 307 (1928). Stems (5-)12-21 cm, glabrous or shortly pubescent above. Leaves 0·3-0·6(-0·8) mm wide, smooth, glaucous; veins 3-5; sclerenchyma-strands separate, unequal in width, mostly stout; ribs 1-3; sheaths closed to the mouth, brownish, decaying irregularly into fibres; ligule shortly auriculate, ciliolate. Panicle (2-)2·5-4·5 cm, the branches minutely hairy. Spikelets 6·5-7·8 mm, with 3-5 florets, glaucous, violet-tinged. Upper glume 3·2-4·6(-5) × 1·1-1·4 mm, linear- to oblong-lanceolate, long-acuminate. Lemma (4-)4·6-5·2(-5·8) × 1·6-1·9 mm, lanceolate, long-acuminate, glabrous; awn often as long as lemma. Anthers up to 2·5 mm.{\i  Calcicole}; 2100-2850{\i  m. • E. Greece} ({\i Olimbos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 91. F. vizzavonae} Ronniger, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  68}: (226) (1918). Stems 6-30 cm. Leaves (0·2-)0·3-0·63 mm wide, smooth, rather soft; veins (3-)5(-7); sclerenchyma-strands 3, slender or rather stout; ribs 1-3, not prominent; sheaths closed to the mouth, glabrous, decaying irregularly into fibres; ligule shortly acuminate, glabrous. Panicle (2-)2·5-3(-5) cm, sparingly branched, the branches glabrous. Spikelets 8·4-9·5 mm, with 3-4 florets, green or violet-tinged. Upper glume 4·2-5·6 × 1·1-1·4 mm, subulate, more or less long-acuminate. Lemma 4·9-6·5 × 1·4-2 mm, subulate to narrowly lanceolate; awn 3-4·9 mm. Anthers 1·5-2 mm. •{\i  Mountains of C. Mediterranean region and Greece.} Co Gr It Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 92. F. horvatiana} Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  Veröff. Geobot. Inst. Rübel} ({\i Zürich}) {\b 56}: 132 (1976). Stems 20-25 cm. Leaves (0·4-)
\par

\par
143}
\par