{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 very shortly acuminate. Lemma 4-6·3 × 1·6-2·3 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, scabrid or densely hairy above, more or less ciliate, mucronate or with an awn up to 1·3 mm. 2n = 42.{\i  Limestone pavement. • S.E. Sweden} ({\i Õland}). Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 73. F. juncifolia} St-Amans, {\i Fl. Agen.} 40 (1821). Laxly caespitose, with creeping rhizomes; stems 30-75 cm. Leaves usually more than ½ as long as stems, (0·6-)0·7-1·5 mm wide, smooth, rigid, acute; veins 7-9(-11); sclerenchyma-strands stout, mostly confluent; ribs very prominent, with numerous sclerenchyma-cells and dense, long hairs; sheaths closed to the mouth, usually glabrous, pinkish, decaying into fibres. Panicle 8·5-18 cm, very lax and wide, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 10-12·8 mm, pale green, densely tomentose or glabrous. Upper glume (5-)5·5-8·3 × 1·4-2 mm, linear-lanceolate, long-acuminate, sometimes ciliate. Lemma 7-9·9 × 2·1-2·4 mm, awned. 2n = 56.{\i  Maritime sands. • W. Europe, from N. Spain to the Netherlands.} Be Br Ga Ho Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 74. F. diffusa} Dumort., {\i Obs. Gram. Belg.} 106 (1824). Laxly caespitose, with stolons of varied length; stems 50-100 cm × 1·7-2·7 mm. Leaves often flat, strongly keeled, 0·6-1·35 mm wide when plicate, soft, smooth, obtuse; veins 7-11 (-13); sclerenchyma-strands separate, not very stout, subequal in width; ribs very prominent, sometimes with sclerenchyma cells and few long hairs; sheaths closed to the mouth, usually hairy, pinkish, decaying into fibres. Panicle 9-15 cm, very lax and wide, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 8-12 mm, often with many florets, green or glaucous, more or less violet-tinged. Upper glume 5·7-6·3 × 1·4-1·6 mm,  oblong-lanceolate,  long-acuminate. Lemma 5-7·5 × 2·5 mm, awned. 2n = 42, 56. {\i Damp places. • N. & C. Europe.} Au Be Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge He ?Hu It No ?Rm Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 75. F. rivularis} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 90 (1838). Laxly caespitose, rhizomatous; stems 30-70 cm. Leaves usually flat when fresh, bright green, strongly keeled, sparsely hairy, 0·6-1·1 mm wide when plicate, smooth or slightly scabrid towards apex; veins 7-9; sclerenchyma-strands not very stout, subequal in width; ribs very prominent, with sclerenchyma cells; sheaths closed to the mouth, more or less pubescent, scarcely fibrous in decay. Panicle (6-)10-22 cm, very lax, the branches slender, smooth or scabrid, patent at anthesis. Spikelets (7-)8-10 mm, green to violet. Upper glume 4·3-6 × 1·2-1·3 mm, lanceolate, rather long-acuminate. Lemma 6-7·1 × 2-2·1 mm, oblong-lanceolate, rather abruptly acuminate, almost glabrous; awn 0·3-2 mm. 2n = 14, 42.{\i  Damp, shady places; calcifuge. • Mountains of S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 76. F. rothmaleri} (Litard.) Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 325 (1978) ({\i F. rubra} var.{\i  rothmaleri} Litard.). Laxly caespitose, with short creeping rhizomes; stems 35-50 cm. Leaves 0·6-0·75 mm wide, soft, smooth, with rather sparse, short hairs; veins 7-9; 3 stout sclerenchyma-strands, alternating with 4-5 very slender strands; ribs without sclerenchyma; sheaths closed to the mouth, glabrous, persistent or partially decaying into fibres; ligule of basal leaves indistinctly auriculate. Panicle 7-12·5 cm, the branches glabrous, patent. Spikelets c. 9·1 mm, green or pale violet. Upper glume 4·5-5 × 1-1·2 mm, subulate-lanceolate. Lemma 4·5-5 × 1·6-2 mm, lanceolate, acuminate; awn up to 2·5 mm. Ovary glabrous.{\i  Calcifuge. Mountains of Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 77. F. nevadensis} (Hackel) Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  op. cit.} 327(1978) ({\i F. rubra} subsp.{\i  nevadensis} Hackel). Laxly caespitose, rhizomatous; stems 40-80 cm × 1·2-2 mm. Leaves 0·5-1·4 mm wide, with dense, rather long hairs, very rigid, acute, smooth or scabrid at apex; veins 7-9; 3 very stout sclerenchyma-strands, alternating with 4 very slender strands; ribs very prominent, with sclerenchyma; sheaths closed to the mouth, not decaying into fibres; ligule a short rim. Panicle 6-17 cm, rather rigid, erect, the branches scabrid. Spikelets (8-)10-10·3 mm, pale green or glaucous, sometimes violet-tinged. Upper glume 4·1-6·6 × 1·3-1·7 mm, subulate, rather abruptly acuminate. Lemma 5-6·6 × 1·8-2·3 mm, subulate-lanceolate, long-acuminate, smooth or scabrid towards apex; awn up to 2·1 mm. Ovary with scattered hairs. 2n = 70.{\i  Calcifuge. Mountains of S.W. Europe.} Co Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 78. F. cretacea} T. Popov & Proskorj.,{\i  Bjull. Obsc. Estestv.Vorononez. Univ.}{\b  2}: 46 (1927) ({\i F. rubra} var.{\i  cretacea} Lavrenko). Rather densely caespitose; stems 30-50 cm. Leaves 0·55-1(-1·4) mm wide, with dense, long hairs, very rigid, acute, glaucous, smooth except for the apex; veins 7; sclerenchyma-strands 5, very stout; ribs with sclerenchyma; sheaths closed to the mouth, densely tomentose, not or scarcely fibrous in decay; ligule a short rim. Panicle 7-13 cm, rather lax, erect, the branches patent at anthesis, with dense, short hairs. Spikelets 8·6-10 mm, green. Upper glume 3·4-6·5 × 1·4-1·7 mm, oblong-lanceolate, long-acuminate. Lemma 5-7·1 × 1·8-2·1 mm; awn 0·4-1·5 mm.{\i  Chalk outcrops. • S.C. Russia, E. Ukraine.} Rs (C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    (iv) Sheaths without deeply infolded thin margins. Ligule with auricles; sheaths usually closed for most of their length, usually decaying into fibres. Non-flowering shoots intravaginal. Leaves smooth; sclerenchyma nearly always in 3 separate strands.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 79. F. brachyphylla} Schultes in Schultes & Schultes fil., {\i Mantissa}{\b  2}: 646 (1827) ({\i F. brevifolia} R. Br., non Muhl.). Stems 15-30 cm. Leaves 0·5-0·7 mm wide, rigid, glabrous or with sparse, short hairs; veins 5-7; sclerenchyma-strands (3-)5(-7), slender or rather stout; ribs 1-3; sheaths closed for at least ½ their length, decaying into fibres; ligule indistinctly auriculate, ciliate. Panicle 2-4 cm, dense. Spikelets 5·5-7·3 mm, often proliferating, glaucous, violet-tinged, more or less pruinose. Upper glume 3·2-4·1 × 1·4-1·6 mm, broadly lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma (3-)3·7-5·5 × 1·7-2·3 mm; awn 1·2-2 mm. Anthers 0·7-1·3 mm. Ovary glabrous. 2n = 28, 42.{\i  Sandy or stony tundra. Svalbard, arctic Russia.} Sb Rs(N). ({\i N. & C. Asia, North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 80. F. hyperborea} Holmen, {\i Meddel. Grønl.} {\b 124}({\b 9}): 120 (1957). Like {\b 79} but stems rarely more than 10 cm; leaves with dense, short hairs and usually sclerenchyma-strands; panicle 1·5-2·3 cm; spikelets (4·7-)5-6·2 mm; upper glume 3-3·5 × 1·7 mm; lemma 3-3·5 mm; anthers 0·5-0·8 mm. 2n = 28. {\i Snow-patches and other wet places. Svalbard.} ?Is Sb. ({\i Greenland to E.Siberia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 81. F. pirinica} I. Horvat ex Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 324 (1978) ({\i F. alpina} Acht., non Suter). Stems c. 10 cm. Leaves 0·3-0·67 mm wide, smooth; veins 5-7; sclerenchyma-strands 3, rather slender, often alternating with 2 very slender strands; ribs 2 or 3, not prominent; sheaths closed for c. ½ their length, brownish, irregularly decaying into fibres; ligule shortly auriculate, ciliolate. Panicle c. 2·5 cm, rather dense, the branches minutely hairy. Spikelets c. 6·5 mm, with 3-4 florets, glaucous, slightly violet. Upper glume 3·2-4·2 × 1·1-1·4 mm, lanceolate, rather shortly acuminate. Lemma 3·6-4·9 × 1·5-1·7 mm, lanceolate; awn up to 2·3 mm. Anthers 1·6-1·9 mm. {\i Calcicole. • S.W. Bulgaria }({\i Pirin Pl.}). Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 82. F. intercedens} (Hackel) Ludi ex Becherer, {\i Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges.}{\b  50}: 388 (1940). Stems 6-20(-26) cm, glabrous or shortly pubescent above. Leaves 0·3-0·6 mm wide, glaucous; veins 5-7; sclerenchyma-strands 3, slender, usually with 1-2 smaller lateral strands; ribs 1-2(-3), not prominent; sheaths closed for at least
\par

\par
142}
\par