{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 0·5-0·7(-0·8) mm wide, smooth, glaucous, hard, subpungent; veins 7; sclerenchyma forming a complete or nearly complete ring; ribs 3, usually distinct; sheaths closed to the mouth, densely setose, decaying into abundant fibres enveloping the base of the non-flowering shoots; ligule shortly auriculate, ciliolate, shortly hairy. Panicle 2·5-3·5 cm, very dense, the branches glabrous or with sparse short hairs. Spikelets 6·9-7·8 mm, with 4-5 florets, slightly pruinose and dirty grey-violet. Upper glume 3·2-4·2 × 1-1·4 mm, oblong-lanceolate, long-acuminate. Lemma 5-5·8 × 1·6-2 mm, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, long-acuminate, glabrous; awn up to 2·9 mm. Anthers 2-3·2 mm.{\i  Calcifuge. • Mountains of Jugoslavia and N.W. Greece.} ?Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 93. F. jeanpertii} (St-Yves) Markgr. in Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  3}: 276 (1933) ({\i F. heldreichii} (Hackel) Alexeev). Stems 30-60 cm. Leaves (0·4-)0·6-1(-1·2) mm wide, smooth, pruinose; veins 7; sclerenchyma-strands usually 3, stout or very stout; ribs 3; sheaths closed for c. ½ their length, more or less decaying into fibres. Panicle dense, the branches glabrous or minutely hairy. Spikelets with 5-8 florets, pale green, pruinose. Upper glume acuminate.{\i  Calcicole. C. & E. Mediterranean region. }Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Upper glume reaching 1/2-2/3 of the way up the second
\par
  lemma ............................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b campana}
\par
1 Upper glume reaching 2/3-3/4 of the way up the second lemma 
\par
2 Panicle up to 17 cm; spikelets 6·3-7·8 mm .................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b jeanpertii}
\par
2 Panicle not more than 10·5 cm; spikelets 5·5-6(-7·1) mm
\par
  ............................................................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b achaica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b jeanpertii}: Panicle up to 17 cm, linear. Spikelets 6·3-7·8 mm. Upper glume 3·6-5 × 1·1-1·6 mm, reaching 2/3-3/4 of the way up the second lemma. Lemma 4·2-5·2 × 1·4-1·7 mm, narrowly lanceolate; awn 0-1·3 mm.{\i  C. & S. Greece, Kikladhes.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b achaica} (Markgr.-Dannenb.) Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 325 (1978): Panicle not more than 10·5 cm, oblong. Spikelets 5·5-6(-7·1) mm. Upper glume (3·2-)3·5-4·6 × 1-1·4 mm, reaching 2/3-3/4 of the way up the second lemma. Lemma(3·9-)4·4-6 × (1·3-)1·4-2 mm, linear-lanceolate; awn 0·4-1·3 mm. •{\i  S. Greece} ({\i N. Peloponnisos}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b campana} (N. Terracc.) Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i F. duriuscula} var.{\i  campana} N. Terracc.): Panicle 7-13 cm, linear. Upper glume 3·6-4·2 × 0·9-1·3 mm, reaching 1/2-2/3 of the way up the second lemma. Lemma 3·9-4·6 × 1·4-1·6 mm, narrowly linear-lanceolate; awn 0·2-0·9 mm. •{\i  S. Italy; islands of W. Jugoslavia.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 94. F. stenantha} (Hackel) K. Richter,{\i  Pl. Eur.}{\b  1}: 96 (1890) ({\i F. halleri} subsp. {\i stenantha} (Hackel) Hegi). Stems 15-30 cm, smooth or slightly scabrid above. Leaves (0·3-)0·4-0·7(-0·9) mm wide, smooth; veins (5-)7; sclerenchyma-strands 3, very stout; ribs 3(-5); sheaths closed nearly to the mouth, brownish, glabrous or minutely hairy, decaying into fibres; ligule short or rather short, auriculate, ciliolate. Panicle 3·5-6·5 cm, oblong, lax, the branches more or less shortly hairy. Spikelets 7-8(-9) mm, pale yellowish-green, pruinose, rarely violet-tinged. Glumes subequal, the upper 4·9-5·5 × 1·2-1·3 mm, subulate. Lemma 5·2-5·8 × 1·5-1·9 mm, subulate-lanceolate; awn c. ½ as long as lemma. Anthers 1·7-2·3 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Calcareous cliffs. • E. Alps and mountains of N.W. Jugoslavia; one locality in S.W. Alps.} Au Ga He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 95. F. pseudodura} Steudel, {\i Syn. Pl. Glum.}{\b  1}: 306 (1855) ({\i F. halleri} subsp.{\i  dura} Hegi). Stems 15-30(-37) cm, glabrous or sparsely pubescent above. Leaves (0·4-)0·5-1(-1·1) mm wide, smooth, rigid, bright green; veins 7(-9); sclerenchyma-strands 3 rather stout, often alternating with 2 smaller strands; ribs 3(-5); sheaths usually closed to the mouth, brownish, often densely setulose, scarcely decaying into fibres; ligule very shortly auriculate, ciliolate. Panicle (2-)4-7 cm, dense, the branches glabrous or shortly hairy. Spikelets 7·1-8·4 mm, with (3-)4-6 florets, glaucous, slightly variegated with violet. Upper glume 3·5-5·3 × 1·2-1·7 mm, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, more or less shortly ciliate at apex. Lemma 4·9-6·2 × 2-2·5 mm, broadly lanceolate, acuminate, slightly scabrid above, more or less ciliate; awn c. ½ as long as lemma. Anthers up to 3·3 mm. 2n = 28. 1300-2900{\i  m; calcifuge. • E. Alps.} Au He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 96. F. circummediterranea} Patzke, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  122}: 261 (1973) ({\i F. laevis} (Hackel) K.Richter). Stems 10-70 cm. Leaves (0·35-)0·5-1·1 mm wide, smooth, pruinose; veins 7(-9); sclerenchyma-strands 3, slender to rather stout; ribs 3; sheaths closed for ½-¾ of their length, often decaying into fibres; ligule shortly auriculate, densely ciliolate. Panicle 3-9·5 cm, dense or lax, the branches minutely hairy, patent at anthesis. Spikelets 6-8 mm, with 4-7 florets, green or violet-tinged. Upper glume (2·9-)3·1-5·5 × 1-1·7 mm, oblong-lanceolate. Lemma 4-5·8 × 1·4-2·5 mm, lanceolate, shortly acuminate, glabrous, rarely ciliate; awn up to 3·7 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Calcicole. C. & E. Mediterranean region.} Al Cr Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 97. F. costei} (St-Yves) Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 327 (1978) ({\i F. ovina} subsp.{\i  laevis} var.{\i  gallica} subvar. {\i costei} St-Yves). Stems 35-50 cm. Leaves (0·63-)0·7-1·1 mm wide; veins 7-9; sclerenchyma-strands 3, rather stout, with small intermediate strands; ribs 3(-5); sheaths closed for c. ¼ of their length, rather persistent; ligule shortly auriculate, minutely hairy. Panicle up to 9 cm, rather dense, the branches glabrous. Spikelets 7-8(-9) mm, pruinose, green and violet-tinged. Upper glume 4-4·5 × 1·25-1·5 mm, oblong-lanceolate, shortly acuminate. Lemma 5·4-6 × 1·75-2 mm, lanceolate, long-acuminate; awn 1·3-2 mm. 2n = 28. •{\i  W. Europe, from Luxembourg to N. Italy and C. Spain.} Be Ga He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 98. F. hervieri} Patzke, {\i Decheniana}{\b  114}: 213 (1962). Stems 25-40 cm. Leaves (0·6-)0·7-0·8(-0·95) mm wide, smooth, often pruinose; veins 7; sclerenchyma-strands 3, usually rather slender; ribs 3; sheaths closed for 1/6-1/3(-1/2) of their length, rather persistent; ligule shortly auriculate, ciliolate. Panicle 6-9 cm, rather dense, the branches densely and minutely hairy. Spikelets 6-6·5(-8) mm, with 5-8 florets, green or violet-tinged, more or less pruinose. Upper glume 3·25-3·8 × 0·75-1·3 mm, oblong-lanceolate to lanceolate, shortly acuminate. Lemma 4-4·6(-5·5) × 1·5-2 mm, glabrous; awn 0·7-1(-1·4) mm. 2n = 14. •{\i  W. Europe, from Belgium to N.E. Spain.} Be Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 99. F. patzkei} Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 325 (1978). Stems 30-56 cm. Leaves 0·45-0·8(-1·2) mm wide, smooth; veins 7(8-10); sclerenchyma-strands 3, rather slender; ribs 3(-5); sheaths open to the base, persistent; ligule slightly elongate, auriculate, ciliolate. Panicle 6-9 cm, the branches densely and minutely ciliolate. Spikelets 6·5-7·3 mm, with 4-5 florets, green or slightly glaucous, pruinose. Upper glume 3·3-3·6 × 0·9-1·1 mm, oblong-lanceolate, rather shortly acuminate. Lemma 3·2-4·9 × 1·4-1·6 mm; awn (1·5-)1·7-2·1 mm. •{\i  N.E. France} ({\i N.E. of Metz}). Ga ?Ge.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  (v) Sheaths without deeply infolded thin margins. Ligule with auricles; sheaths usually not closed for more than ½ their length, usually not decaying into fibres. Non-flowering shoots intravaginal. Leaves often scabrid; sclerenchyma usually forming a ring.
\par

\par
144}
\par