{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b dominii} (Krajina) Soó,{\i  Magyar Növ. Kéz.} 921 (1951): Panicle-branches patent only at anthesis. Spikelets 5·3-6·5 mm. Upper glume (2·7-)3-3·7 mm, very shortly acuminate; lemma (3·7-)3·9-4·5 mm, mucronate or with an awn up to 1 mm.{\i  E.C. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 119. F. psammophila} (Hackel ex Celak.) Fritsch,{\i  Excursionsfl. Oesterr.} 64 (1897). Stems 20-57 cm, glabrous. Leaves 0·5-1·1 mm wide, smooth, glaucous, pruinose; veins 9-13; sclerenchyma forming a complete, thin ring; ribs (3-)5; sheaths open to the base, glabrous or with dense, short hairs. Panicle 9-12 cm, the branches glabrous or scabridulous, patent at anthesis only. Spikelets 6·2-7·5(-8) mm, with 3-8 florets, glaucous, pruinose. Upper glume 3·2-4 × 1·3-1·4 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 3·4-4·9 × 1·6-1·8 mm, oblong-ovate, acuminate; awn up to ¼ as long as lemma. 2n = 14. {\i Sandy soils. • E. Germany, W. Czechoslovakia and Poland.} Cz Ge Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 120. F. pannonica} Wulfen ex Host,{\i  Gram. Austr.}{\b  4}: 36 (1809). Stems 30-60 cm, smooth or scabrid above. Leaves (0·65-)0·9-1·3 mm wide, rigid, glaucous, smooth or scabrid above; veins 7-11(-13); sclerenchyma forming a complete ring; ribs 5(-7); sheaths tomentose, open to the base. Panicle 7·5-13 cm, lax, usually interrupted, the branches strongly scabrid. Spikelets (6-)8·3-8·5(-10) mm, with 5-9 florets, glaucous, more or less pruinose. Upper glume (3·9-)4·6-5·7 × 1·6-1·7 mm, lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 5·2-5·8 × 2·1-2·3 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, more or less ciliate, glabrous or scabrid above; awn 1/4-1/3 as long as lemma. {\i Rocky slopes; somewhat calcicole. • S.E. Austria, W. & S. Hungary.} Au Hu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 121. F. beckeri} (Hackel) Trautv., {\i Acta Horti Petrop.}{\b  9}: 325 (1884). Stems 20-60 cm, glabrous. Leaves 0·3-0·7 mm wide, deciduous, smooth or slightly scabrid near apex, more or less pruinose, more or less pungent; veins 7-9; sclerenchyma forming a complete ring; ribs 3, often indistinct; sheaths brownish, often ciliate. Panicle (4·5-)6-12(-18) cm, often interrupted, the branches more or less densely hairy. Spikelets 4·5-6(-7) mm, with 4-6 florets, pale green, more or less pruinose. Upper glume 2·9-3·5 × 1·2-1·4 mm, ovate-lanceolate, shortly acuminate. Lemma 2·5-3·8(-4·3)  × 1·6-1·7 mm, lanceolate, rather long-acuminate; awn 0·4-0·8(-1·3) mm.{\i  Sandy soils. S. part of U.S.S.R., northwards to} c. 48° 30' {\i N.} Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 122. F. polesica} Zapal.,{\i  Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie}{\b  1904}: 303 (1904) (?{\i F. sabulosa }(N. J. Andersson) Lindb. fil.). Densely caespitose. Stems 20-60 cm, scabrid-puberulent or densely hairy above. Leaves 0·4-0·8(-1) mm wide, caducous, glaucous, pruinose, smooth or weakly scabrid or scabrid-hispid beneath; veins 7-9(-11); sclerenchyma forming a ring; ribs (3-)5-7(-9); sheaths open to base, whitish to yellowish or pale brownish. Panicle (4·5-)6-10·5 cm, the branches scabrid. Spikelets (5-)6·5-6·9(-8) mm, with 4-5 florets, pale green, pruinose. Upper glume 3·2-4·1 × 1-1·4 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma (4-)4·6-5·2 × 1·6-1·7 mm, oblong-lanceolate, scabrid above; awn 0·3-1·4(-2) mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Maritime sands; rarely inland. • N. & E. Europe, westwards to N.W. Germany and southwards to Moldavia.} Da Fe Ge ?Ho Po Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 123. F. javorkae} Majovsky,{\i  Acta Fac. Rer. Naf. Univ. Comen. Bot.}{\b  7}: 325 (1962) (excl. var. wagneri (Degen, Thaisz & Flatt) Májovský). Stems (30-)40-60(-80) cm, scabrid above. Leaves 0·5-1·1 mm wide, more or less scabrid, not pungent, glaucous; veins 5-7(-9); ribs 3(-5); sclerenchyma forming a continuous or interrupted uneven ring; sheaths usually scabrid or hirsute. Panicle 6-11(-15) cm, dense, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 6-8 mm, with (3-)4-7(-8) florets, glaucous or green and violet-tinged. Upper glume 4-4·8 mm, acuminate, scabrid or smooth above. Lemma 4·2-5(-5·8) mm, glabrous or densely hairy and ciliate above; awn (0·5-)1-3(-3·3) mm.{\i  Sandy soils. • E.C. Europe}. Au Cz Hu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 124. F. arenicola} (Prodan) Soó, {\i Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  18}: 365 (1973). Stems 21-36 cm, scabrid-puberulent to densely hairy above. Leaves (0·3-)0·4-0·7(-0·9) mm wide, caducous, glaucous, more or less pruinose, scabrid, more or less pungent; veins 7-11(-13); sclerenchyma forming a sometimes interrupted ring, sometimes thickened at the base; ribs 5-7, often indistinct; sheaths ciliate, whitish to pale brownish. Panicle 3-12 cm, rigid, erect, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 5·5-7 mm, with 3-6 florets, pale green, more or less pruinose. Upper glume 3·1-3·6 × 1·1-1·4 mm, ovate-lanceolate to ovate, shortly acuminate. Lemma 3·5-4·6(-5) mm, lanceolate, scabrid above; awn 0·1-1·5 mm.{\i  Maritime sands. E. Romania and N.E. Bulgaria.} Bu Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 125. F. cinerea} Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  2}: 98 (1787). Densely caespitose. Stems 18-35 cm, smooth or weakly scabrid above. Leaves 0·5-0·8(-1·2) mm wide, glaucous, more or less pruinose, rather hard, usually scabrid; veins 7(-9); sclerenchyma in a continuous or slightly interrupted, often laterally thickened ring; ribs 3(-5), rather low; sheaths closed in the lower 1/5-1/4, glabrous. Panicle (2-)4-6 cm, rather dense, the branches glabrous or shortly hairy. Spikelets 7-7·3 mm, with 4-6(-7) florets, glaucous, more or less pruinose, violet-tinged. Upper glume 3·2-4·1 × 1-1·4 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, weakly scabrid or ciliate above. Lemma 4·6-5·2 × 1·7-2 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, scabrid or densely pubescent or ciliate above; awn 1/6-1/3 as long as lemma. 2n = 28.{\i  Dry meadows on limestone. • S.E. France, N.W. Italy.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 126. F. pallens} Host, {\i Gram. Austr.}{\b  2}: 63 (1802). Densely caespitose. Stems (20-)30-40(-58) cm. Leaves rigid, glaucous, strongly pruinose, usually smooth; sclerenchyma forming a complete ring; sheaths open to the base, usually glabrous. Panicle lax, somewhat interrupted. Spikelets 6·5-8·4(-9·1) mm, with (3-)4-7 florets, glaucous, strongly pruinose.{\i  Rocks and screes. • C. Europe, extending to Belgium and S. Jugoslavia. }Au Be Cz Ga Ge He Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Awn at least 2/3 as long as lemma ................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b treskana}
\par
1 Awn not more than ½ as long as lemma
\par
2 Leaves with (7-)9 veins and 5(-7) ribs ............................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b pallens}
\par
2 Leaves with 9-11(-16) veins and 7-9 ribs ..................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b scabrifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pallens}: Stems smooth. Leaves 0·6-1 mm wide, smooth or slightly scabrid above; veins (7-)9; ribs 5(-7). Panicle 5-9·5 cm, the branches glabrous or weakly pubescent. Upper glume 3·3-5·2 × 1·2-1·7 mm, oblong-lanceolate. Lemma (3·7-)4·3-5·4(-5·8) × 1·7-2·3 mm, broadly lanceolate; awn less than ½ as long as lemma. 2n = 14, 28.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except C. & S. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b scabrifolia} (Hackel ex Rohlena) Zielonk.,{\i  Hoppea}{\b  31}: 177 (1973) ({\i F. glauca} var.{\i  scabrifolia} Hackel ex Rohlena): Stems smooth or scabrid above. Leaves 0·6-1·1(-1·5) mm wide, scabrid for most of their length, or smooth; veins 9-11(-16); ribs 7-9. Panicle 5-9 cm, the branches glabrous or densely puberulent. Upper glume 3·8-4·3 × 1·4-1·9 mm, oblong-lanceolate.  Lemma 4·5-4·7 × 1·8-2 mm, oblong-lanceolate; awn less than ½ as long as lemma. {\i C. & S.E. Germany, W. Czechoslovakia.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b treskana} Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  Bot. Jour.Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 323 (1978). Stems smooth. Leaves 0·6-0·9 mm wide, smooth; veins 7; ribs 1-3 . Panicle 4-6 cm, the branches scabridulous. Upper glume
\par

\par
147}
\par