{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 100. F. hystrix} Boiss., {\i Elenchus }89 (1838). Densely caespitose. Stems 8-33 cm, smooth or slightly scabrid above. Leaves (0·4-)0·5-0·6(-0·7) mm wide, often very short and curled, glaucous, smooth or scabrid, abruptly contracted to the acute, flat apex; veins 3; sclerenchyma forming a complete ring of 3-4 rows of cells; rib 1, with several sclerenchyma-cells above; sheaths closed to the mouth, silvery, hyaline, sometimes decaying into fibres; ligule 0·4-0·8 mm. Panicle 1·5-3·5 cm, dense, with few spikelets, the branches scabrid. Spikelets (5·7-)6·2-7 mm, with 3-5 florets, glaucous, slightly violet-tinged. Upper glume 3·8-4 × 1·2 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, scabrid above. Lemma 3·9-4·3 × 1·5-1·7 mm; awn 1/4-1/3 as long as lemma.{\i  Calcareous rocks and screes, }1300-2300{\i  m. C. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 101. F. reverchonii} Hackel,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  53}: 30 (1903). Caespitose. Stems 18-32 cm, smooth. Leaves (0·3-)0·4-0·55 mm wide, strongly curved distally, scabrid, glaucous, more or less pruinose, obtuse or acute; veins 3(-5); sclerenchyma a thin complete ring; 1 distinct or rarely 2-3 indistinct ribs, with sclerenchyma cells above; sheaths open to the base, opaque, stramineous, not becoming fibrous; ligule 2 mm, with acute auricles. Panicle 2·5-4 cm, dense, the branches weakly scabrid. Spikelets 5·7-6·7(-7) mm, with 4-6 florets, dirty violet-glaucous. Upper glume 3·3 × 1·2 mm, lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 3·8-4·2 × 1·4-1·6 mm, with yellow apex; awn at least ¾ as long as lemma. {\i Dry mountain-sides,} 1900-2000{\i  m; calcicole. • S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 102. F. tenuifolia} Sibth.,{\i  Fl. Oxon.} 44 (1794) ({\i F. capillata} Lam.). Densely caespitose. Stems 20-30(-55) cm, usually strongly scabrid above. Leaves 0·2-0·4(-0·6) mm wide; veins (5-)7; sclerenchyma forming a complete ring; rib 1; sheaths open to the base. Panicle (2-)4-8 cm, lax, the branches scabrid. Spikelets (3·7-)4-5·2(-6·5) mm, greenish, sometimes proliferating. Upper glume (1·7-)2·5-3(-3·9) × 0·8-1·2 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, scabrid above. Lemma 2·3-3·6(-4·4) × 1·4-1·5(-1·7) mm, ovate-lanceolate, scabrid above or sometimes hairy on the back, unawned or with a mucro up to 0·4 mm. 2n = 14, 28.{\i  Rocks and sandy or peaty soils; usually calcifuge. W. & C. Europe, extending to S.W. Finland, C. Italy and C. Jugoslavia.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 103. F. ovina} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 73 (1753) ({\i F. vulgaris} (Koch) Hayek). Densely caespitose. Stems (10-)20-45(-70) cm, usually scabrid above. Leaves 0·25-0·7 mm wide, scabrid at least towards apex, green or glaucous; veins 5-7; sclerenchyma forming a complete ring; rib 1; sheaths usually open to the base, glabrous or weakly scabrid. Panicle 2-12 cm, rather dense, the branches patent at anthesis, scabrid. Spikelets (4-)4·8-6·3(-7·3) mm, with 3-8 florets, green, glaucous or violet-tinged. Upper glume (2·2-)2·6-4·6 × 0·8-1·3 mm, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma (2·6-)3·5-4·5(-5·1) × 1·4-1·7(-2) mm, lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, glabrous, scabrid or hairy above; awn 1/4-1/3 as long as lemma. 2n = 14.{\i  N. & C. Europe.} Au Be Br Cz Da *Fa Fe ?Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu ?It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su [Is].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 104. F. ophioliticola} Kerguelen,{\i  Lejeunia} nov. ser., {\b 75}: 13 (1975). Rather laxly caespitose. Stems (27-)30-40(-60) cm, smooth above. Leaves 0·55-0·7 mm, sometimes slightly scabrid near apex, often curved, dark green or violet-tinged; veins (5-)7(-9); sclerenchyma forming a complete ring of 2-3 rows of cells, rarely interrupted; rib 1, rarely 2-3 indistinct ribs; sheaths open almost to the base, glabrous, often violet-tinged. Panicle 3·5-5·7(-7·5) cm, the branches scabrid or hairy. Spikelets (6·8-)7-7·5(-7·9) mm, glaucous, often pruinose. Upper glume 3·6-4·3(-4·7) mm, oblong. Lemma (4-)4·3-4·9(-5·2) mm, glaucous and pink-tinged; awn 0·5-1·5 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Serpentine rocks. • N.W. France} ({\i W. of Quimper}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 105. F. niphobia} (St-Yves) Kerguelen, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  123}: 320 (1976). Densely caespitose. Stems 10-15(-20) cm, scabrid above. Leaves 0·6 mm wide, rigid, erect, scabrid; veins 7; sclerenchyma forming a complete ring; rib 1; sheaths open to the base. Panicle 2-3(-4) cm, dense, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 6 mm, green or violet-tinged. Lemma 4 × 1·25 mm, scabrid above; awn 1·5 mm. 2n = 28. •{\i  E. Pyrenees.} Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 106. F. airoides} Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  2}: 464 (1788) ({\i F. supina} Schur, {\i F. ovina} var.{\i  supina} (Schur) Hackel). Densely caespitose. Stems 10-30 cm, weakly scabrid to densely hairy above. Leaves (0·3-)0·5-0·7 mm wide, often longer than the stems, more or less curved, usually scabrid near the apex only; veins (5-)7; sclerenchyma in a continuous or somewhat interrupted ring; ribs 1, or 3 and indistinct; sheaths closed in the lower 1/4-1/3(-1/2), glabrous or slightly hairy. Panicle 2-5·5(-7) cm, dense, the branches strongly scabrid. Spikelets (5-)6-7(-8) mm, with 3(-5) florets, glaucous, violet-tinged, sometimes proliferating. Upper glume 2·7-4·2(-5·3) × 1-1·5(-1·7) mm, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 3·3-4·6(-5·5) × 1·6-2·1(-2·3) mm, lanceolate, acuminate; awn usually less than ½ as long as lemma. 2n = 14, 28, 35.{\i  Alpine pastures and heaths; calcifuge. • Mountains of Europe, from the Sudeten Mts and Carpathians to the Pyrenees and S.W. Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 107. F. armoricana} Kerguelen, {\i Lejeunia} nov. ser., {\b 75}: 9 (1975). Densely caespitose. Stems 9-36 cm, glabrous to shortly hairy above. Leaves 0·3-0·8 mm wide, smooth or weakly scabrid above, green or glaucous, not pruinose; veins (5-)7(-9); sclerenchyma in a continuous or interrupted ring, with (1-)2(-4) rows of cells; sheaths usually closed in the lower 1/3-1/2, glabrous or sparsely hairy. Panicle 1·5-6(-7) cm, rather dense, the branches more or less hairy. Spikelets 6-7·4 mm, with 3-5(-6) florets, glaucous. Upper glume (3·3-)3·6-4·2(-4·9) × 1-1·3 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, more or less scabrid above. Lemma (3·8-)4·4-4·6(-5) × 1·4-2 mm, lanceolate, acuminate; awn (0·6-)1·3-1·7 (-2·5) mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Maritime heaths and rocks; calcifuge. • N.W. France and Channel Islands.} Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 108. F. eggleri} Tracey,{\i  Pl. Syst. Evol.}{\b  128}: 290 (1977). Densely caespitose. Stems 27-44 cm, smooth or nearly so above. Leaves (0·25-)0·56-0·6 mm wide, lax, bright green, weakly scabrid above; veins (5-)7; sclerenchyma in a continuous or slightly interrupted ring; rib 1; sheaths closed in the lower 1/4-1/3, glabrous or shortly hairy. Panicle (3-)4·5-6·5(-10·4) cm, rather lax, the branches scabrid, patent at anthesis. Spikelets 5·8-6·7(-7) mm, with 2-5 florets, bright green. Upper glume 2·6-3·6 × 0·8-1·3 mm, lanceolate, shortly acuminate. Lemma 3·4-3·9(-4·6) × 1·4-1·6(-1·8) mm, lanceolate, acuminate, usually glabrous; awn 1/3-1/2 as long as lemma. 2n = 28. Pinus-{\i woods on serpentine. • S.E. Austria }({\i Mur valley}). Au.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 109. F. sipylea} (Hackel) Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i Veröff. Geobot. Inst. Rübel} ({\i Zürich}){\b  56}: 110 (1976) ({\i F. ovina} subsp.{\i  sipylea} Hackel). Densely caespitose. Stems (5-)8-20 cm, nearly or quite smooth above. Leaves 0·3-0·5(-0·7) mm wide, rigid, smooth, glaucous, with obtuse, cartilaginous apex; veins 5; sclerenchyma forming a complete ring; ribs 1(-3), low; sheaths closed in the lower 1/4-1/3. Panicle 2-2·5 cm, dense, with few spikelets, the branches shortly hairy. Spikelets 7·8 mm, with 2-3(-4) florets. Upper glume (3·7-)4-4·9 × 1·1-1·5 mm, subulate-lanceo
\par

\par
145}
\par