{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 smooth. Leaves 0·5-0·9 mm wide, rigid, glaucous, weakly scabrid above; veins 7; sclerenchyma in a continuous or slightly interrupted ring; ribs 3; sheaths open nearly to the base, with dense, patent hairs c. 2 mm. Panicle 5·5-8 cm, rather dense, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 7·8-9·7 mm, with 4-5 florets, glaucous. Upper glume 5·2-6·2 × 1·3-1·7 mm, lanceolate, rather abruptly acuminate. Lemma 5·4-7·1 × 1·8-2·2 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, glabrous or scabrid above; awn usually 4 as long as lemma. •{\i  Macedonia.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 136. F. ticinensis} (Markgr.-Dannenb.) Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 328 (1978) ({\i F. ovina} subsp. {\i ticinensis} Markgr.-Dannenb.). Densely caespitose. Stems 30-60 cm, smooth, angular above. Leaves 0·45-1(-1·5) mm wide, bright green or glaucous, strongly scabrid at least above; veins 7; sclerenchyma forming a continuous or slightly interrupted ring; ribs 3; sheaths closed in the lower ¼ or less. Panicle 5·5-12·5 cm, very lax, the branches patent, scabrid. Spikelets (7·1-)8·1-9·7 mm, with 3-7 florets, bright green or glaucous. Upper glume 3·4-6·3 × 1·2-2·2 mm, oblong-lanceolate, long-acuminate, scabrid above, with a narrow scarious margin. Lemma 5·2-6·9 × 1·6-2·2 mm, oblong-lanceolate, long-acuminate, shortly cilate, scabrid above; awn 1/3-1/2 as long as lemma.{\i  Limestone rocks and dry meadows. • S. Alps} ({\i hills above Lago di Como and Lago di Lugano}). He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 137. F. grandiaristata} Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i Veröff. Geobot. Inst. Rübel} ({\i Zürich}){\b  56}: 101 (1976). Stems 30-40 cm, smooth. Leaves 0·45-0·8 mm wide, scabrid above, glaucous; veins 7; sclerenchyma forming a complete ring, thickened at base; ribs 3; sheaths open to the base, slightly hairy. Panicle 9 cm, rather lax, the branches densely hairy. Spikelets 8·5-9·7 mm, with 3-4 florets, glaucous. Upper glume 5·6 × 1·3-1·4 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate. Lemma 6·9-7·3 × 1·9-2 mm, oblong-lanceolate, long-acuminate; awn at least ½ as long as lemma. {\i Siliceous mountain rocks. • N. Greece }({\i E. Makedhonia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 138. F. thracica} (Acht.) Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1976). Stems up to 57 cm, smooth. Leaves 0·4-0·65(-0·8) mm wide, scabrid, glaucous; veins (5-)7; sclerenchyma forming a usually interrupted ring; ribs 3; sheaths open to the base, more or less scabrid. Panicle 6-9 cm, the branches densely hairy. Spikelets 8·4-8·5 mm, with 3-4 florets, green, more or less pruinose. Upper glume 3·9-6·2 × 1·3-1·7 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, ciliate. Lemma 5·5-6·7 × 1·7-2·3 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate pubescent above, ciliate; awn 2/3 as long to as long as lemma. •{\i  S. Bulgaria, N. Greece.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 139. F. hercegovinica} Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 323 (1978). Densely caespitose. Stems 20-60 cm, smooth or weakly scabrid above. Leaves 0·4-0·9 mm wide, rigid, slightly pruinose, scabrid at least above; veins (5-)7; sclerenchyma forming a continuous or interrupted ring; ribs 3, often indistinct; sheaths closed in the lower ¼ at most, with deciduous lamina. Panicle 4-8·5 cm, dense, the branches more or less scabrid. Spikelets 8·1-10 mm, with 3-5 florets, pale green or glaucous, sometimes violet-tinged, more or less pruinose. Upper glume 4·6-6·9 × 1·5-2 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, sometimes shortly ciliate above, with a distinct scarious margin. Lemma 6·2-7·5 × 2·1-2·5 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, scabrid above and ciliate or pubescent; awn 2/3 as long to as long as lemma. •{\i  S. Jugoslavia, N. Greece.} Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 140. F. robustifolia} Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i op. cit.} 328 (1978) ({\i F. ovina }var. {\i duriuscula} subvar.{\i  robusta} Hackel, non {\i F. robusta} Mutel). Densely caespitose. Stems 24-36 cm, smooth or scabrid above. Leaves 0·4-0·8(-1·1) mm wide, usually obtuse, rather hard, more or less pruinose; veins 7(-9); sclerenchyma in a complete ring; ribs 3; sheaths closed in the lower 1/5-1/3(-1/2), smooth or weakly scabrid. Panicle 3-5·5 cm, dense, the branches weakly scabrid to densely hairy. Spikelets 9-9·7 mm, with 3-5 florets, pale green to glaucous, more or less violet-tinged, and pruinose. Upper glume (3·9-)4·2-6 × 1·5-2 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, scabrid above or pubescent, with a distinct scarious margin. Lemma 5-6·7 × 2·1-2·4 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, scabrid above or pubescent; awn c. ½ as long as lemma. {\i Rocks, mainly in the mountains. • C. & S. Italy, Sicilia.} It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 141. F. panciciana} (Hackel) K. Richter,{\i  Pl. Eur.}{\b  1}: 96 (1890). Stems 15-35(-53) cm, glabrous, scabrid or hairy above. Leaves 0·3-0·6 mm wide, scabrid to nearly smooth at apex, scabrid to pubescent below; veins 5(-7); sclerenchyma-strands as many as the veins, sometimes confluent into an interrupted or complete ring which is thickened in places; ribs 3; sheaths often closed in the lower 1/4-1/3 glabrous or pubescent. Panicle 3-6(-8·5) cm dense, the branches shortly hairy. Spikelets 7·8-9·1 mm, with 3 florets, glaucous or dirty violet, rarely pruinose. Upper glume 3·4-5 × 1·3-1·7 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 5·2-6·2 × 1·7-2·3 mm, lanceolate, acuminate; awn more than ½ as long as lemma.{\i  Mountain rocks. • N. & C. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Al ?Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 142. F. apuanica} Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 322 (1978). Rather densely caespitose. Stems 33-64 cm, glabrous or weakly scabrid above. Leaves 0·5-0·9 mm wide, smooth or weakly scabrid above; veins 5-7; sclerenchyma-strands separate or confluent into a ring which is thickened in places; ribs 1-3 sheaths closed in the lower 1/8(-1/2), smooth or weakly scabrid Panicle 6-14 cm, rather lax, the branches scabrid, patent at anthesis. Spikelets 8-9·4 mm, with 3-5 florets. Upper glume 4·5-5·5 × 1·2-1·7 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, with a distinct scarious margin. Lemma 5·2-7 × 1·6-2·1 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, scabrid above, with a narrow scarious margin; awn 2-3·3 mm.{\i  Mountain rocks and meadows; calcifuge. • N. Italy} ({\i Alpi Apuane}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 143. F. koritnicensis} Hayek & Vetter, {\i Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl. }({\i Wien}){\b  99}: 220 (1924) ({\i F. heteroglossa }Vetter pro parte). Stems (9-)30-48 cm. Leaves 0·6-0·9(-1·15) mm wide, nearly smooth, slightly hairy below, glaucous, pruinose; veins (5-)7; sclerenchyma of 3 stout and 2-4 slender strands, some confluent; ribs 3-5; sheaths closed in the lower 1/5-1/2, usually smooth. Panicle 5-8 cm, rather dense, the branches shortly hairy. Spikelets (8-)9·5-10 mm, with 4-5 florets, pruinose, glaucous, violet-tinged. Upper glume 4·7-6·7 × 1·6-1·8 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma (5·5-)6·5-7·8 × (1·8-)2·2-2·3 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, smooth or scabrid above; awn c. ½ as long as lemma. •{\i  W. part of Balkan peninsula, from Hercegovina to N.W. Greece. }Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The type material of{\i  F. heteroglossa} Vetter is a mixture of {\i F. koritnicensis} and{\i  Bellardiochloa violacea}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 144. F. pohleana} Alexeev,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  78}({\b 5}): 144 (1973). Densely caespitose. Stems (10-)15-30 cm, smooth. Leaves 0·45-0·6 mm wide, glaucous, pruinose, scabrid; veins 5-7; sclerenchyma forming a continuous, unevenly thickened or somewhat interrupted ring; ribs 1-3; sheaths closed in the lower 1/4-1/3, almost glabrous. Panicle (1·5-)3-4·5 cm, the branches scabrid. Upper glume 3·4-4·1 × 1·2 mm. Lemma 3·8-4·7 × 2 mm; awn 1·3-1·6 mm.{\i  Limestone rocks. • N.E. Russia} ({\i basin of R. Usa}). Rs (N).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 145. F. macedonica} Vetter, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  69}: 547 (1939) (non {\i F. ovina} subsp.{\i  macedonica} Stoj.). Stems 15-30(-40) cm, scabrid
\par

\par
149}
\par