{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 4-5 × 1·1-1·2 mm, linear-lanceolate. Lemma 4·8-5·2 × 1·6-2 mm, oblong-lanceolate; awn 2/3-3/4 as long as lemma. {\i C. & S. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 127. F. huonii} Auquier, {\i Candollea} {\b 28}: 16 (1973). Densely caespitose. Stems (5-)12-25(-44) cm, usually hairy above. Leaves (0·45-)0·6-0·8(-0·95) mm wide, smooth; veins (5-)7(-9); sclerenchyma in a continuous or slightly interrupted ring; ribs 1(-3); sheaths closed in the lower 1/4-1/3, whitish to brownish, usually glabrous. Panicle 2-4·5(-6) cm, not much exserted, dense, the branches scabrid to puberulent. Spikelets (6-)6·4-7·2(-8) mm, with 3-4(-6) florets, glaucous, more or less pruinose. Upper glume (2·9-)3·3-3·9(-4·5) mm, oblong. Lemma (3·6-) 4·2-4·8(-5·3) mm, oblong-lanceolate; awn 1-1·7(-2·3) mm. 2n = 42.{\i  Cliff-tops. • N.W. France} ({\i Bretagne}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 128. F. gracilior} (Hackel) Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 325 (1978) ({\i F. ovina }var. {\i duriuscula} subvar. {\i gracilior} Hackel). Densely caespitose. Stems 20-35 cm, glabrous above. Leaves 0·5-0·8 mm wide, irregularly curved, more or less smooth, somewhat pruinose; veins 7; sclerenchyma in a continuous or slightly interrupted ring; ribs 3, usually low; sheaths closed up to ½ way, glabrous or puberulent. Panicle 4-7·5 cm, rather dense, the branches subglabrous, patent at anthesis. Spikelets 6·5-7·5 mm, with 4-6 florets, green, often slightly violet-tinged. Upper glume 3·5-4·5 × 1·3-1·6 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 4-4·4(-5·5) × 1·7-1·8(-2) mm, oblong-lanceolate to lanceolate, acuminate; awn 0·2-1·5 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Limestone rocks,} 800-2000{\i  m. • S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 129. F. liviensis} (Verguin) Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  op. cit.} 327 (1978) ({\i F. ovina} var. {\i liviensis }Verguin). Densely caespitose. Stems 35-45 cm, glabrous or scabridulous above. Leaves 0·6-0·95 mm wide, glaucous, pruinose, smooth, except for apex; veins 7-9; sclerenchyma in a continuous or slightly interrupted ring; ribs 1(-3); sheaths closed in the lower 1/4-1/3(-1/2), glabrous. Panicle 4·5-8 cm, rather dense, the branches scabridulous. Spikelets 7-8 mm, with 4-5 florets, glaucous, pruinose. Upper glume 3·6-4·6 × 1·2-1·3 mm, oblong-lanceolate, with 3 conspicuous veins. Lemma 4·5-6·5 × 1·8-2·1 mm, oblong-lanceolate to lanceolate, acuminate, scabrid above, more or less ciliate; awn 1/4-1/3 as long as lemma. 2n = 14. {\i Dry meadows. • E. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 130. F. ochroleuca} Timb.-Lagr.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Toulouse}{\b  3}: 129 (1869). Densely caespitose. Leaves 0·5-0·85 mm wide, smooth, dark green, more or less pruinose; veins 7; sclerenchyma in a continuous or slightly interrupted ring; ribs 3; sheaths glabrous, up to 1/3 as long as the stem. Panicle-branches densely puberulent. Spikelets pale green, more or less pruinose. Upper glume 4·5-5 × 1·4-1·5 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, with conspicuous veins. Lemma (4·8-)5·4(-6) × 1·5-2 mm, lanceolate, acuminate; awn 1/4-1/3(-1/2) as long as lemma. 2n = 28. •{\i  Pyrenees and Cévennes. }Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spikelets at least 8 mm
\par
2 Sheaths closed in the lower 1/3 .................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b ochroleuca}
\par
2 Sheaths closed to the middle ......................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b heteroidea}
\par
1 Spikelets not more than 7·5 mm
\par
3 Stems glabrous ................................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b gracilior}
\par
3 Stems densely hairy above ........................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b bigorrensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ochroleuca}: Stems 30-60 cm, densely hairy above. Sheaths closed in the lower 1/3. Panicle 6-10 cm, slightly lax. Spikelets 8-9 mm. Glumes and lemma glabrous or hairy, more or less pruinose.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b gracilior} (Verguin) Kerguélen, {\i Lejeunia} nov. ser.,{\b  75}: 163 (1975): Stems 25-30 cm, glabrous. Sheaths closed in the lower 1/3. Panicle 7-9·5 cm, lax. Spikelets 7-7·5 mm, more or less pruinose. Glumes and lemma glabrous. {\i C. Pyrenees} ({\i near Ax-les-Thermes}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b bigorrensis} (St-Yves) Kerguélen,{\i  loc. cit.} (1975): Stems 20-30 cm, densely hairy above. Sheaths closed in the lower 1/3. Panicle 4-6 cm, dense. Spikelets 7-7·5 mm, more or less pruinose. Glumes and lemma more or less tomentose.{\i  C. Pyrenees} ({\i Lourdes to Gavarnie}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b heteroidea} (Verguin) Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  Bot.Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 327 (1978) ({\i F. ovina }subsp.{\i  indigesta} var.{\i  heteroidea} Verguin): Stems 30-40 cm, densely hairy above. Sheaths closed to the middle. Spikelets 8 mm, pruinose. Glumes and lemma glabrous or hairy.{\i  Pyrenees and Corbières}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 131. F. brigantina} (Markgr.-Dannenb.) Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i op. cit.} 328 (1978) ({\i F.ovina} subsp.{\i  brigantina} Markgr.-Dannenb.). Densely caespitose. Stems 25-40 cm, smooth or weakly scabrid above. Leaves 0·5-0·75 mm wide, rather rigid, glaucous, more or less curved, scabrid at apex; veins 5-7; sclerenchyma in a continuous or slightly interrupted ring; ribs 1(-3); sheaths closed in the lower 1/3-1/2, smooth or scabrid. Panicle 5-7·5 cm, dense, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 8-8·5 mm, with 5-6 florets, glaucous, pruinose, violet-tinged. Upper glume (3·3-)4-4·3 × 1·6 mm, ovate-lanceolate, with a scarious margin. Lemma 5·5-6 × 2-2·2 mm, oblong-lanceolate; awn c. 16 mm.{\i  Serpentine rocks. • N.E. Portugal. }Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 132. F. valentina} (St-Yves) Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i F. ovina} var. {\i valentina} St-Yves). Densely caespitose. Stems 32-43 cm, usually smooth above. Leaves 0·4-0·8 mm wide, green, more or less weakly pruinose and slightly scabrid at apex; veins 5-7; sclerenchyma in a continuous or slightly interrupted ring; ribs 3; sheaths closed in the lower ¼-½, smooth or weakly scabrid. Panicle 5-9·5 cm, rather lax, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 8·1-8·4 mm, with 4-6 florets, somewhat pruinose. Upper glume (3·5-)4-4·6 × 1·2-1·5 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, with a narrow scarious margin, slightly ciliate above. Lemma (5-)5·2-5·8 × 1·7-2·1 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, somewhat scabrid above; awn up to 0·7 mm. {\i Scrub; calcicole. • Mountains of E. Spain. }?Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 133. F. degenii} (St-Yves) Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i F. ovina} var.{\i  glauca} subvar. {\i degenii} St-Yves). Densely caespitose. Stems 25-50 cm, usually pubescent above. Leaves 0·4-0·8 mm wide, rigid, usually strongly scabrid, with rather long dense hairs above, glaucous, more or less pruinose; veins 7; sclerenchyma forming a complete, rather thick ring; ribs 1-3 sheaths closed in the lower 2/5-1/2 glabrous. Panicle 4·5-9 cm, the branches more or less scabrid. Spikelets 7·5-9·1 mm, with 4-5 florets, glaucous, more or less pruinose, usually pubescent. Upper glume 3·5 4·9 × 1·3-1·4 mm, lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 4·6-5·6 × 1·8-2·1 mm, lanceolate, acuminate; awn 0·7-1·7 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Rocky places; calcifuge. • S.E. France} ({\i Massif de l'Esterel, near Cannes}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 134. F. oviniformis} Vetter,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  69}: 547 (1939). Stems 12-32 cm, smooth. Leaves 0·65-0·85 mm wide, rigid, scabrid above, pruinose; veins 5(-7); sclerenchyma forming a complete ring; ribs 3; sheaths open to the base, more or less puberulent. Panicle 3-8 cm, dense, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 7·8-9 mm, with 5-9 florets, green. Upper glume 3·9-4·9 × 1·3-1·7 mm, lanceolate, rather abruptly acuminate. Lemma 5-6 × 1·7-1·9 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, scabrid above; awn ½-¾ as long as lemma.{\i  Calcifuge. • N.E. Greece} ({\i mountains above Komotini}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 135. F. hirtovaginata} (Acht.) Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i Veröff. Geobot. Inst. Rübel} ({\i Zürich}) {\b 56}: 100 (1976). Stems 30-57 cm,
\par

\par
148}
\par