{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 (8-)10-11 mm, bright green or glaucous, glossy, rarely pruinose. Upper glume 4·6-5·2 × 1·6-2·1 mm, lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 6·2-7·1 × 1-2·3 mm. 2n = 42. {\i Salt-marshes and damp maritime sands. Coasts of W. Europe and the Baltic region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b arenaria} (Osbeck) Syme in Sowerby,{\i  Engl. Bot.} ed. 3, {\b 11}: 147 (1872) ({\i F. arenaria} Osbeck): Stems up to 70 cm, stout rigid. Leaves 0·6-1·1 mm wide, smooth, densely hairy, rigid obtuse; veins (5-)7-9; sclerenchyma-strands unequal; all ribs with sclerenchyma; sheaths glabrous. Panicle 7-16 cm. Spikelets 9-13 mm, glaucous. Upper glume 5·2-8 × 1·4-1·8 mm, ovate-lanceolate, rather abruptly acuminate, more or less ciliate. Lemma 6·9-9·7 × 2·1-2·6 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, usually densely tomentose. 2n = 56.{\i  Maritime sands. • Coasts of N.W. Europe and the Baltic region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b pruinosa} (Hackel) Piper,{\i  Contr. U.S. Nat. Herb. }{\b 10}: 22 (1906): Stems up to 44 cm. Leaves 0·4-1·2 mm wide, glabrous or subglabrous, rather rigid; veins 5-7; sclerenchyma-strands not very stout; ribs without sclerenchyma; sheaths usually glabrous. Panicle 2-6 cm, rather dense, with few spikelets. Spikelets 7·6-10 mm, glaucous. Upper glume 3·7-6 × 1·3-1·7 mm, oblong-lanceolate, rather shortly acuminate. Lemma 4·5-6·8 × 2-2·1 mm, lanceolate, long-acuminate, glabrous or hairy, usually pruinose. 2n = 42.{\i  Atlantic coasts of Europe, from Portugal to Iceland}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b juncea} (Hackel) Soó, {\i Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  17}: 117 (1972): Stems up to 65 cm, stout. Leaves (0·4-)0·5-2 mm wide, smooth, usually with long, dense hairs, obtuse, rigid; veins 7(-9); sclerenchyma-strands unequal, some very stout; epidermal cells very large; ribs often with sclerenchyma; sheaths usually setose. Panicle (5-)6·5-12 cm, erect, rather dense. Spikelets 8·5-12 mm, glaucous. Upper glume 3·2-6 × 1·6-2 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 5-6·9 × 2·1-2·6 mm, lanceolate, long-acuminate, glabrous or shortly hairy. 2n = 42.{\i  Mainly on disturbed ground. Throughout most of the range of the species except the U.S.S.R}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b thessalica} Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  Veröff. Geobot. Inst. Rübel} ({\i Zürich}){\b  56}: 144 (1976): Stems 40-65 cm. Leaves 0·4-0·9 mm wide, rigid, long-hairy, acute, scabrid towards apex; veins 5-7(-9); sclerenchyma-strands unequal; sheaths persistent, setulose above. Panicle (5-)7-14·5 cm, very lax. Spikelets (8·5-)9·4-10·5 mm; upper glume 4-5·5 × 1·4-1·7 mm, subulate-lanceolate, long-acuminate. Lemma (5·4-)6·1-7·1 × (1·7-)2-2·4 mm, lanceolate.{\i  Mountain springs. • N. Greece }({\i Pindhos}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b g}) Subsp. {\b asperifolia} (St-Yves) Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  op. cit.} 143 (1976): Stems up to 70 cm. Leaves (0·4-)0·5-1·1 mm wide, rigid, usually with long, dense hairs, more or less acute; veins 7-9(-10); sclerenchyma-strands unequal, some very stout; sheaths glabrous to long-setose. Panicle 7-20 cm, rigid. Spikelets (7·5-)8-10(-12) mm, glaucous. Upper glume 3·8-5·5 × 1·3-1·5 mm, oblong-lanceolate, long-acuminate. Lemma (5-)5·5-6·9(-7·5) mm, lanceolate, acuminate, scabrid above or shortly hairy all over. {\i Mountain rocks. • S. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 67. F. richardsonii} Hooker,{\i  Fl. Bor.-Amer.}{\b  2}: 250 (1840). Laxly caespitose, with some long rhizomes; stems (12-)22-40(-52) cm. Leaves 0·5-1(-1·35) mm wide, plicate or partly flat, smooth or scabrid above, subrigid, obtuse; veins 7; sclerenchyma-strands usually of medium width; ribs 3-5, very prominent, some with sclerenchyma; sheaths closed to the mouth, pinkish, shortly hairy, decaying into fibres. Panicle (2-)4-7 cm, erect, usually very dense, the branches scabrid. Spikelets (6-)7-8·6 mm, usually densely covered with rather long, whitish hairs. Upper glume 3-3·6 × 1-1·1 mm, ovate to ovate-oblong, often rounded. Lemma 4-5·3(-6) × 1·7-2·1 mm; awn up to 1·6 mm. 2n = 42. {\i Arctic and subarctic Europe, southwards to the Færöer and C. Ural.} Fa Fe Is No Rs (N, C) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 68. F. pyrenaica} Reuter, {\i Cat. Graines Jard. Bot. Genève}{\b  1861}: 4 (1862). Laxly or very laxly caespitose, with long rhizomes; stems 10-32 cm, ascending. Basal leaves 0·3-0·45(-0·6) mm wide, rather soft, somewhat hairy, obtuse; veins 5-7; sclerenchyma-strands 3-4, large, rarely with up to 4 additional small strands; ribs very prominent, usually with some sclerenchyma and with long hairs; sheaths closed to the mouth, pinkish, hirtellous, decaying into fibres. Panicle 2-3·5 cm, nearly simple. Spikelets 6-6·5 mm, variegated with greyish-violet. Upper glume 3·4-3·7 × 1·2-1·3 mm, oblong-lanceolate, long-acuminate. Lemma 4-4·2 × 1·5-1·6 mm, lanceolate, long-acuminate; awn up to 1·5 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Mountain rocks; calcicole. · C. & E. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 69. F. trichophylla} (Ducros ex Gaudin) K. Richter,{\i  Pl. Eur.}{\b  1}: 100 (1890). Laxly caespitose, with more or less long rhizomes; stems 30-68 cm × 0·7-1 mm. Leaves 0·3-0·5(-0·6) mm, plicate scabrid above, more or less hairy, subacute; veins (4-)5; sclerenchyma-strands rather stout, subequal, rarely confluent, ribs not very prominent; sheaths closed to the mouth, glabrous, pinkish, decaying into fibres. Panicle 6-10 cm, rather lax but narrow, the branches very slender. Spikelets 7-8·6 mm, green. Upper glume 3·4-4·3 × 0·8-1·2 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 4·9-5·4 × 1·6-2 mm, linear-lanceolate, glabrous, often dark below the apex; awn usually very short. 2n = 42.{\i  Damp grassland, mainly in the mountains; usually calcicole. S. & S.C. Europe.} Au ?Bu Co Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 70. F. pseudotrichophylla} Patzke, {\i Decheniana}{\b  117}: 195 (1964). Rather densely caespitose, with short rhizomes; stems 30-70 cm × 1·1-1·5 mm. Leaves 1/6-1/4 as long as stems, 0·4-0·6 (-0·8) mm wide, plicate, scabrid, glabrous or subglabrous; veins 5; sclerenchyma-strands of medium width or stout; sheaths closed to the mouth, glabrous, pinkish, usually not fibrous in decay. Panicle 3-12 cm, rather lax, the branches glabrous or slightly scabrid. Spikelets (6·5-)7-9 mm, green slightly violet-tinged. Upper glume 4·5-5 × 1·2-1·6 mm, lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 5·5-6·2 × 1·4-2·1 mm, lanceolate, acuminate; awn c. ½ as long as lemma. 2n = ?42. • {\i Mountains of S. W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 71. F. cyrnea} (Litard. & St-Yves) Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 327 (1978) ({\i F. rubra} subsp.{\i  eu-rubra }var. {\i cyrnea} Litard. & St-Yves). Rather densely caespitose, with creeping rhizomes; stems 30-40 cm. Leaves 0·35-0·55(-0·6) mm wide, smooth, glabrous or subglabrous, subacute; veins 5(-7); sclerenchyma-strands rather stout, sometimes confluent; sheaths closed to the mouth, sparingly hairy, not decaying into fibres. Panicle (3-)5-7 cm, erect, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 8-9 mm, pale green, violet-tinged. Upper glume c. 5 × 1·5 mm, subulate, acute, with a wide scarious margin. Lemma 5·4-6 × 2-2·1 mm, lanceolate-subulate; awn 1-2·5 mm. •{\i  Mountains of Italy and Corse.} Co It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 72. F. oelandica} (Hackel) K. Richter,{\i  Pl. Eur.}{\b  1}: 100 (1890) ({\i F. rubra} var. {\i oelandica} Hackel). Rather densely caespitose, with short rhizomes; stems 20-37(-47) cm. Leaves more or less hairy, rigid, acute; veins 7(-9); sclerenchyma-strands stout, mostly confluent; ribs very prominent, very rarely with sclerenchyma; sheaths closed to the mouth, glabrous or hairy, pinkish, decaying into fibres. Panicle 4-6 cm, with few spikelets, the branches somewhat flexuous, smooth or slightly scabrid. Spikelets 6·5-8·7 mm, glaucous or dark violet, pruinose. Upper glume 2·8-4·9 × 1·1-1·3 mm, ovate-lanceolate, obtuse or
\par

\par
141}
\par