{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 spinose-dentate on the margins and often also on the back of the midrib; sheaths not or only very shortly auriculate. Male flowers with a spathe; anther 4-thecous. Female flowers without a spathe. Fruit 3-8 mm. 2n = 12.{\i  Fresh or brackish water. Most of Europe, northwards to S.E. England and to} c. 63°{\i  N. in Finland.} Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. HYAS Dumort. Monoecious. Stems smooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. N. flexilis} (Willd.) Rostk. & W. L. E. Schmidt, {\i Fl. Sedin.} 382 (1824). Leaves up to 2·5 cm, less than 1 mm wide including the teeth, with 20-36 minute ascending teeth on each margin; sheaths with sloping shoulders, not auriculate. Male flowers with a spathe; anther 1-thecous. Female flowers without a spathe. Fruit 2-3 mm. 2n = 24. {\i  N. & C. Europe, southwards to Switzerland; very local}. Br Da Fe Ge Hb He No Po Rs (N, B, C) Su. ({\i North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. N. minor} All.,{\i  Auct. Syn. Stirp. Horti Taur.} 3 (1773). Leaves up to 3 cm, less than 1 mm wide including the teeth, minutely spinose-dentate on the margins and sometimes also on the back of the midrib, with 5-17 teeth on each margin; sheaths with short, rounded-truncate auricles. Male flowers with a spathe; anther 1-thecous. Female flowers without a spathe. Fruit 2-3 mm; seed with transverse areoles (wider than long). 2n = 24.{\i  Europe, northwards to Belgium & C. Russia, but absent from the islands.} Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge He †Ho Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. N. tenuissima} (A. Braun) Magnus,{\i  Beitr. Kenntn. Gatt. Najas} 24, 45 (1870). Like {\b 3} but leaves not more than 1·2 cm, with c. 6 teeth on each margin; areoles of seed longitudinal (longer than wide). •{\i  S. Finland and N.W. Russia.} Fe Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. N. gracillima} (A. Braun ex Engelm.) Magnus, {\i op. cit.} 23 (1870). Leaves 1·5-3·5 cm, up to 0·3 mm wide, linear-setaceous, straight, somewhat divergent from the scarious sheathing base, with 6-20 remote, usually 3-celled spinules above the entire lower third; sheaths with conspicuous, rounded to truncate 4- to 7-toothed auricles. Male flowers with a spathe; anthers 1-thecous. Female flowers without a spathe. Fruit 2·5-3·5 mm. {\i Extensively naturalized in rice-fields in N. Italy.} [It.] ({\i E. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. N. graminea} Delile,{\i  Descr. Égypte, Hist. Nat.}{\b  2}: 282 (1813). Leaves up to 4 cm, less than 1 mm wide including the teeth, with 30 or more very minute, ascending teeth on each margin; sheaths with long, narrowly triangular auricles. Male flowers without a spathe; anthers 4-(2-) thecous. Female flowers without a spathe. Fruit 1·75-2·25 mm.{\i  Naturalized in rice-fields and ditches in N. Italy, Romania and Bulgaria.} [Bu It Rm.] ({\i S. Asia, N. & E. Africa, Australasia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc LILIIFLORAE
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 183.      LILIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. V.H. Heywood & A.O. Chater. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs, often with bulbs, corms, rhizomes or tuberous roots; sometimes climbers, rarely annuals or small shrubs. Flowers usually in racemes or panicles, more rarely solitary or in cymes or umbels, regular or slightly zygomorphic, usually hermaphrodite. Perianth of two whorls, each of (2-)3(-5) usually petaloid segments, free or variously connate. Stamens usually as many as perianth-segments, free or connate. Ovary 3-locular, superior (very rarely 1-locular or semi-inferior); styles 1 or 3(-5). Fruit a loculicidal or septicidal capsule or a berry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers axillary, or in lateral inflorescences arising
\par
  from aerial stems
\par
2 Leaves reduced to small, scarious scales; cladodes present
\par
3 Flowers arising from the surface of ovate or elliptical
\par
  cladodes; filaments united to form a tube ...................................... {\b 49. Ruscus}
\par
3 Flowers arising from the stem or from lateral inflores-
\par
  cences; cladodes usually linear; filaments free ......................... {\b 48. Asparagus}
\par
2 Leaves green, not scale-like; cladodes absent
\par
4 Stems spiny, climbing or creeping ............................................... {\b 50. Smilax}
\par
4 Stems unarmed, not climbing, usually erect
\par
5 Flowers red or yellow; leaf-margins with ± spinose teeth ............... {\b 14. Aloe}
\par
5 Flowers white or greenish; leaves entire
\par
6 Leaves amplexicaul; perianth-segments connate only at 
\par
  the base ..................................................................................... {\b 45. Streptopus}
\par
6 Leaves not amplexicaul; perianth-segments connate for 
\par
  most of their length .............................................................. {\b 46. Polygonatum}
\par
1 Flower or inflorescence terminal on an aerial stem, or 
\par
  arising directly from an underground rootstock
\par
7 Flowers arising from a corm; scape very short; ovary 
\par
  underground at anthesis
\par
8 Style 1, 3-fid near apex ...................................................... {\b 17. Bulbocodium}
\par
8 Styles 3, free from the base
\par
9 Perianth-segments connate below, forming a long, slender
\par
  tube .......................................................................................... {\b 16. Colchicum}
\par
9 Perianth-segments free to the base, their claws appro-
\par
  ximated to form a tube, but not connate
\par
10 Leaves arising from top of stem, immediately below the
\par
   flowers; ovaries at or only slightly below ground-level;
\par
   anthers versatile .............................................................. {\b 15. Androcymbium}
\par
10 Leaves basal, arising from top of corm; ovaries at 
\par
   anthesis several centimetres below ground-level;
\par
   anthers basifixed ..................................................................... {\b 18. Merendera}
\par
7  Flowers with evident scape, or arising from leafy,
\par
   aerial stems; ovary above ground at anthesis
\par
11 Flowers in umbels, enclosed in bud by one or more 
\par
   spathe-like bracts
\par
12 Perianth 40-45 mm; stamens and style declinate; seeds
\par
   winged ................................................................................... {\b 37. Agapanthus}
\par
12 Perianth not more than 20 mm; stamens and style 
\par
   straight; seeds not winged
\par
13 Ovary semi-inferior; perianth-segments 3- to 7-veined 
\par
   the inner with distinct claw ............................................ {\b 39. Nectaroscordum}
\par
13 Ovary superior; perianth-segments usually 1-veined,
\par
   usually all alike and without claw
\par
14 Plant usually with onion-like smell when bruised;
\par
   perianth-segments free; style gynobasic ....................................... {\b 38. Allium}
\par
14 Plant without onion-like smell; perianth-segments 
\par
   connate at base; style terminal ......................................... {\b 40. Nothoscordum}
\par
11 Flowers solitary, or in racemes, panicles or cymes,
\par
   or, if in umbel-like inflorescences, not enclosed by 
\par
   spathe-like bracts in bud
\par
15 Larger leaves at least 100 cm, erect, equitant, very 
\par
   fibrous ..................................................................................... {\b 13. Phormium}
\par
15 Leaves without this combination of characters
\par
16 Leaves coriaceous and somewhat succulent, the margins
\par
   with ± spinose teeth; anthers extrorse, basifixed .............................. {\b 14. Aloe}
\par

\par
14}
\par