{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  slender, erect or geniculate at base. Ligule of upper cauline leaves 0·1-0·5 mm. Inflorescence 1-7 × 0·5-1 cm, racemose or with a few branches below; pedicels 0·4-1 mm, at an angle of 45-90° after anthesis. Spikelets 5·5-9·5 mm (excluding awns), with 3-7 florets. Lower glume 0·4-1 mm, finely pointed, hyaline throughout or with a very narrow central band of parenchyma, veinless or rarely shortly 1-veined, entire; upper glume 4-6·5 mm, lanceolate, subulate to acuminate at apex, with 3 veins. Lemma 3·2-5·5 mm, gradually acuminate, with awn usually about as long as lemma, scabrid on midrib, otherwise usually glabrous; veins inconspicuous. Rhachilla-segments 0·9-1·3 mm. Anthers 1·5-2·5 mm. 2n = 14. {\i Dry, open habitats. • W. & C. Spain, N.E. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. gypsophila} (Hackel) Paunero, {\i op. cit.} 368 (1963) ({\i Vulpia delicatula }var.{\i  gypsacea} Willk.). Stems up to 35 cm, slender, erect or geniculate at base. Ligule of upper cauline leaves 0·5-1·5 mm. Inflorescence 1-5 × 0·5-2 cm, racemose or with a few branches below; pedicels 0·4-1(-2) mm, at an angle of 45-90° after anthesis. Spikelets 5·5-12 mm (excluding awns), with 4-14 florets. Lower glume 0·7-1·5 mm, acute to obtuse, with wide hyaline margin, 1-veined, spinulose on margins; upper glume 3-5 mm, narrowly lanceolate, subulate at apex, with 1-3 veins. Lemma 3·2-42 mm, glabrous to pubescent, rather abruptly acuminate, with awn usually c. ½ as long as lemma; veins inconspicuous. Rhachilla-segments 0·6-0·9 mm. Anthers 0·5-1·5 mm.{\i  Dry, open habitats on gypsaceous soils. • C. Spain; W. Sicilia.} Hs Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Possibly conspecific with {\i C. cynosuroides} (Desf.) Paunero from N. Africa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  C. pectinella} (Delile) De Not., {\i Ind. Sem. Horti Bot. Genuensis}{\b  1847}: 26 (1847), from N. Africa and W. Asia, with sessile spikelets 3·5-5·5 mm, has been recorded from S.W. Spain, probably in error or as a casual, and as a casual elsewhere in S. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 8.   Wangenheimia}     Moench
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.A. Stace. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves convolute. Inflorescence a secund spike. Spikelets with 4-11 florets, tardily disarticulating below each floret. Glumes equal or subequal, the lower twisted to lie parallel to the rhachilla on the flattened face of the spikelet, coriaceous, with thickened midrib. Lemma 5-veined, more or less keeled. Palea almost equalling lemma, 2-veined, very shortly 2-fid. Anthers 3. Grain ellipsoid, free from palea, glabrous; hilum oblong, sub-basal, less than ¼ as long as grain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. W. lima} (L.) Trin., {\i Fund. Agrost}. 132 (1820) ({\i Desmazeria castellana} Willk.). Stems up to 30 cm, rather rigid, erect. Inflorescence 0·8-3·5 × 0·4-1·4 cm, straight; pedicels 0·2-0·6 mm, at an angle of 45-90° after anthesis. Spikelets 3·5-8 mm. Lower glume 3·5-5·8 mm, linear, subulate, with 1 vein, more or less keeled; upper glume 3·5-6·1 mm, lanceolate, acute, with 2-3 veins, rounded on back at base but keeled for most of its length. Lemma 2·7-4·5 mm, acuminate or acute to obtuse and apiculate, the lowest pubescent at base to all pubescent throughout. Anthers 2-2·5 mm.{\i  Dry, open habitats. C. & E. Spain, N.E. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 9.     Micropyrum}      Link
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.A. Stace. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat, convolute when dry. Inflorescence a distichous, spiciform raceme or sparingly branched panicle. Spikelets with 3-9(-14) florets, disarticulating below each floret. Glumes subequal, not keeled, acute to rounded. Lemma 5-veined, rounded on back, obtuse to emarginate, apiculate to long-awned, chartaceous, with hyaline margin. Palea almost equalling lemma, 2-veined, shortly 2-fid. Anthers 3, slightly exserted at anthesis. Grain 2·5-3·2 mm, ellipsoid, adherent to palea, glabrous; hilum linear, nearly as long as grain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Spikelets ± appressed at anthesis; anthers 0·5-1·3 mm .................. {\b 1. tenellum} 
\par
Spikelets erecto-patent at anthesis; anthers 2-3·2 mm ....................... {\b 2. patens}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. tenellum} (L.) Link,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  17}: 398 (1843) ({\i Festuca festucoides} (Bertol.) Becherer,{\i  Nardurus tenellus} (L.) Duval-Jouve, non Reichenb. ex Godron,{\i  Nardurus lachenalii} (C. C. Gmelin) Godron). Stems up to 60 cm, slender, erect, rather rigid. Inflorescence 1-20 cm, rigid, unbranched or with very few branches; pedicels 0·5-1·5 mm. Spikelets (3-)4-9(-14) mm (excluding awns), more or less appressed at anthesis. Lower glume 2·1-5 mm, acute to obtuse, with (1-)3 veins, more than ¾ as long as upper; upper glume 2·4-6 mm, obtuse to rounded, with 3(-5) veins. Lemma 2·7-5 mm, aculeolate near margins proximally, otherwise glabrous, scarcely cucullate, unawned or with awn up to as long as lemma. Rhachilla-segments 0·6-0·9 mm. Anthers 0·5-1·3 mm. 2n = 14. {\i Dry places. S. Europe, extending northwards to }c. 49° {\i N. in France.} Bu Co Ga Ge ?Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. patens} (Brot.) Rothm. ex Pilger, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  74}: 567 (1949). Like {\b 1} but stems up to 100 cm; inflorescence up to 30 cm; spikelets (7-)9-15 mm, erecto-patent at anthesis; lemma 3·5-5·5 mm, cucullate, unawned or rarely with awn up to 2 mm; rhachilla-segments 1-1·6 mm; anthers 2-3·2 mm. 2n = 14. •{\i  Portugal, W. & C. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 10.     Castellia}      Tineo
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.A. Stace. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a spike or raceme or with few, simple, racemose branches below. Spikelets with 6-12 florets, disarticulating below each floret. Glumes more or less keeled, acute to obtuse. Lemma with 5 prominent, thin veins, not keeled, subacute to obtuse, membranous, densely tuberculate. Palea almost equalling lemma, 2-veined, truncate to slightly 2-fid. Anthers 3, with deeply separated anther-lobes, included or slightly exserted at anthesis. Grain 3·5-4 mm, oblong-ellipsoid, strongly adherent to palea, glabrous; hilum linear, 3/4 as long as grain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. tuberculosa} (Moris) Bor, Ind. Forest. 74: 90 (1948) (Nardurus tuberculosus (Moris) Hayek, Castellia tuberculata Tineo). Stems up to 75(-100) cm, erect. Inflorescence 4-26 cm, with spikelets on 2 sides, unbranched or with few branches below; pedicels absent or stout, up to 0·5 mm. Spikelets 9-15 mm, ovate, distant. Glumes glabrous, the lower 2·8-3·5 mm, acute, 3-veined, the upper 3·5-5 mm, subacute to obtuse, 3- to 5-veined. Lemma 4·2-5·7 mm, glabrous but with dense minute tubercles on dorsal surface. Anthers 0·3-0·5 mm. Rhachilla segments 0·5-0·7 mm, minutely aculeolate. Dry places. Mediterranean region from S.E. Spain to S.E. Greece; very local. Cr Gr Hs Sa Si. (N. Africa, S.W. Asia.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 11.     Narduroides}      Rouy
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.A. Stace. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat, convolute when dry. Inflorescence spicate, rarely branched. Spikelets with 4-6 florets, disarticulating below each floret. Glumes subequal, (1-)3- to 5-veined, not keeled, emarginate; midrib prominent. Lemma 5-veined, rounded or very slightly keeled on back, chartaceous, with hyaline margin. Palea almost equalling lemma, 2-veined, shortly 2-fid. Anthers 3, slightly exserted at anthesis. Grain 1-1·8 mm, ellipsoid, slightly adherent to palea, glabrous; hilum punctiform, sub-basal.
\par

\par
157}
\par