{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 158. F. makutrensis} Zapal.,{\i  Kosmos} ({\i Lwów}){\b  35}: 783 (1910). Stems 20-50 cm, weakly scabrid above. Leaves 0·3-0·5(-0·6) mm wide, scabrid, glaucous; veins 5-7; sclerenchyma-strands 3, stout, sometimes with 2 smaller strands alternating, rarely confluent; ribs 3-5; sheaths open to the base, glabrous or more or less hairy, the lamina deciduous. Panicle 4·5-7 cm, rather lax. Spikelets 5-6·5 mm, with 3-4 florets, green or slightly violet, more or less pruinose. Upper glume 3·7-4(-4·2) × 1·1 mm, oblong-lanceolate. Lemma 4-4·5(-5) × 1·7 mm, oblong-lanceolate, long-ciliate; awn c. ½ as long as lemma. •{\i  Poland and W.C. part of U.S.S.R.} ?Ge Po Rs (C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 159. F. valesiaca} Schleicher ex Gaudin, {\i Agrost. Helv.}{\b  1}: 242 (1811). Stems 25-40(-50) cm, weakly scabrid above. Leaves (0·2-)0·3-0·5(-0·6) mm wide, scabrid, pruinose; veins 5; sclerenchyma-strands 3, stout, rarely with additional small strands and rarely confluent; ribs 3; sheaths open to the base, glabrous, the lamina sometimes deciduous. Panicle 3-7 cm, slightly interrupted, the branches weakly scabrid. Spikelets (5·5-)6-6·7 mm, with 3-5 florets, pruinose. Upper glume 2·6-3·9 × 1-1·4 mm, oblong-lanceolate, abruptly acuminate: Lemma 3·4-4·9(-5·2) × 1·3-1·5(-1·6) mm, subulate-lanceolate to subulate, glabrous or ciliate; awn rarely more than ½ as long as lemma. 2n = 14, ?28.{\i  From C. Germany and N.C. Russia southwards to the Pyrenees, C. Italy and S.C. Greece.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 160. F. carnuntina} Tracey,{\i  Pl. Syst. Evol.}{\b  128}: 289 (1977). Densely caespitose. Stems 15-23 cm, scabrid above. Leaves (0·4-)0·7-1 mm wide, strongly scabrid, tomentose especially at the base, glaucous; veins 5; sclerenchyma-strands 3, very stout, rarely with small strands alternating; ribs 3; sheaths open to the base, densely tomentose. Panicle (2-)3-4·5 cm, almost simple, the branches hairy. Spikelets 6-6·4 mm, with 3-4 florets, glaucous. Upper glume 3·1-3·4 × 1·3-1·6 mm, ovate-lanceolate, shortly acuminate, tomentose above. Lemma 4·2 × 2 mm, ovate-lanceolate, rather shortly acuminate, tomentose; awn nearly ½ as long as lemma. 2n = 42.{\i  Dry meadows on limestone. • E. Austria} ({\i Hainburger Berge, W. of Bratislava}). Au.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 161. F. rupicola} Heuffel, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  8}: 233 (1858). Densely caespitose. Leaves rarely pruinose; sclerenchyma-strands 3, stout, rarely with 2 small strands alternating; ribs 3; sheaths open to the base. Panicle 4·5-8(-9·5) cm, rather lax, the branches scabrid. Spikelets with 3-5 florets, green. Upper glume 2·9-5·2 × (1-)1·2-1·9 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate; awn up to ½ as long as lemma. 2n = 42.{\i  Dry places. C. Europe and Balkan peninsula, extending to N. Italy and W. Ukraine.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Records from the S.E. part of the U.S.S.R. require confirmation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rupicola} ({\i F. sulcata} (Hackel) Nyman,{\i  F. vallesiaca} subsp. {\i sulcata} (Hackel) Schinz & Keller): Stems 23-52(-65) cm, scabrid above. Leaves (0·4-)0·6-0·8 mm wide, scabrid throughout, c. ½ as long as stems; veins 5(-7); sheaths scabrid-pubescent or glabrous. Spikelets 6·4-8·2 mm. Lemma (3·8-)4·2-4·8 × 1·7-2·3 mm, glabrous or pubescent.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b saxatilis} (Schur) Rauschert,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  63}: 276 (1960) ({\i F. saxatilis} Schur): Stems 38-75 cm, smooth. Leaves (0·4-)0·5-1 mm wide, smooth but usually scabrid near apex, as long as stems; veins 5-7(-9); sheaths glabrous. Spikelets 8·5-9·2 mm. Lemma 5·9-6 × 2-3 mm, glabrous, often pruinose.{\i  S. & E. Carpathians}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 162. F. taurica} (Hackel) A. Kerner ex Trautv., {\i Acta Horti Petrop.}{\b  9}: 327 (1884). Stems 40-50 cm, scabrid above. Leaves 0·35-0·6(-0·7) mm wide, strongly scabrid, densely hairy above, less so beneath, c. ¾ as long as stems; veins 5; sclerenchyma-strands 3, sometimes with several intermediate strands, or confluent; ribs 3; sheaths closed near base, glabrous or minutely hairy. Panicle 5-11 cm, somewhat interrupted, the branches hairy. Spikelets 8·4-10·7 mm, green, with 5 florets. Glumes subulate, the upper 6·5-7·4 × 1·4-1·5 mm. Lemma 6·5-8·4 × 1·7-2 mm, glabrous or weakly scabrid above; awn up to as long as lemma.{\i  S.E. Europe, from N.E. Greece to Krym}. Bu Gr Rs (W, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 163. F. dalmatica} (Hackel) K. Richter,{\i  Pl. Eur.}{\b  1}: 95 (1890). Stems 30-58 cm. Leaves (0·4-)0·5-0·85 mm wide, strongly scabrid, usually pruinose; veins 5-7; sclerenchyma-strands 3, stout, often with 2 small strands alternating; ribs 3; sheaths closed at the base, glabrous or weakly scabrid. Panicles 5-12 cm, rather dense, the branches shortly hairy. Spikelets 7·8-8(-10·5) mm, with 4-6 florets, pruinose. Upper glume 4·6-4·9(-6·5) × 1·3-1·6(-1·8) mm, oblong-lanceolate, long-acuminate. Lemma 5·3-6·5(-7·8)x 1·6-2·1 mm, oblong-lanceolate, long-acuminate, glabrous or ciliate; awn more than ½ as long as lemma. 2n = 28. •{\i  From Hungary to N. Greece}. Bu Gr Hu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 164. F. pseudodalmatica} Krajina ex Domin,{\i  Acta Bot. Bohem.}{\b  8}: 61 (1929). Stems (25-)30-50(-65) cm, scabrid above. Leaves 0·4-0·7(-0·8) mm wide, scabrid, glaucous or green, usually pruinose, more than ½ as long as stems; veins 5; sclerenchyma-strands 3, usually stout, often with 2 small strands alternating; ribs 3; sheaths open to the base, smooth or weakly scabrid. Panicle (6-)8-15 cm, lax, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 6·5-8 mm, with 4-7 florets, glaucous or green, sometimes pruinose. Upper glume 3·4-5 × 1·1-1·3 mm, subulate-lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 5-5·6 × 1·4-1·6(-1·8) mm, subulate-lanceolate, long-acuminate, smooth, scabrid or ciliate above; awn 1/3-1/2 as long as lemma. 2n = 28.{\i  Dry places. E.C. Europe and U.S.S.R., northwards to} c. 63°{\i  N. in E. Russia.} Au Cz Hu Po Rm Rs (N, C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 165. F. callieri} (Hackel ex St-Yves) Markgraf in Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  3}: 278 (1933). Stems 12-35(-45) cm, scabrid above. Leaves 0·4-0·6(-0·8) mm wide, strongly scabrid, rigid, glaucous, pruinose, with short hairs at base; veins 5(-7); sclerenchyma forming a somewhat interrupted ring, thickened at the base; ribs 3; sheaths closed only at base, smooth or weakly scabrid, the lamina deciduous. Panicle 3-5·5 cm, rather dense, the branches densely hairy. Spikelets 6·5-7·5 mm, with (3-)4-5 florets, glaucous, pruinose. Upper glume 4-4·5 × 1·4-1·6 mm, linear-lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 4·6-5·2(-5·5) × 1·6-1·7 mm, subulate-lanceolate, long-acuminate; awn 1/2-2/3 as long as lemma.{\i  S. & E. parts of Balkan peninsula, E. Romania, Krym.} Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  F. uralensis} (Tzvelev) Alexeev,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou }{\b 78}({\b 5}): 143 (1973) ({\i F. callieri} subsp. {\i uralensis} Tzvelev), known from one locality in N. Ural, is like {\b 165} but has dark green, subrigid leaves 0·6-0·7(-0·8) mm wide, with 7 veins. It requires further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 166. F. wolgensis} P. Smirnov, {\i op. cit}.{\b  50} ({\b 1-2}): 100 (1945). Stems up to 58 cm, strongly scabrid or tomentose. Leaves (0·4-)0·5-0·75(-0·8) mm wide, glaucous, densely hairy throughout; veins 5-7, sclerenchyma forming a continuous or somewhat interrupted ring thickened at the base; ribs 3-5; sheaths open to the base, densely tomentose. Panicle 7·5-12 cm, interrupted, the branches tomentose. Spikelets 7-8 mm, with 4-6 florets, green. Upper glume 3·7-4·1 × 1·4-1·5 mm, ovate-lanceolate to lanceo-
\par

\par
152}
\par