{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. salzmannii} (Boiss.) Rouy,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  14}: 301 (1913) ({\i Nardurus salzmannii} Boiss.). Stems up to 40 cm, slender, erect, rather rigid. Inflorescence 2-23 cm, rigid, rarely with a few branches; pedicels up to 0·5 mm. Spikelets (2·2-)4-7 mm, appressed, set in depressions in rhachis. Glumes broadly hyaline at margin; lower 1·5-2·7 mm, with (1-)3(-5) veins; upper 1·8-3·2 mm, with 3-5 veins. Lemma 2·2-3·2 mm, emarginate to shortly 2-fid, unawned but sometimes apiculate, glabrous. Rhachilla-segments 0·8-1·2 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry places. S. & C. Spain; S.E. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 12.     Desmazeria}       Dumort.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  (incl. {\i Catapodium} Link, {\i Scleropoa} Griseb.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.A. Stace. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat, convolute when dry. Inflorescence a raceme or sparingly branched panicle. Spikelets with 5-25 florets, disarticulating below each floret. Glumes subequal, weakly to strongly keeled, acute to obtuse. Lemma 5-veined, with 1-5 of the veins prominent, keeled to rounded on back, often with a short apiculum, coriaceous, acute to shortly 2-fid. Anthers 3, slightly exserted at anthesis. Grain 1·5-2 mm, ellipsoid-oblong, strongly adherent to palea, glabrous; hilum punctiform, sub-basal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The three species placed in {\i Desmazeria} in this account are the type-species of the genera {\i Desmazeria}, {\i Catapodium} and {\i Scleropoa} respectively, but they differ only in small, mainly quantitative characters which are not sufficient for generic separation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lemma 3·5-4·5 mm, strongly keeled ............................................... {\b 1. sicula} 
\par
1 Lemma 2-3 mm, rounded on back or keeled only near apex
\par
2 Lower glume 2-3 mm; upper glume 2·3-3·3 mm ........................... {\b 2. marina}
\par
2 Lower glume 1·3-2 mm; upper glume 1·5-2·3 mm .......................... {\b 3. rigida}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. sicula} (Jacq.) Dumort.,{\i  Comment. Bot.} 27 (1822). Stems up to 25 cm, erect. Inflorescence 1·5-6 cm, not rigid, with spikelets on 2 sides, unbranched; pedicels 0·5-1 mm, appressed, stout. Spikelets 10-22 mm, ovate, crowded, with (5-)12-25 florets, tardily disarticulating. Glumes slightly unequal, keeled, obtuse to subacute, glabrous or aculeolate on midrib; lower glume 2·5-3 mm, 3-veined; upper glume 3-4 mm, 3- to 5-veined. Lemma 3·5-4·5 mm, strongly keeled, subacute to obtuse, not or very shortly apiculate, more or less cucullate, glabrous to sparsely aculeolate on keel, with minute capitate hairs near base. Rhachilla-segments c. 0·7 mm, with minute capitate hairs. Anthers 0·8-1·4 mm.{\i  Dry places. S. Spain, Sardegna, S. Italy, Sicilia.} Hs It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. D. marina} (L.) Druce,{\i  Scott. Bot. Rev.}{\b  1}: 156 (1912) {\i Catapodium loliaceum} (Hudson) Link,{\i  Desmazeria loliacea} (Hudson) Nyman, {\i Scleropoa loliacea} (Hudson) Gren. & Godron). Stems up to 25 cm, procumbent to erect. Inflorescence 1-12 cm, rigid, with spikelets on 2 sides, usually unbranched but sometimes with few, simple branches below; pedicels 0·7-2 mm, appressed, stout. Spikelets 4-10 mm, ovate, with 5-14 florets, tardily disarticulating. Glumes subequal, obtuse to acute, glabrous, more or less keeled, with prominent veins; lower glume 2-3 mm, (1-)3-veined; upper glume 2·3-3·3 mm, 3(-5)-veined. Lemma 2·2-3 mm, rounded on back proximally, keeled distally, acute to obtuse, often shortly apiculate, glabrous. Rhachilla-segments 0·3-0·6 mm, sparsely aculeolate. Anthers 0·4-0·6 mm. 2n = 14, 28.{\i  Dry, open habitats near the sea. S. & W. coasts of Europe, northwards to} 59° {\i N. in Scotland} ({\i Orkney}). Az Be Bl Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hb Ho Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. D. rigida} (L.) Tutin in Clapham, Tutin & E. F. Warburg,{\i  Fl. Brit. Is.} 1434 (1952) ({\i Scleropoa rigida} (L.) Griseb.). Stems up to 35(-60) cm, procumbent to erect. Inflorescence 1-12(-18) cm, rigid, usually with 1 or 2 branches at lower nodes; branches and pedicels with weak pulvini and often somewhat divaricate at maturity; branches bearing spikelets from near base or devoid of spikelets for up to ½ of their length, the axis or branches bearing spikelets on two sides or spikelets spreading in 3 dimensions; pedicels 0·5-3 mm, appressed to patent. Spikelets 4-10 mm, narrowly ovate, with 5-12 florets, rather readily disarticulating. Glumes subequal, acute, glabrous or aculeolate on veins, more or less keeled, with prominent veins; lower glume 1·3-2 mm, (1-)3-veined; upper glume 1·5-2·3 mm, 3-veined. Lemma 2-2·6(-3) mm, rounded on back or keeled distally, acute to obtuse, often shortly apiculate, glabrous. Rhachilla-segments 0·5-1 mm, sparsely aculeolate. Anthers 0·4-0·6 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry places. S. & W. Europe, northwards to} 56° 30' {\i N. in Scotland.} Al Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu ?Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A very variable species, particularly in inflorescence-characters. The following two subspecies seem worthy of recognition.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rigida}: Stems not more than 15(-35) cm. Inflorescence 1-8(-12) cm, with branches bearing spikelets from near base. Pedicels mostly 1-2 mm, relatively long and narrow. Lemmas strongly convolute after anthesis, becoming well-separated from each other. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b  b}) Subsp. {\b hemipoa} (Delile ex Sprengel) Stace,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 352 (1978) ({\i Festuca hemipoa} Delile ex Sprengel,{\i  Scleropoa hemipoa} (Delile ex Sprengel) Parl.; incl. {\i Catapodium occidentale} Paunero): Stems up to 35(-60) cm. Inflorescence 2-12(-18) cm, with lower branches devoid of spikelets for at least the lower 1/3. Pedicels mostly 0·5-1 mm, relatively short and thick. Lemmas not convolute near apex and partially imbricate after anthesis.{\i  Usually on maritime sands. Mediterranean region, from S.E. Spain to Greece; Atlantic coasts of S.W. France and N. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b Catapodium rigidum} subsp. {\b majus} (C. Presl) F. H. Perring & P.D.Sell, {\i Watsonia}{\b  6}: 317 (1967), differs from subsp. ({\b a}) only in its well-branched inflorescence spreading in 3 dimensions, but all degrees of intermediates occur and it is best regarded as only a variety.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 13.        Cutandia}        Willk.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.A. Stace. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat or more or less convolute. Inflorescence a panicle or rarely a raceme, the branches divaricate at maturity. Spikelets disarticulating variously below each floret, at the base of the pedicel and at the base of the branches. Glumes slightly to very unequal, more or less keeled, acuminate to rounded or emarginate, not or shortly awned. Lemma with 3 thick veins, strongly keeled on all 3 veins, acuminate to rounded, with hyaline margin, usually emarginate or 2-fid at apex, unawned or with an awn from the sinus up to 1·2 mm. Palea equalling or almost equalling lemma, 2-veined, acute to truncate or 2-fid. Anthers 3 exserted at anthesis. Grain narrowly ellipsoid, trigonous, more or less free, glabrous; hilum usually elongated, sub-basal, up to ¼ as long as grain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lower glume ½-¾ as long as upper; lemma not more 
\par
  than 4 mm ............................................................................... {\b 2. stenostachya}
\par
1 Lower glume more than 3/4 as long as upper; lemma more
\par
  than 4·5 mm
\par
2 Spikelets with 2-3(-4) florets .................................................. {\b 4. memphitica}
\par
2 Spikelets with 5-9(-12) florets
\par
3 Glumes 3- to 5-veined; lemma 5·5-7 mm, obtuse to acute .......... {\b 1. maritima}
\par

\par
158}
\par