{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min57}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min58}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1028}{\nofchars5861}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 3 Glumes 1-veined; lemma 4\'b77-5\'b75 mm, obtuse to emarginate .... }{\b\fs28 3. divaricata}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. C. maritima}{\fs28  (L.) W. Barbey,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Sard. Comp.}{\fs28  72 (1885) (}{\i\fs28 Scleropoa maritima}{\fs28  (L.) Parl.). Stems up to 35 cm, procumbent to erect, rigid. Inflorescence a sparingly branched panicle 1\'b75-12 cm, mostly with 1 spikelet and 1-2 branches at each node; branches and pedicels pulvinate, more or less divaricate at maturity; pedicels 0\'b75-2 mm, smooth, terete. Spikelets 8-16(-22) mm, narrowly ovate, with 5-9(-12) florets. Glumes obtuse to acute, sometimes mucronate, smooth, with thick, prominent veins; lower 4\'b75-5\'b75 mm, 3-veined; upper 5\'b75-6\'b75 mm, 3- to 5-veined. Lemma 5\'b75-7 mm, smooth, obtuse to acute, apiculate, with a wide insertion and partly enfolding the next higher rhachilla-segment and lemma. Rhachilla-segments 1-1\'b75 mm, smooth. 2n = 14. }{\i\fs28 Maritime sands. Mediterranean region and Iberian peninsula}{\fs28 . Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. C. stenostachya}{\fs28  (Boiss.) Stace,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  76}{\fs28 : 352 (1978) (}{\i\fs28 Scleropoa stenostachya}{\fs28  Boiss.). Stems up to 38 cm, ascending to erect, somewhat rigid. Inflorescence a sparingly branched panicle 3-12 cm, mostly with 1-2 spikelets or short branches and 1 longer branch at each node; branches and pedicels pulvinate, divaricate at maturity; pedicels 0\'b74-2 mm, aculeolate, sharply angular. Spikelets 5-14 mm, narrowly linear, with 2-5 florets. Glumes obtuse to emarginate or somewhat laciniate, sometimes mucronate, smooth or slightly scabrid; lower 1\'b73-2\'b76 mm, \'bd-\'be as long as upper, 1-veined; upper 2\'b73-4 mm, 3-veined. Lemma 2\'b77-4 mm, aculeolate on veins distally, obtuse to emarginate or somewhat laciniate, not enfolding the next higher rhachilla-segment, sometimes mucronate. Rhachilla-segments 2\'b74-2\'b79 mm, pubescent. }{\i\fs28 Rocky places on hills. Aegean region}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Samothraki and Karpathos}{\fs28 ). Cr Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. C. divaricata}{\fs28  (Desf.) Ascherson ex W. Barbey,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Sard. Comp.}{\fs28  (1885) (}{\i\fs28 Scleropoa divaricata }{\fs28 (Desf.) Parl.). Stems up to 35 cm, procumbent to erect, somewhat rigid. Inflorescence a rather sparingly branched panicle 3-10 cm, mostly with 1 spikelet and 1-2 branches at each node; branches and pedicels pulvinate, divaricate at maturity; pedicels 0\'b73-1 mm, aculeolate, sharply angular. Spikelets 9-17 mm, linear-oblong, with 5-9(-12) florets. Glumes obtuse to rounded, rarely subacute, not mucronate, smooth or slightly scabrid, with 1 thick, prominent vein; lower 2\'b78-4\'b73 mm; upper 3\'b75-5 mm. Lemma 4\'b77-5\'b75(-7) mm, glabrous, obtuse or rounded to emarginate, apiculate, not enfolding next higher rhachilla-segment. Rhachilla-segments 1\'b72-2 mm, aculeolate.}{\i\fs28  Maritime sands. W. Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  Hs It ?Ju Sa Si.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. C. memphitica}{\fs28  (Sprengel) K. Richter,}{\i\fs28  Pl. Eur.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 77 (1890) (}{\i\fs28 C. scleropoides}{\fs28  Willk.). Stems up to 35 cm, procumbent to erect, somewhat rigid. Inflorescence a sparingly branched panicle 3-15 cm, mostly with 1 spikelet and 1(-2) branches at each node; branches and pedicels pulvinate, strongly divaricate at maturity; pedicels 0\'b73-0\'b76(-1\'b75) mm, aculeolate, sharply angular. Spikelets 7-10\'b75 mm, oblanceolate, with 2-3(-4) florets. Glumes acute to acuminate, apiculate, glabrous, with 1 thick, prominent vein; lower 3\'b75-4\'b73 mm; upper 4\'b75-5\'b75 mm. Lemma 5\'b78-7\'b75 mm (excluding awn), glabrous, acuminate, not enfolding the next higher rhachilla-segment, with an awn 0\'b75-1\'b72 mm. Rhachilla-segments 1\'b75-2\'b75 mm, aculeolate.}{\i\fs28  Maritime sands. S.E. Spain}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Almeria to Cabo de Gata}{\fs28 ). Hs. (}{\i\fs28 Morocco to Pakistan}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 14.       Sphenopus}{\fs28        Trin.
\par }{\fs24  By C.A. Stace. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Slender, more or less glabrous annuals. Leaves flat or almost filiform. Inflorescence a spreading, much-branched panicle; branches filiform, divaricate after anthesis. Spikelets 2-3 mm with 2-5 florets, disarticulating below each floret. Glumes very unequal, largely hyaline, rounded to emarginate, much shorter than lemmas. Lemma 3-veined, keeled on all 3 veins and enclosing palea, rounded to subacute, unawned. Palea shorter than lemma, 2-veined, 2-fid. Anthers 3, c. 0\'b74 mm, slightly exserted at anthesis. Grain oblong-ellipsoid; hilum short, basal.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. S. divaricatus}{\fs28  (Gouan) Reichenb.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Germ. Excurs.}{\fs28  45 (1830) (}{\i\fs28 S. gouanii}{\fs28  Trin.). Stems 1-several, up to 30 cm. Inflorescence up to 10 cm; branches mostly 2 at each node, naked for more than \'bd their length; pedicels mostly 2 at each branch-node mostly 2-4 mm, filiform but gradually thickened distally. Lower glume 0\'b71-0\'b74 mm, veinless; upper glume 0\'b76-1 mm, usually 1-veined. Rhachilla-segments c. 0\'b75 mm, glabrous or minutely aculeolate. Lemma 1\'b75-2 mm, glabrous. 2n = 12. }{\i\fs28 Maritime sands and rocks and saline marshes. Mediterranean region, S Portugal.}{\fs28  Bl Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 15.       Vulpiella}{\fs28           (Trabut) Burollet 
\par }{\fs24  By C.A. Stace. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Like }{\b\fs28 Cutandia}{\fs28  but inflorescence not divaricate at maturity spikelets with 5-12(-18) florets; glumes acuminate, shortly awned; lemma acuminate, with long awns; grain strongly adherent to palea, with rounded edges and inrolled adaxial surface; hilum oblong-linear, sub-basal.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. V. tenuis}{\fs28  (Tineo) Kergu\'e9len, }{\i\fs28 Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b\fs28  124}{\fs28 : 347 (1977) (}{\i\fs28 V. incrassata}{\fs28  (Salzm. ex Loisel.) Burollet,}{\i\fs28  Vulpia incrassata}{\fs28  (Salzm. ex Loisel.) Parl.,}{\i\fs28  Vulpia tenuis}{\fs28  (Tineo) Parl.,}{\i\fs28  Bromus tenuis}{\fs28  Tineo). Stems up to 40 cm, erect. Inflorescence a panicle 2-10 cm, with up to 4 branches at each node; branches and pedicels with a pulvinus but not divaricate; pedicels 0\'b77-4 mm, aculeolate, sharply angular. Spikelets 8-25(-40) mm (excluding awns), obovate. Glumes acuminate, shortly awned, scabrid on midrib, with inconspicuous veins, lower glume 3-4\'b77 mm, 1-veined, the upper 4-6\'b76 mm, 1- to 3-veined. Lemma 6-8 mm aculeolate, acuminate, with awn up to 8 mm.}{\i\fs28  Dry, sandy places. W. Mediterranean region, from Mallorca to S.W. Italy.}{\fs28  Bl Co Ga It Sa Si.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 16.           Poa}{\fs28           L.
\par }{\fs24 By J.R. Edmondson}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets laterally compressed, with (1-)2-10 florets. Glumes keeled membranous, usually 3-veined or the lower 1-veined. Lemma 5-veined, keeled, membranous, awnless or rarely with a short terminal awn. Palea 2-keeled, the keels aculeolate or ciliate. Grain ellipsoid; hilum basal, punctiform.
\par 
\par   Measurements of ligules refer to those of the leaves of the flowering stems unless otherwise stated. Measurements of the panicle refer to well-grown panicles from the middle of the flowering season. Anthers ale measured when mature but undehisced.
\par 
\par   Literature: A. Buschmann,}{\i\fs28  \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  91}{\fs28 : 81-130 (1942). J. Chrtek, }{\i\fs28 Folia Phytotax. Geobot.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Praha}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28 : 197-203 (1969). J. Chrtek & V. Jir\'e1sek,}{\i\fs28  Preslia}{\b\fs28  34}{\fs28 : 40-68 (1962). F. Hermann, }{\i\fs28  Hercynia}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 451-461 (1939). J. Nannfeldt,}{\i\fs28  Symb. Bot. Upsal.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28 ): 1-113 (1935). N. N. Tzvelev, }{\i\fs28 Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Leningrad}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  9}{\fs28 : 47-54 (1972).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Spikelets proliferating 
\par 2 Caespitose
\par 3 Base of stem bulbous
\par 4 Stem 15-40 cm; ligule not more than 3 mm, hyaline;
\par   propagules bulb-like ..................................................................... }{\b\fs28 35. bulbosa}{\fs28 
\par 4 Stem 12-20 cm; ligule 3-6\'b75 mm, milky-white; propagules
\par   leaf-like ................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 38. timoleontis}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 159}
\par }