{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 7 Ovary pubescent at apex; anthers 0·8-2 mm ............................ {\b 5. fasciculata} 
\par
7 Ovary glabrous; anthers 0·6-0·9 mm ................................... {\b 6. membranacea} 
\par
5 Lemma with rounded callus
\par
8 Anthers 3, 0·7-1·3(-1·9) mm, exserted at anthesis;
\par
  lemma 3-5 mm ........................................................................ {\b 12. unilateralis}
\par
8 Anthers 1-3, 0·3-0·8 mm, usually included at anthesis;
\par
  lemma 4-7·8 mm
\par
9 Spikelets with 1-3 fertile florets and 3-7 distal 
\par
  sterile florets; lemma of fertile florets 3(-5)-veined ....................... {\b 11. ciliata}
\par
9 Spikelets with 2-5 fertile florets and 1-2 distal 
\par
  sterile florets; lemma 5-veined
\par
10 Lemma 1·3-1·9 mm wide; lower glume 2·5-5 mm, ½-¾
\par
   as long as upper ......................................................................... {\b 8. bromoides}
\par
10 Lemma 0·8- 1·3 mm wide; lower glume 0·5-3 mm, usually 
\par
   less than ½ as long as upper
\par
11 Inflorescence usually not fully exserted from upper-
\par
   most leaf-sheath; lower glume 1/10-2/5 as long as upper ........... {\b 10. myuros}
\par
11 Inflorescence usually well exserted from uppermost
\par
   leaf-sheath; lower glume ¼-½ as long as upper ............................. {\b 9. muralis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. LORETIA (Duval-Jouve) Boiss. (Loretia Duval-Jouve). Annual or perennial. Florets chasmogamous; anthers (1-)3, 2-5 mm. Inflorescence a panicle or raceme. Spikelets disarticulating below each fertile floret and at the base of the pedicel; pedicels conspicuously dilated distally; most florets fertile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. V. sicula} (C. Presl) Link,{\i  Hort. Berol.}{\b  2}: 272 (1833) (incl.{\i  V. setacea} Parl.). Densely caespitose perennial up to 70 cm. Inflorescence a diffuse or somewhat contracted panicle 5-13 cm; branches erect or patent; pedicels 1-2·5 mm. Spikelets 6·5-9·5 mm (excluding awns). Lower glume 1·5-3·5 mm, 1/5-3/5 as long as upper; upper glume 5·5-10·5 mm (including awn up to 1 mm). Lemma 4·5-7 mm (excluding awn), glabrous to pubescent; callus c. 0·2 mm, rounded. 2n = 14.{\i  Pastures. Mediterranean region, from S.E. France to Sicilia.} Co Ga It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Two varieties can be recognized: var.{\i  setacea} (Parl.) Hackel ({\i V. setacea} Parl.), with taller, laxer habit, longer inflorescences, spikelets and floral parts, and upper glume exceeding (not shorter than) the adjacent lemma, and var. {\i sicula}, which is confined in Europe to Sardegna and Sicilia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. V. geniculata} (L.) Link,{\i  Hort. Berol.}{\b  1}: 148 (1827) ({\i Loretia geniculata} (L.) Duval-Jouve). Caespitose annual up to 60 cm. Inflorescence a diffuse panicle 5-15 cm; branches erect or erectopatent; pedicels 3·5-6·5 mm. Spikelets 6·5-9·5 mm (excluding awns). Lower glume 2·5-5·5 mm, 2/5-3/5 as long as upper; upper glume 6-10·5 mm (including awn up to 1 mm). Lemma 5-7·5 mm (excluding awn), glabrous to ciliate or pubescent; callus c. 0·2 mm, rounded. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry, open habitats. W. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Bl Co Ga Hs ?It Lu Sa ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. V. ligustica} (All.) Link, {\i loc. cit.} (1827). Caespitose annual up to 60 cm. Inflorescence a diffuse panicle 5-13 cm; branches patent or nodding; pedicels 1·5-5·5 mm, often pendent at maturity. Spikelets 6·5-10(-16) mm (excluding awns). Lower glume 0·2-0·8 mm, less than ½ as long as upper; upper glume 8-12(-18) mm (including awn up to 2 mm). Lemma 5-8·5 mm (excluding awn), glabrous to pubescent; callus c. 0·2 mm, rounded. Ovary pubescent at apex. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry, open habitats. Mediterranean region, eastwards from S. France.} Co Cr Ga It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. V. alopecuros} (Schousboe) Dumort., {\i Obs. Gram. Belg.} 100 (1824). Caespitose annual up to 90 cm, usually stiffly erect. Inflorescence a rigid raceme 5-20 cm, with usually 1 spikelet at each node but up to 3 at lower nodes; pedicels 3-5 mm, erect except at anthesis. Spikelets 10-21 mm (excluding awns). Lower glume 0·8-2·7 mm, less than 1/6 as long as upper; upper glume 9·5-22 mm (including awn up to 5 mm). Lemma 9-15 mm (excluding awn), glabrous to ciliate or pubescent; callus c. 0·5-0·8 mm, pointed, antrosely hispid. Ovary glabrous. 2n = 14.{\i  Maritime sands and other open, sandy habitats. S. & W. Portugal, S. Spain.} Hs ?It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Particularly variable in the pubescence of the lemma and glumes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. MONACHNE Dumort. Annual. Florets cleistogamous or the anthers just exserted at anthesis; anthers 1-3, 0·5-2 mm. Inflorescence a panicle, rarely sub-racemose. Spikelets disarticulating below each fertile floret or additionally at the base of the pedicel; pedicels dilated distally; spikelets with a distinct apical group of small, sterile florets.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. V. fasciculata} (Forskål) Samp.,{\i  Lista Esp. Herb. Port.} 24 (1913) ({\i V. membranacea} auct., non (L.) Dumort., {\i V. uniglumis} (Aiton) Dumort.). Stems 8-50 cm, rigid, erect to decumbent. Inflorescence a rigid raceme or sparingly branched panicle 3-11 cm, with up to 6 spikelets at lower nodes, slightly exserted from to partly included in uppermost leaf-sheath; pedicels 3-7 mm, dilated distally, erect. Spikelets 10-18 mm (excluding awns), disarticulating below each fertile floret and at the base of the pedicel; proximal 2-5 florets fertile; distal 3-6 florets much smaller and sterile. Lower glume 0·1-2·6 mm, less than 1/6 as long as upper; upper glume 10-30 mm (including awn 3-12 mm). Lemma 8-18 mm, with an awn up to twice as long, glabrous or minutely scabrid; callus 0·5-0·8 mm, pointed, minutely antrorsely scabrid, less than ½ as long as rhachilla-segments. Anthers 1-3, 0·8-2 mm, slightly exserted at anthesis. Ovary pubescent at apex. 2n = 28. {\i Maritime sands and other open, sandy habitats. Coasts of S. & W. Europe, northwards to} 56° 30'{\i  in Scotland.} Al Bl Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hb Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. V. membranacea} (L.) Dumort., {\i Obs. Gram. Belg.} 100 (1824) ({\i V. longiseta} (Brot.) Hackel). Like {\b 5} but stems usually more slender; inflorescence usually well exserted from uppermost leaf-sheath; spikelets 9-15 mm (excluding awns); lower glume 0·2-3 mm; lemma 7-15 mm (excluding awn); anthers 0·6-0·9 mm; ovary glabrous. 2n = 14.{\i  Open, sandy habitats. W. Europe, northwards to} 50° 30' {\i in N.W. France.} †Be Co Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. V. fontquerana} Melderis & Stace,{\i  Collect. Bot.} ({\i Barcelona}) {\b 7}: 782 (1968). Stems 4-30 cm, slender, erect to decumbent. Inflorescence an erect raceme or sparingly branched panicle 2·5-7 cm, with up to 5 spikelets at lower nodes, usually exserted from uppermost leaf-sheath; pedicels 2-4 mm, slightly dilated distally, erect. Spikelets 6-10 mm (excluding awns), disarticulating below each fertile floret; proximal 1-2(-3) florets fertile; distal 2-3 florets much smaller and sterile. Lower glume 2-4 mm, ¼-½ as long as upper; upper glume 4-8 mm, with awn up to 4 mm. Lemma 4-8 mm, with awn usually 3-6 times as long, glabrous or minutely scabrid; callus 1-1·5 mm, pointed, antrorsely hispid, about as long as rhachilla-segments. Anthers 3, 0·5-0·8 mm, slightly exserted at anthesis. Ovary glabrous. 2n = 14.{\i  Fixed, open dunes in} Pinus pinea {\i forest. • S.W. Spain} ({\i near Sanlúcar de Barrameda, prov. Cádiz}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. VULPIA. Annual. Florets cleistogamous or the anthers just exserted at anthesis; anthers 1(-3), 0·3-0·8(-1·8) mm. Inflorescence a panicle, rarely subracemose. Spikelets disarticulating below each fertile floret; pedicels not or scarcely dilated; spikelets with most florets fertile or with an apical group of sterile but not smaller florets.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. V. bromoides} (L.) S. F. Gray,{\i  Nat. Arr. Brit. Pl.}{\b  2}: 124 (1821) ({\i V. sciuroides} (Roth) C C. Gmelin, {\i V. dertonensis} (All.)
\par

\par
155}
\par