{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. perenne} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 83 (1753). Perennial (3-)8-90 cm; stems with 2-4 nodes. Leaf-blades 5-14(-30) cm × 2-4 mm, acute, glabrous, shiny beneath, flat or folded in young shoots; ligule up to 2·5 mm; auricles inconspicuous or absent. Spike 3-31 cm. Rhachis flexuous, slender, glabrous or scabridulous on the angles. Spikelets 5-23 × 1-7 mm, with 2-10 florets. Glumes lanceolate or narrowly oblong, 1/3 as long as to slightly longer than the spikelet. Lemma oblong to oblong-lanceolate, usually unawned, not turgid at maturity. Mature caryopsis more than 3 times as long as wide. 2n = 14+1-3 B.{\i  Pastures, meadows, roadsides and waste places; widely cultivated for forage} ({\i perennial ryegrass}). {\i Almost throughout Europe but often introduced in the north.} All except Sb but only as a casual or recent introduction in Bl Fa Fe Is.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Hybridizes frequently with {\b 2} ({\i L. × hybridum} Hausskn.), {\b 3} and {\b 5}. The hybrid with {\b 2} is highly fertile, widespread throughout Europe and back-crosses with the parental species. It is an annual or short-lived perennial with the young leaf-blades convolute and the spikelets with 3-9 florets.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. multiflorum} Lam.,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  3}: 621 (1779) ({\i L. italicum} A. Braun). Annual, biennial or short-lived perennial up to 130 cm; stems with 4-5 nodes. Leaf-blades 11-22 cm × 3-8 mm, acute to obtuse, glabrous and shiny beneath, usually scabridulous above, convolute in young shoots; ligule up to 4 mm; auricles usually present. Spike 15-33(-45) cm. Rhachis slender, flexuous, scabridulous. Spikelets 8-31 × 2-10 mm, with (5-)11-22 florets. Glumes lanceolate to narrowly oblong, ¼-½(-¾) as long as the spikelet. Lemma oblong to oblong-lanceolate, usually awned, not turgid at maturity; awn up to 15 mm. Mature caryopsis more than 3 times as long as wide. 2n = 14.{\i  S. Europe; widely cultivated for forage elsewhere and naturalized in meadows and on roadsides and field-margins} ({\i Italian ryegrass}). Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si Tu [Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ge Hb He Ho Hu No Po Rs (C, W, K) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Hybridizes freely with {\b 1}, {\b 3} ({\i L.} ×{\i  hubbardii} Jansen & Wachter),{\b  4} and {\b 5}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. rigidum} Gaudin,{\i  Agrost. Helv.}{\b  1}: 334 (1811). Annual (6-)18-45(-70) cm; stems with 2-4 nodes. Leaf-blades up to 17 cm × 5-8 mm, acute to obtuse, glabrous beneath, glabrous or scabridulous above; ligule up to 1·5 mm; auricles inconspicuous or absent. Spike 3-30 cm. Rhachis usually somewhat rigid, slender to very thick, smooth to scabrid. Spikelets 5-18 × 1-3 (-7) mm, with (2-)5-8(-11) florets, often partly or completely concealed by the glumes in the concavities of the rhachis. Glumes lanceolate-oblong, obtuse, rarely acute to acuminate, (½-)¾ as long as to slightly longer than the spikelet. Lemma oblong to oblong-lanceolate, usually unawned, rarely with a subterminal awn up to 10 mm, not turgid at maturity. Mature caryopsis more than 3 times as long as wide.{\i  Rocky hillsides, sandy ground and waste places. S. Europe; casual elsewhere.} Al Bu Co Cr Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rigidum} ({\i L. strictum} C. Presl): Rhachis (0·5-)1-1·5(-2) mm wide at lowest nodes of the inflorescence. Glumes herbaceous to somewhat indurate. Lemma 4·5-8·5 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lepturoides} (Boiss.) Sennen & Mauricio,{\i  Cat. Fl. Rif Or.} 135 (1933) ({\i L. loliaceum} (Bory & Chaub.) Hand.-Mazz.): Rhachis 1·5-3·5 mm wide at the lowest nodes of the inflorescence. Glumes indurate. Lemma 3·2-5·5(-7) mm.{\i  From Sicilia to Krym}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  L. subulatum} Vis., {\i Fl. Dalm.}{\b  1}: 90 (1842) was described from Jugoslavia; it is doubtfully distinct from {\b 3}({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. temulentum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 83 (1753) ({\i L. arvense} With.). Annual 20-120 cm. Stems with 3-5 nodes. Leaf-blades up to 27 cm × 1-12 mm, acuminate, scabridulous at the apex and margins above, glabrous and glossy to more or less scabridulous beneath; ligule 0·5-2·7 mm; auricles conspicuous to absent. Spike 5-40 cm. Rhachis rigid, thickened, glabrous. Spikelets 8-28 × 3-8 mm, with 2-15 florets. Glumes 7-30 mm, lanceolate, ¾-1½ times as long as the spikelet. Lemma of lower florets 4·6-8·5 mm, elliptical to ovate, very turgid at maturity, usually with a scabrid awn up to 23 mm. Mature caryopsis (3·8-)4·2-7 mm, 2-3 times as long as wide. 2n = 14.{\i  Perhaps native in the Mediterranean region; formerly widespread in most of Europe as a weed of cereal crops} ({\i especially} Avena),{\i  but now only a casual ruderal in most of N. & C. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. remotum} Schrank,{\i  Baier. Fl.}{\b  1}: 382 (1789). Like {\b 4} but stems and rhachis shorter and more slender; glumes 5-16 mm; lemma of lower florets 3·5-4·5(-5·4) mm, usually unawned; mature caryopsis 3·2-4·5 mm. 2n = 14+1B.{\i  Of uncertain origin. Formerly widespread in most of Europe as a weed of Linum-fields; now only a casual ruderal, except in some parts of E. & E.C. Europe.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    It is impossible to provide detailed geographical data for{\b  4} and {\b 5}, as most Floras do not distinguish between old and recent records.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 6.   Vulpia}     C.C. Gmelin   
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.A. Stace & R. Cotton. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or rarely caespitose perennials; branches all intravaginal. Leaves flat, convolute when dry. Inflorescence a panicle or rarely a raceme, usually more or less secund. Spikelets with 3-12 florets, sometimes with a distal group of sterile florets, disarticulating variously below each fertile floret and at the base of the pedicel. Glumes very unequal; lower often minute, veinless or 1-veined; upper 1- to 3-veined, acute to acuminate, awned or not. Lemma (3-)5-veined, rounded dorsally, gradually tapered into a long, straight awn, chartaceous, with hyaline margins. Palea about equalling lemma, 2-veined, 2-fid. Anthers 1-3. Grain narrowly ellipsoid, adherent to palea; hilum linear, at least ¾ as long as grain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    In this account measurements of the lemmas refer to those of the two basal florets in any spikelet, unless otherwise stated, and measurements of the glumes are taken from spikelets which ale not apical on the inflorescence or its branches.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 4 intergeneric hybrids (×{\i  Festulpia} Melderis ex stace & R. Cotton) occur between {\b 5}, {\b 8} and {\b 10} and {\i Festuca rubra} L. and{\i  F. juncifolia} St-Amans in mainly maritime areas of England and Wales. They are sterile perennials.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Literature: R Cotton & C.A.Stace,{\i  Genetica}{\b  46}: 235-255 (1976); {\i Bot. Not.}{\b  130}: 173-187 (1977).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Florets chasmogamous; anthers usually 3, 2-5 mm
\par
2 Perennial; lower glume 1/6-2/3 as long as upper ............................. {\b 1. sicula}
\par
2 Annual
\par
3 Lower glume at least 1/3 as long as upper ................................ {\b 2. geniculata}
\par
3 Lower glume less than 1/6 as long as upper
\par
4 Spikelets at least 10 mm (excluding awns); ovary glabrous .... {\b 4. alopecuros}
\par
4 Spikelets not more than 10 mm (excluding awns); ovary
\par
  pubescent at apex .......................................................................... {\b 3. ligustica} 
\par
1 Florets cleistogamous or the anthers just protruding at
\par
  anthesis; anthers 1-3, 0·4-2 mm
\par
5 Lemma with pointed callus
\par
6 Lemma 4-8 mm (excluding awn); callus 1-1·5 mm, 
\par
  antrosely hispid ........................................................................ {\b 7. fontquerana}
\par
6 Lemma 7-18 mm (excluding awn); callus less than 1 mm,
\par
  minutely scabrid
\par

\par
154}
\par