{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 or smooth above. Leaves 0·5-0·7 mm wide, scabrid above, glaucous, usually pruinose; veins 5; sclerenchyma forming a continuous or somewhat interrupted ring; ribs 3; sheaths closed in the lower 1/5(-1/4), glabrous, sometimes weakly scabrid. Panicle 4-9·5 cm, rather dense, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 7-8·5 mm, with 4-7 florets, glaucous, violet-tinged. Upper glume 4·2-5·6 × 1·2-1·5 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, somewhat ciliate. Lemma 4·9-6·5 × 1·6-2 mm, oblong-lanceolate; awn often as long as lemma.{\i  Mountain meadows. • N.E. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 146. F. polita} (Halácsy) Tzvelev,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  9}: 43 (1972) ({\i F. ovina} var.{\i  polita }Halácsy). Stems 14-52 cm, smooth. Leaves 0·4-0·85(-1·1) mm wide, rigid, more or less curved, smooth or nearly so; veins 7; sclerenchyma forming a continuous or slightly interrupted ring, thickened at the base; ribs 3; sheaths closed in the lower 1/4 to nearly 1/3, usually smooth. Panicle (2·5-)4·5-6·5(-7·5) cm, usually dense, the branches smooth or weakly scabrid. Spikelets 7·5-9·7 mm, with (3-)4-6 florets, glaucous. Upper glume (4·4-)5-6·1 × 1·5-1·8 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma (5·2-)5·4-7·5 × 1·7-2·5 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate; awn 1/2(-2/3) as long as lemma. •{\i  Greece and Kriti.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 147. F. curvula} Gaudin,{\i  Agrost. Helv.}{\b  1}: 239 (1811). Densely caespitose. Stems 25-40(-60) cm, smooth or scabrid above. Leaves (0·6-)0·8-1·1(-1·35) mm wide; sclerenchyma-ring unequally thickened, sometimes interrupted; ribs 3-5; sheaths closed for up to 1/3 of their length. Panicle 5-11 cm, rather dense, the branches scabrid. Spikelets (7·5-)8-11 with (3-)4-6 florets, green to glaucous. Upper glume 4-6·3 × (1·2-)1·4-2 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, glabrous or ciliate or scabrid above. Lemma lanceolate, acuminate; awn (1/3)1/2 as long as lemma.{\i  Dry grassland, rocks and screes. • From the Pyrenees to the E. Alps.} Au Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Upper glume with a distinct scarious margin ............... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b crassifolia}
\par
1 Upper glume without a scarious margin
\par
2 Leaves usually not more than half as long as stems;
\par
  sclerenchyma-ring thickened at midrib and margin, often
\par
  interrupted .......................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b curvula}
\par
2 Leaves usually about as long as stems; sclerenchyma-
\par
  ring not or scarcely thickened at midrib and margin,
\par
  not interrupted ............................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b cagiriensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b curvula}: Leaves slightly compressed laterally, smooth or slightly scabrid, pruinose; veins 7-9. Spikelets 8-9·7 mm, pruinose. Lemma (5·5-)6-7·5 × 2-2·5 mm, scabrid or pubescent above. 2n = 56+0-1B.{\i  Alps, eastwards to} c. 10°{\i  E.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b crassifolia} (Gaudin) Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 328 (1978) ({\i F. glauca} var.{\i  crassifolia }Gaudin): Leaves not compressed laterally, scabrid above, pungent, usually not pruinose; veins 7-9; sclerenchyma-ring not thickened, continuous. Spikelets (7·5-)8-9·1 mm. Lemma (5-)5·5-7·5 × 2·1-2·6 mm, usually glabrous. 2n = 56+1B.{\i  S.W. Switzerland} ({\i Valais}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b cagiriensis} (Timb.-Lagr.) Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i F. cagiriensis }Timb.-Lagr.): Leaves not compressed laterally, smooth, pruinose; veins 7-9(-11). Spikelets 9-11 mm, pruinose. Lemma (5·8-)6·9-7·1 × 2·1-2·2 mm, glabrous or ciliate.{\i  Pyrenees and mountains of S.C. France}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 148. F. pachyphylla} Degen ex E. I. Nyárády, {\i Contr. Bot.} ({\i Cluj}){\b  1962}: 146 (1962). Densely caespitose. Stems 27-53(-60) cm, smooth or weakly scabrid above. Leaves (0·4-)0·9-1(-1·5) mm wide, glaucous, strongly carinate, smooth; veins 7-9(-12); sclerenchyma in 3 stout strands at the angles and 2 or more smaller lateral strands; ribs 3-5; sheaths open almost to the base or closed for up to 1/3 their length, glabrous or hairy. Panicle 5·5-8 cm, dense, the branches more or less hairy. Spikelets 8·1-9·1 mm, with (3-)4-5 florets, glaucous, violet-tinged. Upper glume 4-5·1 × 1·6-2·1 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, with a narrow scarious margin. Lemma (5-)5·4-6·5 × 2·2-2·4 mm lanceolate, acuminate; awn 1/3-1/2 as long as lemma.{\i  Rocky hillsides, }1400-2000{\i  m. • W. part of S. Carpathians. }Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 149. F. igoschiniae} Tzvelev,{\i  Bot. Zur.}{\b  56}: 1254 (1971) ({\i F. kryloviana} auct., non Reverdatto). Densely caespitose. Stems 20-50 cm, smooth or slightly scabrid above. Leaves (0·4-)0·55-0·85(-1) mm wide, nearly smooth, obtuse, glaucous; veins 7(-10); sclerenchyma in 3 rather slender strands, with several thin intermediate strands, rarely confluent; ribs 3(-5); sheaths closed in the lower 2/5-2/3, smooth or scabridulous. Panicle (2·5-) 5-8(-10) cm, rather dense, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 7·2-7·3 mm, with 4-5 florets, pale green, violet-tinged. Upper glume 4·1-4·6 × 1·2-1·4 mm, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, acuminate, with a distinct scarious margin. Lemma 5-5·5 × 1·7-2·1 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, smooth or scabrid above; awn 2-2·7 mm.{\i  Mountain meadows and scrub. • S. Ural}. Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 150. F. vivipara} (L.) Sm.,{\i  Fl. Brit.}{\b  1}: 114 (1800) ({\i F. ovina} var. {\i vivipara} L.). Densely caespitose. Stems 10-30(-43) cm. Leaves 0·3-0·7(-0·8) mm wide, scabrid or smooth, green or glaucous; veins 5-7(-9); sclerenchyma in a continuous or slightly interrupted ring; ribs 1(-3); sheaths usually closed in the lower 1/4-1/3(-2/3), usually glabrous. Panicle usually 3-6 cm, the branches scabrid or pubescent. Spikelets with at least the upper florets proliferating, the lower sometimes sexual, with awned lemmas. 2n = 28 (21, 35, 42, 49, 56).{\i  Tundra, moorland and mountain cliffs. Arctic and N.E. Europe, southwards to S.W. Ireland. }Br Fa Fe Hb Is No Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    In the British Isles the leaves of this species resemble those of {\i F. tenuifolia,} while elsewhere they are more like those of{\i  F. ovina}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 151. F. glauca} Vill., {\i Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  2}: 99 (1787). Densely caespitose. Stems 18-46 cm, glabrous. Leaves 0·5-0·85 mm wide, erect, smooth, glaucous, pruinose, with long hairs on upper surface; veins 7(-9); sclerenchyma in a continuous or slightly interrupted ring; ribs 1(-3); sheaths closed in the lower 1/3-2/5. Panicle 4·4-5·5 cm, very dense, erect, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 6-8 mm, with 4-5 florets, strongly pruinose or not, glabrous or hairy. Upper glume 3·5-4·2(-5·1) × 1·4-1·7 mm, ovate, subobtuse. Lemma 4·2-4·7 × 1·7-2·5 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate; awn 1/3 as long as lemma. 2n = 42.{\i  Siliceous rocks,} 630-700{\i  m. • S. France} ({\i Roussillon}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 152. F. vasconcensis} (Markgr.-Dannenb.) Auquier & Kerguelen,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  123}: 320 (1976) ({\i F. ovina} subsp.{\i  vasconcensis} Markgr.-Dannenb.). Densely caespitose, sometimes with creeping rhizomes. Stems 24-50 cm, usually pubescent above. Leaves (0·4-)0·5-0·9(-1·2) mm wide, usually smooth, rarely pruinose, usually curved; veins 7(-9); sclerenchyma in a continuous ring; ribs 1(-3); sheaths closed in the lower 1/4-1/3(-1/2), whitish, glabrous or shortly hairy. Panicle 5·5-10·5 cm, often interrupted, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 6·9-8·1 mm, with 3-4(-6) florets, green or glaucous, sometimes violet-tinged. Upper glume 3·3-4·6 × 1-1·7 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 4·6-5·5 × 1·6-2 mm, oblong-lanceolate to lanceolate, acuminate, narrowly scarious, glabrous or ciliate; awn 0·1-1·8 mm. 2n = 42.{\i  Maritime sands. • S.W. France and N.W. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 153. F. durissima} (Hackel) Kerguélen,{\i  Lejeunia }nov. ser., {\b 75}: 153 (1975). Densely caespitose. Stems 25-48 cm, smooth.
\par

\par
150}
\par