{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Gola). Stems 6-50 cm, usually erect. Inflorescence a sparingly branched, usually erect panicle or rarely a raceme 1-11 cm, usually well exserted from uppermost leaf-sheath; pedicels 0·5-3·5 mm. Spikelets 6·5-11·5 mm (excluding awns), disarticulating below each fertile floret; most florets fertile; distal 1-2(-3) florets gradually reduced and male or sterile. Lower glume 2·5-5 mm, ½-¾ as long as upper; upper glume 4·5-9 mm (including awn up to 2 mm). Lemma 4·5-7·5 mm, with an awn usually about as long, 1·3-1·9 mm wide, finely 5-veined; callus c. 0·2 mm, rounded, glabrous. Anthers 1(-3), 0·4-0·7(-1·8) mm, usually included at anthesis. Ovary glabrous. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry, open habitats. S., W. & C. Europe, northwards to }59°{\i  in Scotland, but doubtfully native in much of E.C. Europe.} All except Cr Fa Fe Is No Rs (N, B, C, K, E) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. V. muralis} (Kunth) Nees,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  19}: 694 (1847) ({\i V. broteri }Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  V. dertonensis} var. broteri (Boiss. & Reuter) Hegi,{\i  V. sciuroides} var.{\i  longearistata} Willk., {\i V. dertonensis }var.{\i  longearistata} (Willk.) Aznav.). Stems 10-60 cm, usually erect. Inflorescence a sparingly branched, usually erect panicle or rarely a raceme 3-15 cm, usually well exserted from uppermost leaf-sheath; pedicels 0·5-3·5 mm. Spikelets 5-10 mm (excluding awns), disarticulating below each fertile floret; most florets fertile; distal 1-2(-3) florets gradually reduced and male or sterile. Lower glume 1-3(-6) mm, ¼-½ as long as upper; upper glume 4-8(-10) mm (including awn up to 2 mm). Lemma 4-7(-10) mm, with an awn usually 2-3 times as long, 0·8-1·3 mm wide, finely 5-veined; callus c. 0·2 mm, rounded, glabrous. Anthers 1(-3), 0·3-0·7 mm, usually included at anthesis. Ovary glabrous. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry, open habitats. S. Europe.} Az Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. V. myuros} (L.) C. C. Gmelin,{\i  Fl. Bad.}{\b  1}: 8 (1805) (incl.{\i  V. megalura} (Nutt.) Rydb.). Stems 8-65 cm, usually erect. Inflorescence a sparingly branched panicle or a raceme 5-35 cm, erect or slightly nodding, usually partly included in uppermost leaf-sheath; pedicels 0·4-2 mm. Spikelets 6-10·5 mm (excluding awns), disarticulating below each fertile floret; most florets fertile; distal 1-2(-3) florets gradually reduced and male or sterile. Lower glume 0·4-2·5 mm, 1/10-2/5 as long as upper; upper glume 2·5-6·5 mm (including up to 1 mm). Lemma 4·5-7·5 mm, with an awn usually 1-2 times as long, 0·8-1·3 mm wide, finely 5-veined; callus c. 0·2 mm, rounded, glabrous. Anthers 1(-3), 0·4-0·8(-1·3) mm, usually included at anthesis. Ovary glabrous. 2n = 42. {\i Dry, open habitats. W., C. & S. Europe, northwards to Ireland, S.W. Poland and W. Kazakhstan; casual further north.} All except Da Fa Fe Is No Rs (N, B, C) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Often casual or naturalized outside its native area of distribution, the precise limits of which are obscure.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variants with ciliate lemmas have usually been recognized as{\b  V. megalura }(Nutt.) Rydb.,{\i  Bull. Torrey Bot. Club}{\b  36}: 538 (1909), but they should be treated only as formae, as should plants with pubescent lemmas.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. V. ciliata} Dumort.,{\i  Obs. Gram. Belg.} 100 (1824) ({\i Festuca ciliata} Danth. ex DC., non Gouan). Stems 3-45 cm, usually erect. Inflorescence a sparingly branched, erect or sometimes slightly nodding panicle or raceme 3-20 cm; pedicels 0·2-2 mm. Spikelets 5-10·5 mm (excluding awns), disarticulating below each fertile floret; proximal 1-3 florets fertile; distal 3-7 florets sterile, usually with longer and wider lemmas with shorter awns. Lower glume 0·1-1 mm, less than ¼ as long as upper; upper glume 1·5-4 mm, acute, but apex often breaking off and appearing truncate or obtuse. Fertile lemma 4-6·5 mm, with an awn usually 1-2 times as long, finely 3-veined or with 2 extra short veins, glabrous to pubescent; callus c. 0·1 mm, rounded, glabrous. Anthers 1(-3), 0·4-0·6(-1·6) mm, included at anthesis. Ovary glabrous.{\i  Dry, open habitats. W. & S. Europe, northwards to} 53°{\i  in E. England.} Al Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Rm Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ciliata}: Spikelets mostly 7-10·5 mm. Fertile lemma 5-6·5 mm, usually pubescent on the dorsal midline and sparsely ciliate; sterile lemma up to 8 mm (excluding awn), usually densely ciliate. 2n = 28.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except the north-west}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ambigua} (Le Gall) Stace & Auquier,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 384 (1978) ({\i Festuca ambigua} Le Gall,{\i  V. ambigua} (Le Gall) More): Spikelets mostly 5-7 mm. Fertile lemma 4-5 mm glabrous; sterile lemma up to 6 mm (excluding awn), glabrous. 2n = 28.{\i  Maritime and submaritime sand and shingle. From S. England and Belgium to N.W. France}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The two subspecies are largely allopatric, but overlap in N.W. France; subsp. ({\b a}) is naturalized in S.E. England. Glabrous or subglabrous variants of subsp. ({\b a}) occur scattered throughout its range; these can usually be distinguished from subsp. ({\b b}) by the slightly larger size of their floral parts.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. NARDURUS (Reichenb.) stace (Nardurus Reichenb.). Annual. Anthers 3, 0·7-1·3(-1·9) mm, slightly exserted at anthesis. Inflorescence racemose or with a few branches near base. Spikelets disarticulating below each fertile floret; pedicels not or scarcely dilated; most florets fertile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. V. unilateralis} (L.) Stace, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 350 (1978) ({\i Triticum unilaterale} L., {\i Festuca maritima} L.,{\i  Nardurus maritimus} (L.) Murb., {\i N. unilateralis} (L.) Boiss.,{\i  N. tenuiflorus} (Schrader) Boiss.,{\i  N. tenellus }Reichenb. ex Godron; incl.{\i  N. montanus} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  N. krausei} (Regel) V. Krecz. & Bobrov). Stems 3-45 cm, usually erect. Inflorescence a rather rigid, secund raceme 1-16 cm, sometimes with short branches at lower nodes; pedicels 0·7-1·6 mm, usually erect. Spikelets 4-8 mm (excluding awns). Lower glume 1·5-3·5 mm, ½-¾ as long as upper; upper glume 3-5 mm. Lemma 3-5 mm, usually with an awn about as long or longer, sometimes more or less unawned, finely 5-veined, glabrous to pubescent; callus c. 0·1 mm, rounded, glabrous. Ovary glabrous. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry, open habitats. S. & W. Europe, northwards to }52° 45' {\i N. in C. England.} Be Br Bu Co Ga He Hs It Ju †Lu Sa Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 7.        Ctenopsis}       De Not.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.A. Stace. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves narrow, convolute. Inflorescence a secund raceme or sometimes sparingly branched. Spikelets with 3-14 florets, disarticulating below each floret. Glumes very unequal, the lower very short, the upper 1- to 3-veined, rounded on back. Lemma 5-veined, rounded on back, short- to long-awned, chartaceous, with narrow hyaline margin. Palea equalling or nearly equalling lemma, 2-veined, 2-fid. Anthers 3. Grain narrowly ellipsoid, more or less free from palea, glabrous; hilum oblong, sub-basal, less than ½ as long as grain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Ligule of upper cauline leaves not more than 0·5 mm;
\par
  anthers 1·5-2·5 mm, lower glume acuminate to subulate ........... {\b 1. delicatula}
\par
Ligule of upper cauline leaves 0·5-1·5 mm; anthers
\par
  0·5-1·5 mm; lower glume acute to obtuse ................................. {\b 2. gypsophila}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. delicatula} (Lag.) Paunero,{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  21}: 365 (1963) ({\i Vulpia delicatula} (Lag.) Dumort.). Stems up to 40 cm,
\par

\par
156}
\par