{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 0·6-1·2 mm wide, smooth, more or less pungent and curved, rigid, pale green or glaucous, sometimes pruinose; veins 7-9; sclerenchyma forming a continuous, usually rather thick ring; ribs 1(-3), rarely with single sclerenchyma-cells above; sheaths closed in the lower 1/4-1/3(-1/2), glabrous. Panicle up to 6 cm, dense, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 8-10 mm, with 3-4(-5) florets, glaucous, sometimes violet-tinged. Upper glume 4·5-5·7 × (1·2-)1·4-1·9 mm, lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 5·5-7·1 × 2-2·5 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, scabrid or ciliate above; awn c. ½ as long as lemma. 2n = 42, 56.{\i  Alpine meadows. • C. Spain, E. & C. Pyrenees, Cévennes.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 154. F. indigesta} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 91 (1838). Densely caespitose; non-flowering shoots intravaginal. Leaves rarely pruinose, short, recurved, hard, usually pungent; veins (5-)7(-9); sclerenchyma in a continuous ring; sheaths usually closed in the lower ¼-½, rarely open, sometimes hairy. Panicle up to 7 cm, dense. Spikelets usually glabrous, sometimes pruinose. Glumes and lemma usually with a distinct scarious margin; awn 1/5-1/3 as long as lemma.{\i  Rocks, screes and mountain meadows. S.W. Europe, extending to Elba; one station in W. Ireland.} Co Ga Hb Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems 30-40 cm; sheaths open to the base; spikelets 9-
\par
  11 mm, upper glume subulate-lanceolate ....................... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b litardierei}
\par
1 Stems not more than 30 cm; sheaths closed in at least 
\par
  the lower ¼; spikelets 6-8(-9·7) mm; upper glume 
\par
  lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate
\par
2 Stems scabrid or pubescent above; leaves scabrid at 
\par
  least above
\par
3 Leaves 0·5-0·8 mm wide, scabrid above; awn 1·5-2 mm  ({\b e}) subsp. {\b molinieri}
\par
3 Leaves 0·45-0·55 mm wide, scabrid throughout; 
  awn 1·25-1·45 mm .......................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b alleizettei}
\par
2 Stems smooth or nearly so; leaves smooth
\par
4 Stems 10-23 cm; leaves 0·35-0·5(-0·75) mm wide, usually
\par
  with 1 rib; spikelets (5·5-)6·3-7·5 mm; upper glume 
\par
  ovate-lanceolate ........................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b aragonensis}
\par
4 Stems 20-30 cm, leaves at least 0·6 mm wide, with 3 ribs
\par
  spikelets 7·8-8·7 mm; upper glume lanceolate
\par
5 Leaves with 7(-9) veins; upper glume 4·8-5·2 mm .......... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b indigesta}
\par
5 Leaves with 5 veins; upper glume 3·6-4·2 mm .............. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b hackeliana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b indigesta}: Stems 20-30 cm, smooth or nearly so. Leaves 0·6-1·1 mm wide, pale green, smooth; veins 7(-9); ribs 3; sheaths closed to halfway, sometimes hairy. Panicle 3-7 cm, the branches somewhat scabrid or densely hairy. Spikelets 8-9·7 mm, with (3-)4-6(-7) florets. Upper glume 4·8-5·2 × 1·6-2 mm, lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma (5-)6-7·1 × 2·1-2·8 mm, lanceolate, acuminate; awn (1-)1·5-2·3 mm. 2n = 42.{\i  Mountains of N.W. Portugal and Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b hackeliana} (St-Yves) Markgr.-Dannenb., {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 328 (1978) ({\i F. ovina} subsp.{\i  indigesta }var.{\i  hackeliana} St-Yves): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but leaves with 5 veins; sheaths closed to the mouth; spikelets 7·8-8 mm; upper glume 3·6-4·2 × 1·6-1·7 mm; lemma 5·2-5·6 × 2·1-2·4 mm. 2n = 42. •{\i  Mountains of S. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b aragonensis} (Willk.) Kerguélen, {\i Lejeunia }nov. ser., {\b 75}: 158 (1975). Stems 10-23 cm, smooth or nearly so. Leaves (0·35-)0·5(-0·75) mm wide, glaucous, smooth; veins 7; ribs 1(-3); sheaths closed in the lower 1/3-1/2. Panicle 2-5 cm, the branches shortly hairy. Spikelets (5·5-)6·3-7·5 mm, with 4-5 florets. Upper glume 3-3·8 × 1·2-1·5 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 4-5 × 1·6-1·75(-1·9) mm, lanceolate, acuminate; awn 1·3-1·5 mm. •{\i  Mountains of Spain, N. Portugal and S. W. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b alleizettei} (Litard.) Kerguélen, {\i loc. cit.} (1975): Stems 9-18 cm, pubescent above. Leaves 0·45-0·55 mm wide, not pruinose, scabrid and with rigid hairs c. 1 mm; veins 7; ribs 1(-3); sheaths closed in the lower 1/3-1/2, minutely hairy. Panicle 2-4·5 cm, lax, the branches hispid-scabrid. Spikelets 6 mm, with 4-5 florets. Upper glume 3 × 1 mm, broadly lanceolate. Lemma 4 × 1·3 mm, broadly lanceolate; awn 1·25-1·45 mm. •{\i  Foothills of C. Pyrenees}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b molinieri} (Litard.) Kerguélen,{\i  op. cit.} 159 (1975): Stems 10-17 cm, densely pubescent above. Leaves 0·5-0·7(-0·8) mm wide, glaucous, more or less scabrid above and pubescent below; veins (5-)7(-9); ribs 1, or 2-3 and indistinct; sheaths closed in the lower 1/4-1/3, glabrous or hairy. Panicle 2-3 cm, the branches shortly hairy. Spikelets 6-7 mm, with 3-4 florets. Upper glume 3·5-4 × 1·4-1·5 mm, ovate-lanceolate. Lemma 3·9-4·2 × 1·75-2·1 mm, lanceolate, hispid-scabrid and ciliate above; awn 1·5-2 mm. •{\i  From the Pyrenees to W. Ireland}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b litardierei} (St-Yves) Kerguélen,{\i  loc. cit.} (1975): Stems 30-40(-60) cm, smooth, scabrid or puberulent above. Leaves 0·5-0·9 mm wide, glaucous, pruinose, usually scabrid at least above; veins 7; ribs 1(-3); sheaths open to the base, smooth or scabrid. Panicle 3-6 cm, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 9-11 mm, with 4-6 florets. Upper glume 5·2-6·5 × 1·5-2 mm, subulate-lanceolate. Lemma 6-7·5 × 1·7-2·3 mm, lanceolate, long-acuminate, scabrid or with dense short hairs above; awn c. 3 mm. •{\i  Corse; Elba}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 155. F. pseudovina} Hackel ex Wiesb., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  30}: 126 (1880) ({\i F. valesiaca} subsp.{\i  pseudovina} (Hackel ex Wiesb.) Hegi). Stems 20-36(-43) cm, smooth or almost so. Leaves 0·3-0·6 mm wide, scabrid, glaucous; veins 5; sclerenchyma-strands 3, stout, sometimes with 2 alternating small strands; ribs 3; sheaths open to the base, smooth or weakly scabrid. Panicle 2-4(-5·5) cm, somewhat interrupted, the branches scabrid. Spikelets (4·2-)4·7-6 mm, with (2-)4-5 florets, glaucous, slightly violet-tinged. Upper glume 2·2-2·9 × (0·8-)1-1·2(-1·4) mm, ovate-lanceolate, shortly acuminate. Lemma 2·6-3·4 × 1·2-1·6 mm, ovate-lanceolate, rather shortly acuminate, glabrous or pubescent; awn not more than 1/3 as long as lemma. 2n = 14, 28.{\i  Dry meadows. C. & E. Europe, from C. Germany to White Russia and W. Kazakhstan.} Au Cz Ge Hu Ju Rm Rs (W, C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 156. F. illyrica} Markgr.-Dannenb.,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  92}: 151 (1972). Stems 13-30 cm, smooth or scabrid above. Leaves 0·3-0·5(-0·6) mm wide, glaucous, scabrid; veins 5; sclerenchyma-strands 3, with 2-4 small strands alternating; ribs 3; sheaths open to the base, glabrous or slightly hairy. Panicle (2-)3-5(-6) cm, the branches scabrid. Spikelets (6-)6·5-7·8(-8·1) mm, with (2-)3-6 florets, green or glaucous, dirty violet-tinged. Upper glume 3·1-3·9(-4·6) × 1-1·4(-1·6) mm, ovate-lanceolate, shortly acuminate. Lemma (3·4-)3·8-4·6 × 1·4-1·6 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, glabrous or ciliate; awn usually less than ½ as long as lemma. •{\i  W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 157. F. wagneri} (Degen, Thaisz & Flatt) Krajina, {\i Acta Bot. Bohem.}{\b  8}: 61 (1929). Stems 30-42 cm, pubescent. Leaves (0·3-)0·4-0·6(-0·7) mm wide, glaucous, scabrid, with conspicuous long hairs on both surfaces, particularly near the base; veins 5; sclerenchyma-strands 3, very stout, often with small strands alternating; ribs 3; sheaths closed only near the base, densely pubescent. Panicle 4-7·5 cm, scarcely interrupted, the branches hairy. Spikelets 6·5-7·5(-8) mm, with 4-8 florets, glaucous, glabrous or tomentose. Upper glume 3-4 × 1-1·2 mm, ovate-lanceolate, shortly acuminate. Lemma 4·6-5·2 × 1·8 mm, lanceolate, shortly acuminate; awn 1/4-1/3 as long as lemma. 2n = 28. •{\i  S. W. Romania and E. Jugoslavia.} ?Cz ?Hu Ju Rm.
\par

\par
151}
\par