{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 late, scabrid above. Lemma 5·2-5·8 × 2-2·2 mm, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, scabrid above, more or less ciliate; awn up to ¼ as long as lemma.{\i  Calcifuge. • E.C. Russia and N.E. Ukraine.} Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 167. F. stricta} Host,{\i  Gram. Austr.}{\b  2}: 62 (1802) ({\i F. valesiaca} subsp. {\i stricta} (Host) Hegi). Stems 23-43 cm, scabrid above. Leaves 0·55-0·98 mm wide, rigid, glaucous, pruinose or not, strongly scabrid at least above, sometimes tomentose near base; veins 5(-7); sclerenchyma forming a continuous or somewhat interrupted, unevenly thickened ring; ribs 3; sheaths closed only at the base, usually densely tomentose. Panicle 4·5-6 cm, dense, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 7·1-8·3(-9·1) mm, with 3-6 florets, green or dirty violet. Upper glume (3·2-)3·4-5·4 × (1·2-)1·3-1·8 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, ciliate. Lemma 4·2-5·8 × (1·6-)1·7-2·3 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, scabrid above, more or less ciliate, or pubescent; awn usually less than ½ as long as lemma. 2n = 42. {\i Dry, calcareous soils. • C. Europe, extending to C. Jugoslavia and E. Romania.} Au Cz Hu It Ju ?Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 168. F. trachyphylla} (Hackel) Krajina,{\i  Acta Bot. Bohem.}{\b  9}: 190 (1930). Stems 30-75 cm, scabrid above. Leaves (0·5-) 0·6-1·1 mm wide, strongly scabrid throughout, sometimes tomentose below, pruinose or not; veins 7; sclerenchyma forming an interrupted or continuous, unevenly thickened ring, or sometimes in 3 strands; ribs (3-)5-7; sheaths closed at base only, at least some densely pubescent. Panicle 4·5-13 cm, more or less interrupted, the branches strongly scabrid. Spikelets (6·2-)7-7·5(-10·8) mm, with 4-8 florets, glaucous, pruinose or not. Upper glume 3·5-4·5 × 1·3-1·4 mm, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate. Lemma 4·2-4·9(-6·5) × 1·9-2 mm, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, often pubescent; awn c. ½ as long as lemma. 2n = 42.{\i  Dry places. • C. Europe, extending to Belgium and perhaps to S. Sweden; widely naturalized elsewhere.} Au Be Cz *Da Ge He Ho Po *Su [Br Fe Ga No Rs (B, C, W)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 169. F. brevipila} Tracy,{\i  Pl. Syst. Evol. }{\b 128}: 287 (1977). Densely caespitose. Stems 18-37 cm, smooth above. Leaves (0·5-)0·8-1·1 mm wide, blue-green, often pruinose, scabrid, especially above, the upper surface with short, conical hairs; veins 7-9; sclerenchyma in several rather thin strands or sometimes forming an unevenly thickened ring; ribs 3; sheaths closed in the lower 1/3, more or less hairy. Panicle 3-4 cm, sparingly branched, lax at anthesis, the branches scabrid. Spikelets 6·8-7·2 mm, with 3-4 florets, glaucous, somewhat pruinose. Upper glume 3·4 × 1·4 mm, ovate-lanceolate, shortly accuminate, scabrid above, Lemma 4·3 × 3 mm, lanceolate, long-acuminate, tomentose; awn 1/4-1/3 as long as lemma. 2n = 42.{\i  Dry places; calcifuge. • N.E. Austria }({\i near Gmünd}). Au.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 170. F. duvalii} (St-Yves) Stohr,{\i  Wiss. Zeitschr. Univ. Halle}{\b  4}: 732 (1955). Stems (16-)20-40 cm, smooth. Leaves (0·4-)0·5-1·1 mm wide, smooth or almost so, rigid, glaucous, pruinose; veins (5-)7(-8); sclerenchyma-strands 3, or sometimes more or less confluent; ribs 3-5; sheaths open to the base, glabrous. Panicle 3·5-6 cm, rather dense, the branches smooth or weakly scabrid. Spikelets 6-7(-7·5) mm, with 3-5(-6) florets, glaucous and strongly pruinose. Upper glume (2·9-)3·4(-4·3) × 1·2-1.-6 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 4-5·5 × 1·7-2·1 mm, lanceolate, smooth or scabrid above, ciliate; awn 1/4-1/3 as long as lemma. 2n = 28. •{\i  N.C. Europe, extending to Belgium.} Be Cz Ga Ge Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ×{\b  Festulolium}    Ascherson & Graebner     
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Festuca} × {\i Lolium})
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.J. Humphries. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Caespitose perennials. Inflorescence a simple spike with sessile spikelets, or a panicle with spikelets sessile or subsessile above and pedicellate below. Spikelets with numerous florets, arranged obliquely or at right angles to the rhachis. Glumes more or less equal, or the lower small or sometimes completely suppressed in lateral spikelets. Anthers indehiscent; pollen usually sterile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Leaves flat or folded when young; lemma usually awnless .......... {\b 1. loliaceum} 
\par
Leaves convolute when young; lemma shortly awned ...................... {\b 2. braunii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  1}. × {\b F. loliaceum} (Hudson) P. Fourn., {\i Quatre Fl. Fr.} 81 (1935) ({\i F. pratensis} × {\i L. perenne}). Stems erect to decumbent, with 2-4 nodes. Leaves flat or folded when young; ligule up to 1 mm inconspicuous; auricles glabrous. Rhachis glabrous or scabridulous on the angles. Glumes ¼-½ as long as the spikelet. Lemma 3-9 mm, usually awnless or mucronate. 2n = 14.{\i  Damp meadows and roadsides. Most of Europe, except the east.} Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge ?Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2}. ×{\b  F. braunii} (K. Richter) A. Camus, {\i Bull. Mus. Nat. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Paris}){\b  33}: 538 (1927) ({\i F. pratensis} × {\i L. multiflorum}). Like {\b 1} but leaves convolute when young; rhachis scabridulous; lemma usually shortly awned. 2n = 14.{\i  Mainly in C. & N.W. Europe, but distribution probably imperfectly known.} Au Be Br Ga Ge Hb Ho It Po Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    The following hybrids have also been recorded, though rarely:{\i  F. arundinacea} × {\i L. perenne} ( × {\i F. holmbergii }(Dörfler) P. Fourn.){\i  F. arundinacea} × {\i L. multiflorum, F. gigantea} × {\i L. perenne} (×{\i  F. brinkmanii} (A. Braun) Ascherson & Graebner), {\i F. gigantea }×{\i  L. multiflorum, F. rubra} × {\i L. perenne }( × {\i F. fredericii} Cugnac & A. Camus).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.       Lolium}       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.J. Humphries. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, biennial, or perennial herbs. Ligules obtuse. Inflorescence a simple (very rarely branched) spike with laterally compressed solitary spikelets lying edgeways to concavities of the rhachis. Spikelets with 2-22 florets; lateral spikelets without a lower glume, the terminal one with 2 glumes. Glumes membranous, 3- to 9-veined. Lemma membranous to chartaceous sometimes indurate, sometimes turgid in fruit, with or without a subterminal awn. Palea like the lemma, narrowly keeled, usually ciliate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: E. E. Terrell,{\i  Bot. Rev.}{\b  32}: 138-164 (1966);{\i  U.S. Dept. Agric. Techn. Bull.}{\b  1392}: 1-65 (1968).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lemma elliptical to ovate, very turgid at maturity 
\par
  especially towards the base; mature caryopsis not more
\par
  than 3 times as long as wide
\par
2 Lemma of lower florets 4·6-8·5 mm, usually with a 
\par
  scabrid awn; mature caryopsis (3·8-)4·2-7 mm ....................... {\b 4. temulentum}
\par
2 Lemma of lower florets 3·5-4·5(-5·4) mm, usually unawned
\par
  mature caryopsis 3·2-4·5 mm ....................................................... {\b 5. remotum}
\par
1 Lemma oblong to oblong-lanceolate, not turgid at maturity
\par
  mature caryopsis more than 3 times as long as wide
\par
3 Perennial, with non-flowering shoots at anthesis; leaves
\par
  flat or folded when young; lemma usually unawned ..................... {\b 1. perenne}
\par
3 Usually annual or biennial, without non-flowering shoots
\par
  at anthesis; leaves convolute when young
\par
4 Spikelets not sunk in concavities of the rhachis;
\par
  spikelet with (5-)11-22 florets; lemma usually awned ............ {\b 2. multiflorum}
\par
4 Spikelets ± sunk in concavities of the rhachis and ± 
\par
  concealed by the glume; spikelets with 2-11 florets;
\par
  lemma usually unawned ................................................................. {\b 3. rigidum}
\par

\par
153}
\par