{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 16 Leaves not coriaceous and seldom succulent, the margins
\par
   without spinose teeth; anthers usually introrse or versatile
\par
17 Perianth-segments connate at the base for at least 1/5 of their length
\par
18 Perianth-tube longer than the lobes or teeth
\par
19 Fruit a berry; rootstock a rhizome ....................................... {\b 42. Convallaria}
\par
19 Fruit a capsule; rootstock a bulb
\par
20 Bracts as long as pedicels ....................................................... {\b 31. Brimeura}
\par
20 Bracts minute or absent
\par
21 Perianth somewhat constricted at mouth of tube, which
\par
   is at least 4 times as long as the lobes ......................................... {\b 36. Muscari}
\par
21 Perianth not constricted at mouth of tube, which is
\par
   less than 4 times as long as the lobes
\par
22 Capsule triquetrous ................................................................ {\b 33. Bellevalia}
\par
22 Capsule globose
\par
23 Perianth 4-5 mm ................................................................ {\b 34. Hyacinethella}
\par
23 Perianth 10-25 mm .............................................................. {\b 30. Hyacinthus}
\par
18 Perianth-tube equalling the lobes or shorter
\par
24 Perianth-tube more than 10 mm
\par
25 Flowers solitary, blue or white; perianth infundibuliform
\par
   to rotate ........................................................................................ {\b 41. Ipheion}
\par
25 Flowers in forked cymes, yellow or orange; perianth
\par
   campanulate ........................................................................ {\b 12. Hemerocallis}
\par
24 Perianth-tube less than 10 mm
\par
26 Anthers basifixed, extrorse; styles 3; capsule septicidal
\par
   (E. Russia) ................................................................................. {\b 3. Zigadenus}
\par
26 Anthers dorsifixed, introrse or versatile; style 1;
\par
   capsule loculicidal
\par
27 Pedicels all shorter than the flowers
\par
28 Flowers dull orange to yellowish-brown; filaments not
\par
   winged or toothed ........................................................................ {\b 35. Dipcadi}
\par
28 Flowers purplish-blue; filaments winged, and toothed 
\par
   at apex .................................................................................... {\b 32. Strangweia}
\par
27 At least the lower pedicels longer than the flowers
\par
29 Bracts absent; capsule globose ........................................... {\b 29. Chionodoxa}
\par
29 Bracts present; capsule triquetrous ......................................... {\b 31. Brimeura}
\par
17 Perianth-segments free, or connate at the base for 
\par
   less than 1/5 of their length
\par
30 Styles 3-4(-5), free throughout their length
\par
31 Leaves verticillate .......................................................................... {\b 47. Paris}
\par
31 Leaves alternate or basal
\par
32 Leaves broadly ovate to elliptical, mainly cauline;
\par
   stem 50-175 cm .......................................................................... {\b 4. Veratrum}
\par
32 Leaves ensiform, mainly basal; stem not more than 35 cm ....... {\b 1. Tofieldia}
\par
30 Style, if present, single, sometimes 3-fid at apex
\par
33 Filaments densely hairy
\par
34 Inflorescence a panicle; anthers versatile, dorsifixed;
\par
   seeds 3, subglobose ....................................... {\b 10. Simethis}
\par
34 Inflorescence a raceme; anthers extrorse, basifixed;
\par
   seeds numerous, filiform ......................................................... {\b 2. Narthecium}
\par
33 Filaments glabrous or subglabrous
\par
35 Stems junciform; leaves reduced to scarious scales ......... {\b 11. Aphyllanthes}
\par
35 Green leaves present
\par
36 Leaves all basal (sometimes 1 or 2 sheathing the stem
\par
   and appearing cauline)
\par
37 Rootstock a bulb
\par
38 Seeds flat, winged; perianth-segments with a usually red or
\par
   purple mid-vein ........................................................................... {\b 26. Urginea}
\par
38 Seeds not winged and seldom flat; perianth-segments
\par
   concolorous, or with a median green stripe
\par
39 Perianth white, variously tinged with yellow or green .... {\b 25. Ornithogalum}
\par
39 Perianth blue, lilac or pink (rarely pure white)
\par
40 Bracts single .................................................................................. {\b 27. Scilla}
\par
40 Bracts 2 to each flower ................................................... {\b 28. Hyacinthoides}
\par
37 Rootstock undifferentiated, or a cluster of tuberous roots
\par
41 Perianth campanulate; style and stamens declinate .................. {\b 8. Paradisea}
\par
41 Perianth rotate or cup shaped; style and stamens not declinate
\par
42 Anthers dorsifixed; filaments expanded at base so as 
\par
   to invest the ovary ................................................................... {\b 5. Asphodelus}
\par
42 Anthers basifixed; filaments not conspicuously expanded at base
\par
43 Perianth cup-shaped, its segments shorter than the stamens .... {\b 9. Eremurus}
\par
43 Perianth rotate, its segments as long as the stamens 
\par
   or longer .................................................................................. {\b 7. Anthericum}
\par
36 Some cauline leaves or large, leaf-like bracts present
\par
44 Leaves amplexicaul ............................................................... {\b 44. Smilacina}
\par
44 Leaves not amplexicaul
\par
45 Styles 3 ......................................................................... {\b 15. Androcymbium}
\par
45 Style 1
\par
46 Rootstock a rhizome; leaves cordate; stamens and 
\par
   perianth-segments 4; fruit a berry .................................... {\b 43. Maianthemum}
\par
46 Rootstock a bulb; leaves not cordate; stamens and 
\par
   perianth-segments 6; fruit a capsule
\par
47 Anthers dorsifixed, ± versatile
\par
48 Leaves with a wide, scarious, sheathing base; perianth
\par
   ± rotate ................................................................................... {\b 6. Asphodeline}
\par
48 Leaves not sheathing; perianth campanulate or with 
\par
   revolute segments .......................................................................... {\b 24. Lilium}
\par
47 Anthers basifixed, introrse
\par
49 Cauline leaves 2, opposite, spotted; perianth-segments
\par
   sharply deflexed .................................................................. {\b 21. Erythronium}
\par
49 Cauline leaves not spotted; perianth segments not deflexed 
\par
50 Stigma sessile .............................................................................. {\b 22. Tulipa} 
\par
50 Style well-developed
\par
51 Flowers nodding, variously coloured, but usually tinged,
\par
   tessellated or striped with purple, brown or green .................... {\b 23. Fritillaria}
\par
51 Flowers erect or horizontal, yellow or white
\par
52 Perianth-segments yellow (rarely white), without a nectary ....... {\b 20. Gagea}
\par
52 Perianth-segments white, with a small, pit-like nectary
\par
   at the base .................................................................................... {\b 19. Lloydia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.       Tofieldia}       Hudson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.T. Stearn. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizomatous perennial herbs. Leaves distichous, ensiform. Flowers small, in terminal racemes or heads, shortly pedicellate or subsessile. Perianth persistent; segments free, ascending or patent. Stamens with glabrous filaments and broadly ovate, basifixed, introrse anthers. Ovary ovoid, the 3 carpels free above, gradually narrowed into 3 short, persistent styles. Fruit a septicidal capsule, subglobose or broadly ellipsoid. Seeds numerous, very small, ellipsoid or narrowly oblong.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: W. T. Stearn,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot}.) {\b 53}: 194-204 (1947). H. Kunz, {\i Phyton} ({\i Austria}) {\b 9}: 135-139 (1961). B. Krisa & J. Chrtek, {\i Novit. Bot. Horti Bot. Univ. Carol. Prag.}{\b  1963}: 36-38 (1963).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Bract at base of pedicel 3-lobed; pedicel without bracteole .............. {\b 1. pusilla} 
\par
Bract at base of pedicel entire; pedicel with a 3-lobed 
\par
  bracteole immediately below the flower .................................... {\b 2. calyculata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. pusilla} (Michx) Pers., {\i Syn. Pl.}{\b  1}: 399 (1805) ({\i T. palustris} Hudson pro parte) Leaves 1-8 cm, 3- to 7-veined densely caespitose. Stem 1·5-12(-25) cm, leafless. Inflorescence a 5-to 10-flowered head 3-20 mm. Flowers white or greenish, with a base of pedicel; bracteole absent. Perianth-
\par

\par
15}
\par