{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 wide, scabrid, flat to folded; ligule c. 1 mm, truncate. Panicle 3-7(-12) cm, with few spikelets; branches very scabrid. Spikelets with 2-4 florets. Lemma shortly hairy below on keel and marginal veins, not lanate at base. Keels of palea aculeolate. Anthers 1·4-1·5 mm. •{\i  Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 17.          Bellardiochloa}       Chiov.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.R. Edmondson. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 3-4 florets. Glumes 3-veined, keeled. Lemma 5-veined, keeled, with a short apical awn. Rhachilla and base of lemma with a ring of short, stiff hairs. Grain oblong; hilum basal, linear.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. violacea} (Bellardi) Chiov.,{\i  Stud. Veg. Piemonte }60 (1929) ({\i Poa violacea }Bellardi,{\i  Festuca rhaetica} Suter). Densely caespitose perennial (12-)20-50 cm. Leaves up to 0·8 mm wide, convolute-setaceous, glaucous; ligule 3-7 mm, acute, lacerate. Panicle 5-12 cm, oblong, contracted; branches scabrid, 3-7 together at lowest nodes. Spikelets violet-tinged, with 3-4 florets; glumes subequal. Lemma obscurely 5-veined, scabrid on the keel, shortly hairy at base of keel and on marginal veins, not lanate at base; awn up to c. 1 mm. Palea hairy on surface between the keels. 2n = 14.{\i  Rocks, screes and dry grassland. Mountains of S. & C. Europe, from the Carpathians southwards to N. Spain, Sicilia and S. Greece.} ?Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 18.        Eremopoa}        Roshev.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets terete or slightly compressed laterally, with (1-)2-many florets. Glumes unequal, membranous, shorter than the florets, the lower 1-veined, the upper 3-veined. Lemma indistinctly 5-veined. Palea shorter than lemma, 2-keeled.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. altaica} (Trin.) Roshev. in Komarov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  2}: 431 (1934). Stems 10-40 cm, slender, usually simple. Leaves 1-3 mm wide, scabridulous above; ligule 1-2·5 mm. Panicle 4-10(-15) cm, lax, with branches in half whorls. Spikelets 3-5 mm. Glumes narrowly lanceolate, the lower 1 mm, the upper 1·5-2 mm. Lemma gradually narrowed to the acute apex. Anthers 0·3-0·5 mm.{\i  S. Ural. }Rs (C). ({\i C. & S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The European plant is subsp.{\b  songorica} (Schrenk) Tzvelev,{\i  Bot. Zur.}{\b  51}: 1104 (1966) ({\i E. songorica} (Schrenk) Roshev.). The typical subspecies occurs in C. Asia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 19.         Catabrosella}         (Tzvelev) Tzvelev
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials, with tuberous, thickened stem-base. Leaves usually flat. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 2-4 florets. Glumes unequal, the lower 1-veined, the upper 3-veined, shorter than the florets. Lemma 5-veined, scarious and erose above. Palea about as long as lemma, 2-keeled.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. humilis} (Bieb.) Tzvelev,{\i  Bot. Zur.}{\b  50}: 1320 (1965) ({\i Colpodium humile} (Bieb.) Griseb.). Caespitose; stems 5-15 cm, invested with dead sheaths at base. Leaves 0·6-2 mm wide, usually glabrous, smooth; ligule 0·8-3·5 mm. Panicle 2·5-7·5 cm, lax, with 2-5 smooth branches at a node. Spikelets 1·8-4 mm. Glumes lanceolate to ovate. Lemma oblong-ovate, shortly hairy on the back in the lower half. Anthers 1-1·7 mm.{\i  S.E. part of U.S.S.R.} Rs (E). ({\i Temperate Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 20.           Arctophila}      Rupr. ex N. J. Andersson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a usually lax panicle. Spikelets somewhat compressed laterally, with 2-7 florets. Glumes subequal, membranous, shorter than the spikelet, 1- to 3-veined. Lemma herbaceous, obtuse, obscurely 3- to 5-veined, shortly hairy at base. Rhachilla glabrous, usually prolonged, with a vestigial floret at the apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. fulva} (Trin.) N. J. Andersson,{\i  Gram. Scand.} 49 (1852). Robust, with a thick brittle rhizome. Stems 15-80 cm, erect. Leaves 2-5(-10) mm wide, distichous on non-flowering shoots, purplish, smooth, long-acute, the upper usually much longer than the lower; sheaths smooth, usually imbricate; ligule up to 5 mm, truncate, usually lacerate. Panicle up to 17 cm; branches usually long, the lower often deflexed, smooth. Spikelets 2·5-7 mm. Glumes ovate, with a broadly scarious apex. Lemma with a broadly scarious apex. Anthers c. 1·3 mm. 2n = 42. {\i Wet places. Arctic and subarctic Europe, southwards to }64 50'{\i  N. in Finland.} Fe Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 21.        Puccinellia}         Parl.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Atropis} Rupr.) 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.E. Hughes  & G. Halliday. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials, biennials or annuals. Leaf-sheaths open. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets with (2-)3-10 imbricate florets. Glumes usually unequal, oblong, obtuse, shorter than lemma; lower glume 1(-3)-veined; upper glumes 3-veined. Lemma 5-veined, usually oblong, obtuse, often ciliolate to erose at apex, rounded, rarely keeled, on back. Palea equalling or almost equalling lemma, 2-keeled. Grain glabrous, with a sub-basal, punctiform hilum, falling with lemma and palea.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Evidence for the existence of the numerous hybrids which have been reported is slight.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stolons present rooting at nodes
\par
2 Leaves usually more than 3 cm; veins of lemma hairy;
\par
  keels of palea scabrid; stolons extravaginal ................................. {\b 4. maritima}
\par
2 Leaves not more than 3 cm; veins of lemma glabrous;
\par
  keels of palea smooth; stolons intravaginal ........................... {\b 5. phryganodes} 
\par
1 Stolons usually absent
\par
3 Lower glume 2/3 as long as lemma; lemma with straight,
\par
  divergent veins ............................................................................ {\b 13. vahliana}
\par
3 Lower glume less than 2/3 as long as lemma; lemma with
\par
  curved, convergent veins
\par
4 Leaves flat
\par
5 Lemma 2·75-4 mm, with conspicuous veins ............................. {\b 12. rupestris}
\par
5 Lemma 1·5-2·5 mm
\par
6 Lemma with inconspicuous veins .................................................. {\b 1. distans}
\par
6 Lemma with conspicuous veins ................................................ {\b 3. fasciculata}
\par
4 Leaves plicate or convolute
\par
7 Anthers (0·8-)1·2-3·5(-4) mm
\par
8 Lemma 1·5-2·5 mm .................................................................. {\b 3. fasciculata}
\par
8 Lemma (2-)2·5-3·5(-4) mm ................................. ({\b 6-10}). {\b festuciformis} group
\par
7 Anthers 0·3-1 mm
\par
9 Lemma conspicuously hairy in lower half, 
\par
  especially on the veins ............................................................... {\b 11. angustata}
\par
9 Lemma glabrous to minutely hairy
\par
10 Lemma glabrous or very sparsely hairy at base ............................ {\b 2. tenella}
\par
10 Lemma minutely hairy at base
\par
11 Inflorescence-branches usually all long and lacking 
\par
   spikelets for up to half their length; mid-vein of 
\par
   lemma not reaching apex ................................................................ {\b 1. distans}
\par
11 Inflorescence-branches, at least the short ones, with 
\par
   spikelets to base; mid-vein of lemma reaching apex ................ {\b 3. fasciculata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Puccinellia}. Leaf-epidermis differentiated into long and short cells. Rhachilla stout, not thickened at insertion of
\par

\par
167}
\par