{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 to 3 mm, oblong, rounded or somewhat lacerate. Panicle 3-6(-10) cm, the branches rigid, very scabrid, 2-4 at lower nodes. Spikelets greenish, with 2-4 florets; rhachilla finely papillose. Lemma densely long-hairy on marginal veins, densely lanate at base. •{\i  E.C. Europe, extending to S.W. Ukraine.} Cz Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pannonica} ({\i P. podolica} Blocki): Stems 35-45 cm. Panicle rather wide, more or less pyramidal, with elongate, somewhat patent branches. Palea with tangled hairs between the keels.{\i  S. W. Ukraine, Moldavia, Romania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b scabra} (Ascherson & Graebner) Soó, {\i Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  5}: 483 (1959) ({\i P. scabra} Kit. ex Steudel, non Ehrh.): Stems 25-30(-35) cm. Panicle narrow, spicate to ovoid, with short, more or less erect, branches. Palea glabrous to sparsely hairy between the keels.{\i  E.C. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. P. versicolor} Besser,{\i  Enum. Pl. Volhyn. }41 (1821) ({\i P. romanica} Prodan). Stems (20-)25-40(-65) cm. Leaves 1-2 mm wide. Ligule up to 2·5 mm, oblong, obtuse to acute. Panicle 6-17 cm; branches sparsely to densely scabrid, up to 5 together at lowest nodes. Spikelets violet- and gold-tinged, with 2-4(-5) florets. Lemma c. 3·3 mm, sparsely long-hairy on keel and marginal veins, densely lanate at base. Palea glabrous, or rarely sparsely hairy between the keels. Rhachilla finely papillose. •{\i  S.W. Ukraine, Moldavia, E. Romania; mountains of C. part of Balkan peninsula. }Al Gr Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. P. sterilis} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 62 (1805). Stems 25-35 cm, smooth or sparsely to densely scabrid above. Leaves up to 2 mm wide. Ligule up to 1 mm, truncate. Panicle 8-12 cm, narrow, subspicate. Spikelets greenish, with (2-)3-4 florets. Lemma c. 2·5 mm, usually not lanate at base. Rhachilla with a line of hairs or finely papillose.{\i  S. Ukraine, S.E. Russia.} Rs (W, K, E). ({\i S.W. & S.C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. P. stepposa} (Krylov) Roshev. in Komarov, {\i Fl. URSS}{\b  2}: 754 (1934). Like {\b 31} but stems (15-)25-30 cm, smooth, often leafless above; leaves 0·5-1·3 mm wide.{\i  S.C. & S.E. Russia.} Rs (C, E) [Rs (N)]. ({\i Siberia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. ABBREVIATAE Nannf. ex Tzvelev. Densely caespitose perennials, without rhizomes. Branches intravaginal. Leaves folded. Panicle-branches sulcate, smooth. Lemma glabrous, or shortly appressed-hairy between the veins, not lanate at base. Keels of palea aculeolate in upper part.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. P. abbreviata} R.Br. in Parry,{\i  Jour. Voy. N.W. Pass., Suppl. App.} 287 (1824). Densely caespitose; stems 5-15 cm, smooth. Leaves mostly basal, numerous, tending to curve upwards especially when dry. Ligule 0·5-1 mm, rounded. Uppermost cauline leaf more or less appressed to the stem, without a distinct sheath. Panicle up to 1·5 × 0·8 cm, compact, ellipsoid. Spikelets rather few, purple-tinged. Lemma shortly appressed-hairy to sericeous on the abaxial surface. Anthers 0·6-0·8 mm.{\i  Dry, stony ground. Svalbard; arctic Russia} ({\i near Anderma}). Rs (N) Sb. ({\i Circumpolar-arctic}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. NANOPOA J. R. Edmondson. Densely pulvinate perennials. Branches intravaginal. Leaves setaceous, convolute. Panicle-branches terete, smooth. Lemma glabrous, not lanate at base. Keels of the palea aculeolate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. P. trichophylla} Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 4}): 136 (1859). Stems 6-10 cm, smooth, almost leafless. Leaves 1-2 cm × 0·3-0·5 mm, setaceous, convolute; ligule 1·5-2 mm, prominent, milky-white, finely tapering, acute. Panicle 1·5-2·5 × 0·8-1 cm, narrowly ellipsoid; branches 1-2 at each node. Spikelets c. 2·5 mm, with 2-3 florets, strongly tinged with purple. Glumes unequal, obtuse, with a distinct hyaline margin. Lemma not strongly keeled, glabrous, obtuse; lateral veins indistinct. 2n = 14. •{\i  C. Greece} ({\i Parnassos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Records from Pindhos and Kiona are erroneous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. BOLBOPHORUM Ascherson & Graebner. Laxly to densely caespitose perennials; branches intravaginal. Stems smooth, bulbous at base or clothed with remains of old leaf-sheaths. Leaves flat to folded, usually abruptly contracted into a cucullate apex. Panicle-branches smooth to scabrid, terete. Lemma hairy on keel and marginal veins, with obtuse, often long hairs, and sometimes shortly appressed-hairy on abaxial surface Keels of the palea aculeolate to ciliate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. P. bulbosa} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 70 (1753). Usually caespitose; stems 15-40 cm. Leaves somewhat glaucous, mostly basal, the basal leaves 2-10 cm × (0·5-)1-2 mm, folded or flat; margins not cartilaginous. Ligule up to 3 mm, acute. Panicle 2-6 cm, compact, ovoid; branches in pairs at the lower nodes, scabrid. Spikelets more or less purple-tinged, often proliferating, with 2-6 florets. Glumes broadly ovate, subequal; lemma densely lanate at base. 2n = 21, 28, 39, 42.{\i  Dry places. Most of Europe except the extreme west and parts of the north.} All except Az Fa Hb Is Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. P. perconcinna} J.R. Edmondson,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 330 (1978) ({\i P. concinna }Gaudin, non R.Br.,{\i  P. bulbosa} subsp. {\i concinna} (Gaudin) Hayek, {\i P. molinerii} Lam. & DC., non Balbis). Like {\b 35} but stems 5-10(-25) cm; leaves 1-6 cm × 0·5-1·5 mm; ligule 0·8-2·2 mm; panicle narrowly elliptical; spikelets greenish, with 6-10 florets, never proliferating; lemma not lanate at base. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry places, mainly in mountain districts. • From S.E. France to the Balkan peninsula.} ?Bu Ga ?Gr He It Ju Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. P. ligulata} Boiss.,{\i  Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 659 (1842). Densely caespitose; stems (8-)12-20 cm. Leaves 1·2-5 cm × 1·2-1·8 mm, glaucous, flat; margins not cartilaginous. Ligule 2·5-6 mm, prominent, milky-white, acute, lacerate. Panicle (1-)1·8-3 cm, compact, ovoid to pyramidal; branches 1-2 at the lower nodes. Spikelets more or less purple-tinged, never proliferating, with 5-10 florets. Glumes unequal. Lemma shortly hairy on keel and marginal veins, not lanate at base. Keels of the palea aculeolate. Anthers 1·4-1·6 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Mountain rocks and screes. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. P. timoleontis} Heldr. ex Boiss., {\i Fl. Or.}{\b  5}: 607 (1884) ({\i P. bulbosa }subsp.{\i  timoleontis} (Heldr. ex Boiss.) Hayek). Like {\b 37} but leaves 0·5-1 mm wide, folded; ligule 3-6·5 mm; panicle ovoid; spikelets sometimes proliferating; anthers 1-1·2 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry pastures. Balkan peninsula and Aegean region.} Al Bu Cr Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    The stem-base of {\b 38} tends to be bulbous; this character, together with the sometimes proliferating spikelets, leads to confusion with {\b 35}, from which it can easily be distinguished by its densely caespitose habit, short leaves with prominent milky-white ligules, and by the lemma not being lanate at the base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. P. media} Schur, {\i Verh. Mitt. Siebenb. Ver. Naturw.}{\b  4} ({\i Sert. Fl. Transs.}): 87 (1853) (incl. {\i P. ursina} Velen.). Laxly caespitose, glaucous; stems (15-)20-30(-40) cm. Leaves 4-9 cm × 1-1·5(-2) mm, flat or folded, mostly basal; margins not cartilaginous. Ligule 1-2·5 mm, rounded, more or less lacerate. Panicle 3·5-5 cm, compact, ellipsoid-oblong; branches (1-)2 at the lower nodes. Spikelets violet-tinged, never proliferating, with
\par

\par
165}
\par