{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3 Base of stem not bulbous
\par
5 Leaves 1-2 mm wide, flat to folded, gradually tapering 
\par
  to apex; uppermost leaf-blade arising more than half-way
\par
  up the stem .......................................................................... {\b 47}. × {\b jemtlandica}
\par
5 Leaves 2-4·5 mm wide, flat with cucullate apex; uppermost 
\par
  leaf-blade arising less than halfway up the stem ............................ {\b 43. alpina} 
\par
2 Rhizomatous
\par
6 Ligule not more than 1 mm
\par
7 Base of stem enclosed by thickened leaf-sheaths ............ ({\b 6 × 43}).{\b  herjedalica}
\par
7 Base of stem not enclosed by conspicuously thickened 
\par
  leaf-sheaths .................................................................. ({\b 6-9}).{\b  pratensis} group
\par
6 Ligule 1-5 mm
\par
8 Stem (20-)25-50(-70) cm; ligule 2-5 mm; spikelets with 
\par
  the lower floret usually not proliferating
\par
9 Leaves 2-3 mm wide; glumes unequal ....................................... {\b 48}. ×{\b  nobilis}
\par
9 Leaves 3-5 mm wide; glumes subequal ..................................... {\b 11. granitica}
\par
8 Stem 10-20 cm; ligule 1-3·5 mm; spikelets with all 
\par
  florets usually proliferating
\par
10 Leaves (1-)1·5-2·5 mm wide, flat, with a slightly 
\par
   cucullate apex ................................................................................ {\b 10. arctica}
\par
10 Leaves 1-2 mm wide, flat or folded, tapering gradually
\par
   to the apex .......................................................................... {\b 47}. × {\b jemtlandica}
\par
1 Spikelets not proliferating 
\par
11 Lemma with a short terminal awn .......................................... {\b 45. flabellata} 
\par
11 Lemma unawned
\par
12 Annual or rarely perennial; keels of palea with flexuous, 
\par
   curved or crispate hairs along their whole length
\par
13 Stems solitary or few, purple-tinged at base; marginal
\par
   veins of lemma densely tomentose with crispate hairs .................. {\b 44. jubata}
\par
13 Stems ± numerous, though sometimes somewhat isolated,
\par
   greenish; marginal veins of lemma with short straight hairs
\par
14 Lower panicle-branches erecto-patent after anthesis;
\par
   spikelets with rather distant florets; anthers 0·2-0·5 mm,
\par
   scarcely longer than wide .............................................................. {\b 2. infirma}
\par
14 Lower panicle-branches patent or deflexed after 
\par
   anthesis; spikelets with crowded florets; anthers 
\par
   0·6-2 mm, at least twice as long as wide
\par
15 Spikelets not crowded towards the ends of the panicle-branches;
\par
   anthers 0·6-0·8(-1) mm, 2-3 times as long as wide .......................... {\b 1. annua}
\par
15 Spikelets crowded towards the ends of the panicle-
\par
   branches; anthers 1·6-2 mm, 5-8 times as long as wide ................. {\b 3. supina}
\par
12 Perennial; keels of palea aculeolate, or ciliate only
\par
   in the lower half
\par
16 Leaves 0·3-0·5 mm wide, tightly convolute to filiform
\par
17 Base of stem bulbous ................................................................ {\b 35. bulbosa}
\par
17 Base of stem not bulbous
\par
18 Stem (30-)50-80(-100) cm; panicle 4-18 cm; branches 
\par
   strongly scabrid ............................................................................ {\b 18. stiriaca}
\par
18 Stem 6-30 cm; panicle not more than 2·5 cm; branches smooth
\par
19 Stem 6-10 cm; ligule 1·5-2 mm, acute; glumes obtuse ...... {\b 34. trichophylla}
\par
19 Stem 5-30 cm; ligule 0·4-0·6 mm, truncate; glumes acute,
\par
   distinctly keeled ........................................................................... {\b 21. pirinica}
\par
16 Leaves more than 0·5 mm wide, flat or folded
\par
20 Stem stout, strongly compressed towards the base
\par
21 Rhizomatous; leaves 1-2 mm wide ........................................ {\b 13. longifolia}
\par
21 Caespitose; leaves (4-)7-12(-15) mm wide
\par
22 Leaves flat, tapering gradually to an acute apex;
\par
   ligule 3-5 mm, acute to rounded .................................................. {\b 16. hybrida}
\par
22 Leaves flat to canaliculate, abruptly contracted to a 
\par
   cucullate apex; ligule 1-3 mm, rounded to truncate
\par
23 Panicle-branches long, arcuate-patent; glumes subequal; 
\par
   lemma sparsely lanate at base ...................................................... {\b 17. remota}
\par
23 Panicle-branches short, erecto-patent; glumes unequal;
\par
   lemma usually not lanate at base .................................................. {\b 15. chaixii}
\par
20 Stem ± slender, terete or compressed, especially above
\par
24 Stem bulbous at base; glumes widest below the middle,
\par
   with a distinctly curved keel
\par
25 Leaves (0·5-)1-2 mm wide; stem 15-40 cm; lemma lanate 
\par
   at base; spikelets with 2-6 florets ................................................ {\b 35. bulbosa}
\par
25 Leaves 0·5-1 mm wide; stem 5-10(-20) cm; lemma not 
\par
   lanate at base; spikelets with 5-10 florets ............................ {\b 36. perconcinna}
\par
24 Stem not bulbous at base; glumes usually widest at or
\par
   near the middle, with a ± weakly curved keel
\par
26 Base of stem enclosed by thickened leaf-sheaths; lateral
\par
   shoots intravaginal; lower panicle-branches 1-3 together
\par
27 Ligule c. 1 mm, inconspicuous, rounded to truncate;
\par
   anthers up to 0·7 mm ............................................................... {\b 33. abbreviata}
\par
27 Ligule 1-7 mm, ± conspicuous, acute to truncate;
\par
   anthers at least 1 mm
\par
28 Lemma hairy between the veins
\par
29 Leaves 4-10 cm, green; lower cauline and basal leaves
\par
   with a short, ± truncate ligule; panicle ± pyramidal ...................... {\b 43. alpina}
\par
29 Leaves (1·5-)2·5-6 cm, glaucous; cauline and basal 
\par
   leaves with an elongate, acute ligule; panicle ± ovoid
\par
30 Leaves 2-4·5 mm wide, flat to weakly folded .......................... {\b 42. badensis}
\par
30 Leaves 1·5-2·5 mm wide, canaliculate to strongly folded ...... {\b 41. molinerii}
\par
28 Lemma glabrous between the veins
\par
31 Stem (15-)20-30(-40) cm; panicle 3·5-5 cm, ellipsoid-oblong .... {\b 39. media}
\par
31 Stem 6-20(-30) cm; panicle 1-5 cm, ovoid to pyramidal
\par
32 Ligule 1-2 mm, hyaline; glumes subequal ................................. {\b 40. pumila}
\par
32 Ligule 2·5-6·5 mm, milky-white; glumes unequal
\par
33 Leaves 1·2-1·8 mm wide, flat .................................................... {\b 37. ligulata}
\par
33 Leaves 0·5-1 mm wide, folded ............................................ {\b 38. timoleontis}
\par
26 Base of stem not enclosed by conspicuously thickened 
\par
   leaf-sheaths; lateral shoots extravaginal; lower 
\par
   panicle-branches 2-7 together
\par
34 Panicle-branches smooth; plant ± densely caespitose
\par
35 Panicle-branches terete; uppermost leaf without a 
\par
   distinct sheath ................................................................................ {\b 22. minor}
\par
35 Panicle-branches sulcate; uppermost leaf with a 
\par
   distinct sheath
\par
36 Panicle rather compact; marginal veins of lemma hairy 
\par
   for most of their length; hairs obtuse ................................................ {\b 20. laxa}
\par
36 Panicle lax; marginal veins of lemma hairy for c. ¼
\par
   of their length; hairs acute .......................................................... {\b 19. flexuosa}
\par
34 Panicle-branches ± scabrid
\par
37 Not rhizomatous
\par
38 Ligule of uppermost leaf 5-10 mm
\par
39 Spikelets with 2 florets; lowest panicle-branches in pairs ........ {\b 5. feratiana}
\par
39 Spikelets usually with 3 or more florets, lowest 
\par
   panicle-branches 3-5 together ....................................................... {\b 4. trivialis}
\par
38 Ligule of uppermost leaf not more than 3·5 mm
\par
40 Ligule not more than 0·5 mm; stem smooth
\par
41 Sheaths of cauline leaves compressed, with a distinctly
\par
   raised keel; stem compressed; leaves (3-)4-5 mm wide .......... {\b 28. rehmannii}
\par
41 Sheaths of cauline leaves terete, without a prominent 
\par
   keel; stem terete; leaves 1·5-2(-3) mm wide ............................ {\b 27. nemoralis}
\par
40 Ligule at least 1 mm; stem smooth or scabrid
\par
42 Stem (10-)17-35(-55) cm, stiffly erect; stem usually 
\par
   very glaucous ................................................................................ {\b 26. glauca}
\par
42 Stem 30-80(-120) cm, geniculate-ascending to erect;
\par
   stem not or slightly glaucous 
\par
43 Ligule 2·5-3·5 mm, acute; panicle-branches in pairs at
\par
   lower nodes; lemma appressed hairy between the veins ......... {\b 24. flaccidula}
\par

\par
160}
\par