{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min27}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min28}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords985}{\nofchars5618}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 3 Lower glume 1\'b75-2\'b75 mm; anthers 1\'b75-2 mm ............... (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 intermedia}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28   (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 festuciformis}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 P. teyberi}{\fs28  Hayek, }{\i\fs28 P. palustris}{\fs28  (Seenus) Hayek): Leaves setaceous, scabrid towards the apex. Inflorescence secund, the branches deflexed after anthesis. Spikelets ovate-lanceolate. Glumes ovate, the lower 2\'b75-3 mm. Lemma 3-3\'b75 mm. Anthers 2-2\'b75 mm.}{\i\fs28  From Portugal to E. Bulgaria}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 convoluta}{\fs28  (Hornem.) W. E. Hughes, }{\i\fs28 Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  76}{\fs28 : 363 (1978) (}{\i\fs28 P. convoluta }{\fs28 (Hornem.) Hayek, }{\i\fs28 Atropis convoluta }{\fs28 (Hornem.) Griseb.,}{\i\fs28  Glyceria convoluta }{\fs28 (Hornem.) Fries,}{\i\fs28  Poa convoluta}{\fs28  Hornem.). Like subsp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) but leaves wider, smooth; glumes ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate; lemma 2-3\'b75 mm; anthers 1\'b72-2\'b73 mm.}{\i\fs28  Throughout most of the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 intermedia}{\fs28  (Schur) W. E. Hughes,}{\i\fs28  loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1978) (}{\i\fs28 P. salinaria}{\fs28  (Simonkai) Holmberg; }{\i\fs28 Atropis intermedia}{\fs28  Schur): Like subsp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) but leaves smooth above, more or less scabrid below; inflorescence secund; spikelets linear-lanceolate; lower glume 1\'b75-2\'b75 mm; lemma 2-2\'b75 mm; anthers 1\'b75-2 mm. \bullet }{\i\fs28  From E. Austria to E. Romania}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 tenuifolia}{\fs28  (Boiss. & Reuter) W. E. Hughes,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  76}{\fs28 : 364 (1978) (}{\i\fs28 Glyceria tenuifolia}{\fs28  Boiss. & Reuter): Like subsp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) but leaves filiform, scabrid beneath; inflorescence not secund, the branches erect, becoming slightly patent after anthesis; spikelets oblong; lower glume 1-1\'b72 mm; lemma 2-2\'b73 mm; anthers 0\'b78-1\'b72 mm.}{\i\fs28  S.W. Europe}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 7. P. dolicholepis}{\fs28  (V. Krecz.) V. Krecz. ex Pavlov,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Kazakhstana}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 243 (1956) (}{\i\fs28 Atropis dolicholepis}{\fs28  V. Krecz.). Stems up to 60 cm. Inflorescence up to 20 cm, the branches scabrid, patent after anthesis. Spikelets linear to linear-lanceolate, with 3-5 florets. Lower glume 1\'b75-2\'b75 mm, lanceolate, more or less acute, the upper 2\'b75-3 mm. Lemma 3-3\'b75 mm. Keels of palea ciliolate towards the base. Anthers 1-1\'b75 mm.}{\i\fs28  Saline habitats. S. & S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.}{\fs28  Rs (C, E).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 8. P. gigantea}{\fs28  (Grossh.) Grossh.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Kavk.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 114 (1928) (}{\i\fs28 Atropis chilochloa}{\fs28  V. Krecz. pro parte, }{\i\fs28 A. sclerodes }{\fs28 V. Krecz.). Stems up to 80 cm. Inflorescence up to 20 cm, the branches smooth, erect, somewhat spreading after anthesis. Spikelets narrowly oblong, with 4-7 florets. Lower glume 1-1\'b77 mm, the upper 1\'b75-2\'b75 mm. Lemma 2\'b75-3 mm, hairy on the veins in the lower half. Keels of palea more or less ciliolate towards the base. Anthers 1\'b72-1\'b76 mm. }{\i\fs28 Saline habitats. S. & S.E. parts of U.S.S.R.}{\fs28  Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 9. P. poecilantha}{\fs28  (C. Koch) Grossh.,}{\i\fs28  Opred. Rast. Kavk.}{\fs28  706 (1949) (}{\i\fs28 Atropis poecilantha}{\fs28  (C. Koch) V. Krecz.,}{\i\fs28  A. chilochloa}{\fs28  V. Krecz. pro parte). Stems up to 40 cm. Inflorescence 10-15 cm, the branches scabrid, deflexed after anthesis. Spikelets oblong, with 6-9 florets. Glumes obtuse, the lower 1-1\'b75 mm, oblong-ovate, the upper 1\'b75-2 mm. Lemma 2\'b75-3 mm. Keels of palea ciliolate towards the top. Anthers 1\'b75-2 mm.}{\i\fs28  Saline habitats. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.}{\fs28  Rs (E).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 10. P. tenuissima}{\fs28  (V. Krecz.) V. Krecz. ex Pavlov,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Kazakhstana }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 242 (1956) (}{\i\fs28 Atropis tenuissima }{\fs28 V. Krecz.). Stems up to 50 cm. Leaves filiform. Inflorescence 5-15 cm, contracted, the branches smooth. Spikelets elliptical, with 3-5 florets. Lower glume 0\'b77-1 mm, the upper 1\'b75-1\'b77 mm. Lemma 2 mm. Keels of palea ciliolate towards the apex. Anthers 1\'b72-1\'b75 mm. }{\i\fs28 Saline habitats. S.E. Russia.}{\fs28  Rs (C, E).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 11. P. angustata}{\fs28  (R. Br.) Rand & Redf.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Mount Desert Is. Maine}{\fs28  181 (1894) (}{\i\fs28 Atropis angustata}{\fs28  (R. Br.) Griseb.). Caespitose; stems up to 15(-25) cm, usually erect. Inflorescence purplish, well-exserted; branches sometimes patent, scabrid at least above. Spikelets with (2-)3-5 florets. Lower glume (0\'b79-)1\'b71-1\'b79(-2\'b74) mm, the upper (1\'b78-)2\'b71-3\'b71 mm. Lemma 2\'b78-3\'b76 (-3\'b79) mm, conspicuously hairy in the lower half, especially on the veins. Keels of palea strongly spinulose-hairy. Anthers 0\'b75-0\'b78 mm. 2n = 42.}{\i\fs28  Open habitats, especially on saline clay. N.E. Russia; Svalbard.}{\fs28  Rs(N) Sb. (}{\i\fs28 Circumpolar}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 12. P. rupestris}{\fs28  (With.) Fernald & Weatherby,}{\i\fs28  Rhodora}{\b\fs28  18}{\fs28 : 10 (1916) (}{\i\fs28 Glyceria procumbens}{\fs28  (Curtis) Dumort.). Annual or biennial. Stems 4-40 cm, erect or ascending. Inflorescence 2-10 cm, rigid, usually dense, strongly secund; branches erecto-patent, scabridulous. Spikelets narrowly oblong, subsessile, with 3-5 florets. Lower glume 1\'b725-3 mm, 1- to 3-veined. Anthers 0\'b775-1 mm. 2n = 42.}{\i\fs28  Damp places near the sea; inland on damp sands in Spain. \bullet  W. Europe, from England and the Netherlands to C. Spain.}{\fs28  Be Br Ga Ho Hs.
\par 
\par    Subgen. }{\b\fs28 Pseudocolpodium}{\fs28  (Tzvelev) W. E. Hughes. Leaf epidermis not differentiated into long and short cells. Rhachilla slender, abruptly thickened at insertion of florets. Glumes subequal. Lemma about as long as glumes, with straight, divergent veins.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 13. P. vahliana}{\fs28  (Liebm.) Scribner & Merr.,}{\i\fs28  Contr. U.S. Nat. Herb.}{\b\fs28  13}{\fs28 : 78 (1910) (}{\i\fs28 Colpodium vahlianum}{\fs28  (Liebm.) Nevski). Caespitose perennial; stems up to 12(-15) cm, erect. Leaves erect, usually bright green. Inflorescence c. 2 cm, compact, usually purple; branches smooth, the pedicels conspicuously thickened apically. Spikelets with 2-5 florets. Glumes strongly veined, the lower 2\'b71-3 mm, 2/3 as long as the adjacent lemma, the upper 2\'b73-3\'b75 mm. Lemma 3\'b74-4\'b73 mm, with 5 straight, divergent veins, densely hairy in lower half, especially on the veins. Keels of palea strongly spinulose-hairy. Anthers 0\'b78-1\'b72 mm. 2n = 14.}{\i\fs28  Damp, open habitats. Svalbard.}{\fs28  Sb. (}{\i\fs28 Circumpolar}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 \'d7 Pucciphippsia}{\fs28      Tzvelev
\par (}{\i\fs28 Phippsia}{\fs28  \'d7 }{\i\fs28 Puccinellia}{\fs28 )
\par }{\fs24 By G. Halliday & W.E. Hughes. 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Like}{\b\fs28  Puccinellia}{\fs28  but with a small compact panicle and usually 2 florets in a spikelet. Sterile.
\par 
\par Literature: O. Hedberg,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Tidsskr.}{\b\fs28  58}{\fs28 : 157-162 (1962).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. \'d7 P}{\fs28 . }{\b\fs28 vacillans}{\fs28  (Th. Fries) Tzvelev,}{\i\fs28  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Leningrad}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  8}{\fs28 : 76 (1971). Caespitose perennial. Stems up to 10(-15) cm. Leaves flat. Inflorescence-branches 5-8 at each node, smooth; panicle contracted before and after anthesis. Spikelets with (1-)2 florets and rarely with up to 2 vestigial florets. Glumes persistent, the lower 0\'b74-0\'b77 mm, the upper 0\'b78-1\'b73 mm. Lemma 1\'b78-2\'b74 mm, strongly keeled, stiffly hairy in the lower half, especially on the veins. Keels of palea spinulose. Anthers c. 0\'b775 mm, sterile. 2n = 21.}{\i\fs28  Damp, open habitats. Svalbard.}{\fs28  Sb. (}{\i\fs28 Novaja Zemlja; arctic Canada}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    The parentage and hybrid status of this taxon have been much disputed but it is probably }{\i\fs28 Phippsia algida}{\fs28  \'d7}{\i\fs28  Puccinellia vahliana}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 22.     Phippsia}{\fs28       R.Br.
\par }{\fs24  By G. Halliday. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennials. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets usually with 1 floret. Glumes less than 1/3 as long as the floret, often caducous. Lemma 3-veined, keeled. Palea distinctly 2-keeled. Stamens 1 or 2.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28  Lemma glabrous or weakly hairy in lower half; panicle 
\par   1-2 cm, spike-like .............................................................................. }{\b\fs28 1. algida}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 169}
\par }