{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 2 Stems ± solitary, with few dead leaf-sheaths at base;
\par
  glumes subequal, acuminate, usually both 3-veined ............... {\b 7. subcaerulea}
\par
2 Stems clustered, often forming distinct tussocks, with
\par
  numerous remains of leaf-sheaths at base; glumes unequal,
\par
  acute, the lower usually 1-veined
\par
3 Plant laxly caespitose; basal leaves flat or canaliculate,
\par
  much shorter than stem; ligule decurrent on sheath-margins ....... {\b 8. pratensis}
\par
3 Plant densely caespitose; basal sheaths strongly folded,
\par
  wiry, nearly as long as stem; ligule not decurrent ................... {\b 9. angustifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. alpigena} (Fries) Lindman, {\i Svensk Fanerogamfl.} 91 (1918) ({\i P. pratensis} subsp.{\i  alpigena} (Fries) Hiit.). Plant 20-30(-50) cm, with long rhizomes, not forming compact tussocks; non-flowering shoots distichously leafy. Leaves 2-3(-4) mm wide, abruptly contracted into a cucullate apex. Panicle 6-8 cm, compact, ovoid to pyramidal, the lower branches usually in pairs. Spikelets with 3-5 florets, sometimes proliferating; keels of the palea ciliate below. 2n = 35, 43, 56, 70-72, 84.{\i  Heaths and pastures. N. Europe, southwards to S. Norway}. Fa Fe Is No Rs (N, C) Sb Su.
\par

\par
 Plants from the arctic with proliferating spikelets have been named {\b P. pratensis} subsp. {\b colpodea} (Th. Fries) Tzvelev,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  9}: 47 (1972); they have sometimes been confused with {\b 10}, and with {\i P}. × {\i herjedalica}, which usually has a proliferating inflorescence.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b P}. × {\b herjedalica} H. Sm., {\i Veg. Utveckl. Centralsvenska Högfjälls.} 159 (1920) ({\b 6} × {\b 43}), is frequent in those parts of Fennoscandia where the parent species grow together. It is like {\b 6} but with short rhizomes, the stem-base enclosed by conspicuously thickened leaf-sheaths, and the inflorescence usually proliferating.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. subcaerulea} Sm. in Sowerby,{\i  Engl. Bot.}{\b  14}: t. 1004 (1802) ({\i P. irrigata} Lindman, {\i P. pratensis} L. subsp.{\i  irrigata} (Lindman) Lindb. fil., {\i P. athroostachya }Oett.). Somewhat glaucous, with usually solitary stems (15-)20-30(-45) cm. Leaves 1·5-2·5 mm wide, fringed with hairs at the mouth of the sheath. Ligule c. 1 mm, hairy on the adaxial surface. Panicle (3-)4-6·5 cm, the branches mostly in pairs. Glumes subequal, 3-veined, acuminate. 2n = 38-117.{\i  N. & C. Europe.} Au Br Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb ?Ho Hu Is No Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. P. pratensis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 67 (1753) (incl.{\i  P. pinegensis} Roshev., {\i P. turfosa} Litv.). Bright green, rather laxly caespitose; stems (15-)20-50(-70) cm. Leaves 2-3 mm wide, flat or canaliculate, shorter than the stem. Ligule c. 1 mm, decurrent on sheath-margins. Panicle 6-15 cm, the lower branches mostly 3-5 together. Glumes unequal, acute, the lower 1-veined. 2n = 42, 50-78, 91, 98. {\i Throughout Europe.} All except Bl; introduced in Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. P. angustifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 67 (1753) ({\i P. pratensis} subsp.{\i  angustifolia} (L.) Gaudin). Greyish-green, densely caespitose; stems (30-)50-70 cm. Leaves up to 40 cm × 0·8-1·5(-2) mm, the basal wiry, strongly folded, the upper shorter, sometimes flat. Ligule 1-3 mm, not decurrent. Panicle 6-10 cm, the lower branches 3-5 together. Glumes unequal, acute, the lower 1-veined. 2n = 46-63.{\i  Most of Europe.} Au Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Sa Su Tu [Is].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. CENISIA Ascherson & Graebner (Sect. {\i Stoloniferae} Nannf. pro parte). Perennial; rhizomatous. Branches extravaginal; distichously leafy non-flowering shoots usually present. Leaves flat. Panicle-branches terete, sparsely to densely scabrid. Lemma hairy on the keel and marginal veins, somewhat lanate at base. Keels of the palea aculeolate or ciliate below.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. P. arctica} R. Br. in Parry,{\i  Jour. Voy. N.W. Pass., Suppl. App.} 288 (1824) (incl.{\i  P. petschorica} Roshev.). Laxly caespitose; stems 10-15(-20) cm. Leaves (1-)1·5-2·5 mm wide, dark green. Ligule 1·5-2(-3·5) mm, rounded or sometimes acute. Panicle 3-5 cm, more or less pyramidal, rather open, with few spikelets; spikelets with (2-)3-4 florets, tinged blackish-purple, sometimes proliferating. Glumes unequal. Lemma appressed-hairy on abaxial surface, hairy on keel and marginal veins, lanate at base. Keels of the palea aculeolate or shortly ciliate in lower half. Anthers 1·8-2 mm. 2n = 38, 56, 72, 76.{\i  Heaths and dry grassland. Arctic and subarctic Europe, southwards to S. Norway and C. Ural.} Fe ?Is No Rs (N, C) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. P. granitica} Br.-Bl., {\i Arch. Bot. Bull.} ({\i Caen}) {\b 3}: 46 (1929). Laxly caespitose; stem 25-50(-70) cm, rather leafy. Leaves (2-)3-5 mm wide, bright green. Ligule 2-5 mm, rounded to truncate, often lacerate. Panicle 5-10 cm, ovoid, somewhat contracted. Spikelets with 2-5 florets. Glumes subequal. Lemma short- to long-hairy on keel and marginal veins, lanate at base. Keels of the palea ciliate in lower half. Anthers 2-2·4 mm.{\i  Alpine meadows; calcifuge. • Carpathians. }Cz Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b granitica}: Stems 25-40 cm, robust. Leaves 3-4 mm wide. Panicle 7-10 cm; spikelets sometimes proliferating, strongly violet-tinged. Lemma abundantly crispate-hairy on keel and marginal veins, densely lanate at base. 2n = 64, 67, 71, 72, 94.{\i  W. Carpathians}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b disparilis} (E. I. Nyárády) E. I. Nyárády,{\i  Rev. Roum. Biol.} ({\i Bot}.) {\b 10}: 355 (1965): Stems 30-50(-70) cm, rather slender. Leaves 2-3 mm wide. Panicle 5-7(-9) cm; spikelets never proliferating, tinged bronze or golden-brown or occasionally violet. Lemma with short, straight hairs on keel and marginal veins, sparsely lanate at base.{\i  E. & S. Carpathians}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. P. cenisia} All., {\i Auct. Fl. Pedem.} 40 (1789). Laxly caespitose; stems 24-40 cm, with distichously leafy non-flowering shoots. Leaves 2-3 mm wide, slightly glaucous. Ligule of cauline leaves 3-9 mm, acute; ligule of basal leaves very short and truncate or absent. Panicle (2-)4·5-10 cm; spikelets with 3-5 florets, greenish or weakly violet-tinged. Glumes subequal. Lemma shortly hairy on keel and marginal veins, lanate at base.{\i  Rocks, screes and stony pastures. Mountains of C. & S. Europe.} Al Au Bu Co Cr Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Rm Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Panicle open, with patent branches; marginal veins of 
\par
  lemma hairy in lower 1/3; keels of the palea aculeolate .... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b cenisia}
\par
1 Panicle contracted, spicate; marginal veins of lemma 
\par
  hairy in lower ½; keels of the palea ± ciliate in 
\par
  lower half or occasionally aculeolate
\par
2 Lemma with long, appressed hairs on marginal veins;
\par
  panicle-branches sparsely scabrid for most of their 
\par
  length ................................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b contracta}
\par
2 Lemma with short, patent hairs on marginal veins;
\par
  panicle-branches sparsely scabrid towards the apex,
\par
  smooth below ........................................................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b sardoa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sardoa} E. Schmid, {\i Viert. Naturf. Ges. Zürich }{\b 78}: 239 (1933): Stem leafy to above the middle. Panicle (2-)3-5(-9) cm, narrow, contracted, the branches sparsely scabrid in upper ½. Marginal veins of lemma hairy in lower ½. Keels of the palea ciliate in lower ½, or occasionally aculeolate. Anthers 1·8-2 mm. 2n = 56. •{\i  Pyrenees, Corse, Sardegna, Alpes Maritimes}.
\par

\par
162}
\par