{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 florets. Glumes very unequal in length. Lemma longer than glumes, usually with not very prominent convergent veins.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. distans} (L.) Parl., {\i Fl. Ital. }{\b 1}: 367 (1850) ({\i Glyceria distans} (L.) Wahlenb., {\i Atropis distans} (L.) Griseb.). Caespitose perennial; stems 4-65 cm, erect to decumbent. Leaves up to 10 cm. Inflorescence up to 18 cm, narrowly lanceolate to broadly pyramidal, contracted or spreading; branches 2-6 at each node, smooth to coarsely scabrid, lacking spikelets for up to half their length, usually becoming deflexed after anthesis. Spikelets with 3-9 florets, green or purple-tinged. Glumes acute or subacute, the lower 0·5-1·5 mm, the upper 1-2·5 mm. Lemma exceeding glumes, minutely hairy at base.{\i  Saline habitats; occasionally as a weed inland. Almost throughout Europe}. All except ?Al Az Co Cr Sa Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lemma 2·2-4 mm ............................................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b borealis}
\par
1 Lemma 1·5-2·8 mm
\par
2 Anthers 0·3-0·6 mm ...................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b hauptiana}
\par
2 Anthers 0·5-1 mm
\par
3 Leaves conduplicate; spikelets usually purplish ................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b limosa}
\par
3 Leaves ± flat; spikelets usually greenish-yellow ............... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b distans}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b distans} ({\i P. retroflexa} (Curtis) Holmberg): Leaves flat. Inflorescence-branches long, scabrid. Spikelets green. Lower glume 1-1·5 mm, the upper 1·5-2·5 mm. Lemma 1·5-2·8 mm, greenish-yellow. Palea equalling lemma. 2n = 42. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b limosa} (Schur) Jáv. in Soó & Jáv.,{\i  Magyar Növ. Kez.}{\b  2}: 928 (1951) ({\i P. limosa} (Schur) Holmberg): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but leaves less than 2 mm wide, more or less conduplicate; spikelets usually purplish. 2n = 28. •{\i  S.E. & C. Europe, from C. Germany to Moldavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b hauptiana} (Trin. ex V. Krecz.) W. E. Hughes, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 363 (1978) ({\i Atropis hauptiana} Trin. ex V. Krecz.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but lower glume 0·5-1 mm, the upper 1-2·2 mm; palea shorter than lemma; anthers 0·3-.0·6 mm. 2n = 28, 42.{\i  N. & E. Russia.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b borealis} (Holmberg) W. E. Hughes,{\i  loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i P. retroflexa} subsp.{\i  borealis} Holmberg, {\i P. capillaris} (Liljeblad) Jansen, {\i P. retroflexa} sensu Holmberg, non {\i Poa retroflexa} Curtis): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but leaves often plicate; inflorescence-branches usually short; lemma 2·2-4 mm. 2n = 42. {\i Coasts of N. & W. Europe, southwards to the Netherlands}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. tenella} (Lange) Holmberg,{\i  Meddel. Gronl.}{\b  58}: 45 (1926) ({\i Atropis tenella} (Lange) V. Krecz.). Caespitose; stems up to 11 cm, procumbent to ascending. Leaves 2-4 cm, conduplicate. Inflorescence up to 7 cm, scarcely exserted, narrow; branches smooth or scabrid above. Spikelets with 2-6 florets. Lower glume 0·9-1·4 mm, the upper 1·3-1·8 mm. Lemma 1·9-2·5 mm, glabrous or very sparsely hairy at base. Keels of palea usually smooth. Anthers 0·5 mm. 2n = 42.{\i  Seashores. Arctic Europe} ({\i Vajgac, Svalbard}). Rs (N) Sb. ({\i Circumpolar}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The plants from Svalbard, with the keels of the palea spinulose, have been distinguished as{\b  P. svalbardensis} Ronning,{\i  Kong. Norske Vid. Selsk. Skr.} ({\i Trondhjem}) {\b 1961}({\b 4}): 9 (1963). They probably do not merit specific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. fasciculata} (Torrey) E. P. Bicknell,{\i  Bull. Torrey Bat. Club}{\b  35}: 197 (1907) ({\i P. borreri} (Bab.) Hayek, {\i Glyceria borreri} Bab.). More or less caespitose perennial, rarely biennial. Leaves up to 20 cm, somewhat glaucous, flat or plicate. Inflorescence 2-18 cm, lanceolate to ovate; branches 2-4 at each node, somewhat scabrid, at least the short ones with spikelets to the base. Spikelets with 3-8 florets. Lower glume 1-2 mm; upper glume 1·5-2 mm. Lemma 1·5-2·5 mm, minutely hairy at base.{\i  Salt-marshes. W. Europe, northwards to the Netherlands; N.E. Italy and N.W. Jugoslavia.} Be Br Ga Hb Ho Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b fasciculata}: Stems up to 85 cm. Ligule 1-2·5 mm. Inflorescence-branches patent. Lemma with entire margins. Palea as long as lemma. Anthers 0·4-0·8 mm. Grain 1-1·5 mm. 2n = 28. {\i Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pungens} (Pau) W. E. Hughes,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 363 (1978) ({\i P. pungens} (Pau) Paunero, {\i Glyceria pungens} Pau): Stems 6-25(-30) cm. Ligule 0·5 mm. Inflorescence-branches more or less erect. Lemma with erose-ciliolate margins. Palea slightly shorter than lemma. Anthers 1·25-1·75 mm. Grain c. 2 mm. •{\i  E. Spain} ({\i Laguna de Gallocanta, S. of Calatayud}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. maritima} (Hudson) Parl.,{\i  Fl. Ital.}{\b  1}: 370 (1850) ({\i Atropis maritima} (Hudson) Griseb.,{\i  Glyceria maritima }(Hudson) Wahlenb.,{\i  G. foucaudii} (Hackel) Coste). Robust perennial with extravaginal stolons; stems up to 30(-80) cm, erect or ascending. Leaves more than 3 cm, flat or plicate. Inflorescence up to 25 cm, rather narrow; branches smooth or scabrid above. Spikelets with 4-10 imbricate florets. Lower glume 1·5-2·8 mm, the upper 2-4·2 mm. Lemma 2·7-4·6 mm, usually hairy in the lower half, at least on the veins. Keels of palea spinulose. Anthers 1·5-2·5 mm. 2n = 56 (14, 42, 49, 60, 63, 70, 77).{\i  Salt-marshes. Coasts of W. Europe and the Baltic region; probably introduced in arctic Russia}. Be Br ?Co Da Fa Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs Is ?It Lu No Po Rs (*N, B) ?Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   All records from the Mediterranean region require confirmation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 5. P. phryganodes} (Trin.) Scribner & Merr., {\i Contr. U.S. Nat. Herb.}{\b  13}: 78 (1910) ({\i Atropis phryganodes} (Trin.) V. Krecz.). Like {\b 4} but stolons intravaginal; leaves rarely more than 3 cm; flowering stems up to 7 cm, rarely present; spikelets with not more than 4 florets; lower glume 1·2-1·7 mm, the upper 1·5-2·5 mm; lemma 1·5-2·5 mm; keels of palea smooth; anthers indehiscent. 2n = 28. {\i Salt-marshes. Arctic Europe; Gulf of Bothnia} ({\i near Oulu}). Fe No Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b 6-10}). {\b P. festuciformis} group. Caespitose, often glaucous perennials. Leaves folded; ligule ovate, acute. Panicle-branches 2-6 at each node; panicle more or less contracted. Spikelets often purple- or violet-tinged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A group of closely related species requiring further study.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Inflorescence-branches smooth
\par
2 Keels of palea ciliolate only towards apex ............................. {\b 10. tenuissima}
\par
2 Keels of palea ciliolate only at base ............................................. {\b 8. gigantea}
\par
1 Inflorescence-branches scabrid
\par
3 Glumes ± acute ...................................................................... {\b 7. dolicholepis}
\par
3 Glumes obtuse
\par
4 Upper glume 1·5-2 mm ........................................................... {\b 9. poecilantha}
\par
4 Upper glume 2·8-3·5 mm ..................................................... {\b 6. festuciformis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. festuciformis} (Host) Parl.,{\i  Fl. Ital. }{\b 1}: 368 (1850). Stems up to 60 cm. Leaves up to 2·5 mm wide. Inflorescence up to 15 cm, the branches scabrid, often deflexed after anthesis. Spikelets with 5-11 florets. Glumes obtuse, the upper 2·8-3·5 mm. Lemma 2-4 mm, with a wide scarious margin. Anthers 0·8-2·5 mm. 2n = 35. {\i Salt-marshes. S. & S.C. Europe.} Au Bu Co Ga Gr
\par
Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Inflorescence not secund
\par
2 Anthers 0·8-1·2 mm ....................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b tenuifolia}
\par
2 Anthers 1·2-2·3 mm ....................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b convoluta}
\par
1 Inflorescence secund
\par
3 Lower glume 2·5-3 mm; anthers 2-2·5 mm .............. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b festuciformis}
\par

\par
168}
\par