{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 3-5 florets. Glumes unequal. Lemma moderately hairy on keel and marginal veins, not or sparsely lanate at base. Keels of the palea ciliate in lower half. Anthers c. 1·6 mm. 2n = 14+0-2B.{\i  Mountain pastures. Balkan peninsula, S. & E. Carpathians.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. P. pumila} Host,{\i  Fl. Austr.}{\b  1}: 146 (1827) ({\i P. thessala} Boiss. & Orph.). Densely caespitose; stems 6-18(-30) cm. Leaves 2-5 cm × (0·2-)0·5-1·5 mm, mostly basal, folded or flat; margin not cartilaginous. Ligule 1-2 mm, truncate in the basal leaves, longer and acute in the cauline. Panicle 2·5-5 cm, rather open, ellipsoid to ovoid, with 2-3 slender branches. Spikelets greenish to violet-tinged, with 4-6 florets; glumes subequal. Lemma shortly hairy on keel and marginal veins, glabrous between the veins, sparsely lanate at base. Keels of the palea finely aculeolate or with a few short hairs below. Anthers 1·4-1·8(-2) mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Mountain pastures and rocks. • E. Alps; mountains of Balkan peninsula and Romania.} Al ?Au Gr It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. P. molinerii} Balbis, {\i Elenco} 85 (1801) ({\i P. badensis} var.{\i  xerophila} (Br.-Bl.) Suess.). Densely caespitose; stems (8-)12-18 cm. Leaves 2-6 cm × 1-2·5 mm, glaucous, mostly basal, usually tightly folded but sometimes flat to canaliculate; margin often more or less cartilaginous. Ligule of lowest leaves up to 1 mm, obtuse, often lacerate, the cauline with ligule 1-2 mm. Panicle 1·5-4 cm, compact, narrowly ellipsoid to ovoid; branches rather rigid, mostly in pairs at the lower nodes. Spikelets more or less violet-tinged, with (2-)3-5 florets; glumes subequal. Lemma more or less long-hairy on keel and marginal veins, sparsely hairy between the veins. Keels of the palea ciliate below or aculeolate throughout. Anthers (1·3-)1·5-2 mm. 2n = 14. •{\i  Mountains of S. & C. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Closely related to{\b  40} and {\b 42}; transitional forms occur occasionally and further work is needed to clarify their relationships.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. P. badensis} Haenke ex Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  1}: 392 (1797) ({\i P. alpina} subsp.{\i  badensis} (Haenke ex Willd.) G. Beck). Densely caespitose; stems (15-)20-35 cm. Leaves mostly basal, glaucous; margin cartilaginous. Basal leaves (1·5-)2·5-6 cm × 2-3(-4·5) mm, flat to canaliculate; ligule up to 2 mm, rounded to truncate, lacerate. Cauline leaves folded, short; ligule 2-6 mm, acute. Panicle 4-7 cm, compact, ovoid; spikelets greenish or occasionally purple-tinged, densely clustered, with 5-9 florets. Glumes unequal. Lemma moderately hairy on and sparsely hairy between keel and marginal veins, usually sparsely lanate at base. Keels of the palea aculeolate. 2n = 14+0-8B, 18, 21, 28.{\i  Dry rocks or sandy ground. • C. Europe and N. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu ?It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. P. alpina} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 67 (1753) ({\i P. borisii} Stefanov). Laxly caespitose; stems 15-30(-40) cm. Leaves 4-10 cm × 2-4·5 mm, flat; margin not cartilaginous. Ligule of basal leaves 1-2(-3) mm, truncate; ligule of cauline leaves 3-5 mm, often lacerate. Panicle compact to patent, more or less pyramidal; branches in pairs at the lower nodes. Spikelets purple-tinged, with 4-6(-9) florets, often proliferating. Glumes unequal. Lemma densely hairy on keel and marginal veins, sparsely hairy on the surface between the veins, usually sparsely lanate at base. Keels of the palea ciliate below. 2n = 22, 26, 28, 33-35, 37-40, 42-46, 56.{\i  Mountain pastures and exposed grassland. Mountains of Europe and locally at low altitudes in the north.} Al Au Br Bu Co Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Sb Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp. {\b insularis} (Parl.) Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  3}: 264 (1933) ({\i P. bivonae} Parl. ex Guss.), a seldom collected and rather poorly understood variant of {\b 43}, differs in having elongate leaves 4-7 mm wide, and shortly branched panicle with 2-5 branches at the lower nodes, glabrous lemma or lemma hairy on veins only, and keels of palea aculeolate. It occurs in the mountains of Sicilia and N.C. Greece.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 INCERTAE SEDIS.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. P. jubata} A. Kerner,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  23}: 6 (1873) ({\i P. grimburgii} Hackel). Annual. Stems 12-27 cm, solitary, slender, smooth, purple-tinged at the base. Leaves up to 3 cm × 0·3-0·6 mm, folded. Ligule up to 2·5 mm, acute. Panicle up to 5 cm, lax, ellipsoid, with few spikelets; branches weakly scabrid, arising singly at the lower nodes. Spikelets with 4-11 florets, tinged with purple. Glumes unequal, the upper broadly ovate, subacute, wider than the lower. Lemma very densely long-hairy on keel and marginal veins, ciliate on intermediate veins, sparsely lanate at base. Keels of the palea ciliate along their whole length. Rhachilla smooth, glabrous. Anthers 0·6-0·7 mm. {\i Sandy ground, usually by the sea. • W. coast of Balkan peninsula; one station in Turkey.} Al Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. P. flabellata} (Lam.) Hooker fil.,{\i  Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. London}{\b  168}: 22 (1879). Densely caespitose perennial. Stems stout, 45-55(-150) cm. Leaves 30-40(-70) cm × 4-12(-15) mm, flat to canaliculate; ligule 8-12 mm, acute or obtuse, usually lacerate. Panicle 8-21 × 1-4 cm, narrow, spike-like, dense. Spikelets with 1-4 florets. Glumes subequal, the lower 1-, the upper 3-veined. Lemma scabrid on the veins, with a scabrid terminal awn up to 2 mm. Keels of the palea aculeolate. Anthers 2·8-4 mm.{\i  Naturalized in the Shetland Is.} [Br.] ({\i Southernmost South America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 APPARENTLY STABILIZED HYBRIDS.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. P.} ×{\b  hartzii} Gand.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  66}: 302 (1920) (Probably{\b  26} × {\b 33}). Densely caespitose; shoots extravaginal. Stems (10-)15-25(-30) cm; leaves mostly basal, folded, c. 2·5 mm wide. Uppermost leaf with a distinct, elongate sheath. Ligule 2-3(-4) mm, acute. Panicle 3-5 cm, narrow, contracted; branches scabrid. Spikelets with 3-5 florets; lemma hairy on keel and marginal veins and between the veins.{\i  Svalbard.} Sb. ({\i Greenland, arctic Canada.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. P}. × {\b jemtlandica} (Almq.) K. Richter,{\i  Pl. Eur. }{\b 1}: 84 (1890) (Probably {\b 19} ×{\b  43}). Densely caespitose; shoots intra- and extravaginal. Stem 10-20 cm, with the remains of leaf-sheaths at the base. Leaves 1-2 mm wide, flat or folded, tapering gradually to the apex; ligule 1-2·5 mm, acute. Panicle 2-5 cm, lax, more or less ovoid. Spikelets rather few towards the apex of the panicle-branches, with 2-4 proliferating florets; lemma hairy on keel and marginal veins. 2n = c. 36.{\i  N. & W. Fennoscandia; Scotland.} Br ?Is No Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  48. P}. ×{\b  nobilis} Skalinska,{\i  Acta Soc. Bot. Polon.}{\b  24}: 751 (1955) (Probably {\b 11 }×{\b  43}). Rhizomatous, with intra- and extravaginal shoots. Stem 30-40 cm, with few leaves. Leaves 2-3 mm wide; ligule c. 3 mm, subacute, sometimes lacerate. Panicle 4·5-8·5 cm, nodding at apex. Spikelets with 2 florets, the upper proliferating. Glumes unequal. Lemma densely crispate-hairy on keel and marginal veins. Keels of palea ciliate in lower half. 2n = c. 80. •{\i  S. Poland} ({\i Tatra}). Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. P}.× {\b taurica} H. Pojark., {\i Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 1965}: 51 (1965) (Probably{\b  23} × {\b 29}). Perennial, rhizomatous, laxly caespitose. Stem 25-40(-80) cm, geniculate-ascending, scabrid, distinctly compressed in upper part. Leaves 1-2·5 mm
\par

\par
166}
\par