{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 segments 1·5-2·5 mm. Capsule 2·5-3 mm.{\i  Wet places. N. Europe, southwards to N. England and C. Ural; Alps, W. Carpathians.} Au Br Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge He Is It ?Ju No Po Rs (N, C) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pusilla}: Leaves mostly 2-5 cm, 3- to 4-veined. 2n = 30. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b austriaca} H. Kunz,{\i  Phyton }({\i Austria}) {\b 9}: 138 (1961): Leaves mostly 4-8 cm, 5- to 7-veined. 1800-2200{\i  m. • E. Alps}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. calyculata} (L.) Wahlenb.,{\i  Fl. Lapp.} 90 (1812). Leaves 1·5-15 cm, 4- to 10-veined, densely caespitose. Stem (5-)14-35 cm, usually with 1-3 leaves. Inflorescence usually a cylindrical raceme 20-60 mm with up to 30 flowers, rarely a head c. 5 mm and with 3 flowers. Flowers yellowish, rarely reddish, with an entire bract at base of pedicel and 3-lobed bracteole immediately below flower. Perianth-segments 2-3·5 mm. Capsule 3·5 mm. 2n = 30.{\i  Wet places; calcicole. • From Gotland and Estonia southwards to the Pyrenees, Crna Gora and N.C. Ukraine.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs(B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variants from high altitudes resembling {\b 1} in habit, with 4- to 5-veined leaves but with a 3-lobed bracteole below the flower, have been distinguished as {\b T. glacialis} Gaudin, {\i Fl. Helv.}{\b  2}: 596 (1828).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Putative hybrids of {\b 1} & {\b 2}, {\b T}. ×{\b  hybrida} A. Kerner ex Ascherson & Graebner, {\i Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  3}: 7 (1905), have been recorded from Tirol, but some of the plants may in fact belong to {\b 1}({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.      Narthecium}       Hudson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.T. Stearn. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small, rhizomatous perennial herbs. Leaves distichous, ensiform. Flowers small, in terminal racemes. Perianth persistent, stellate at anthesis, erect in fruit; segments free. Stamens with linear, basifixed, extrorse anthers; filaments lanate. Ovary attenuate into a short style with a small, slightly 3-lobed stigma. Capsule loculicidal, narrowly ellipsoid or narrowly ovoid. Seeds numerous, almost filiform.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Descriptions of leaves, unless otherwise stated, refer to those on non-flowering shoots.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature:{\i  A. Schumacher, Arch. Hydrobiol. }{\b 41}: 112-195 (1945).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Cauline leaves unlike the other leaves, the lower 
\par
  smaller than the upper .............................................................. {\b 1. ossifragum}
\par
1 Cauline leaves like the other leaves, the lower larger
\par
  than the upper
\par
2 Raceme lax; pedicels 7-12 mm; perianth-segments 6-8 mm ... {\b 2. reverchonii}
\par
2 Raceme dense; pedicels 4-7 mm; perianth-segments 4-5 mm .. {\b 3. scardicum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. ossifragum} (L.) Hudson,{\i  Fl. Angl.} 128 (1762). Leaves 3-20(-50) cm, (3-)6(-8)-veined. Stem 5-45 cm, with small, clasping leaves at base and larger leaves above, unlike the other leaves; raceme with 6-20 flowers. Perianth-segments 6-9 mm, yellow inside, greenish outside. Capsule c. 12 mm, orange. 2n = 26. {\i Bogs and wet, acid heaths. • W. & N. Europe, eastwards to S.E. Sweden and southwards to N. Portugal.} Be Br †Cz Da Fa Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs Lu No Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In Faeröer a dwarf variant occurs with stems usually c. 10 cm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. N. reverchonii} Celak., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  37}: 154 (1887). Leaves up to 20 cm, 6- to 12-veined. Stem 10-40 cm; cauline leaves like the other leaves, the upper smaller than the lower. Raceme with 10-24 flowers, lax; pedicels 7-12 mm. Perianth segments 6-8 mm, yellow. Capsule 10-13 mm. 2n = 26.{\i  Damp places by mountain streams. • Corse.} Co.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. N. scardicum} Kosanin, {\i op. cit.}{\b  63}: 141 (1913). Leaves up to 10 cm, 4- to 10-veined. Stem 9-27 cm; cauline leaves like the other leaves, the upper smaller than the lower. Raceme with 5-13 flowers, dense; pedicels 4-7 mm. Perianth-segments 4-5 mm, yellow. Capsule 8-10 mm. {\i Damp places,} 1600-2300{\i  m. • Mountains of S.W. Jugoslavia, N.E. Albania and N.W. Greece.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.     Zigadenus}            L.C.M. Richard 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Bulbous, scapose perennial herbs. Leaves few, mainly basal, linear, acuminate. Inflorescence a lax, few-flowered raceme. Perianth tubular-campanulate, deeply 6-lobed, persistent; segments patent, the outer ovate-lanceolate, the inner lanceolate. Stamens 6, shorter than the perianth. Fruit a capsule. Seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. Z. sibiricus} (L.) A. Gray, {\i Ann. Lyc. New York}{\b  4}: 112 (1837). Bulb oblong-ovoid, covered with brownish-black leaf remains. Scape up to 80 cm, about as long as leaves, erect, simple. Pedicels as long as or longer than the perianth. Bracts elliptical, dark violet. Perianth-segments 5-8(-10) × 2-3 mm, whitish inside, greenish outside, bearing nectariferous glands on the lower third. Anthers purple. Capsule oblong-ovoid, obtusely trigonous.{\i  S. Ural and adjacent lowlands.} Rs (C, E). ({\i Temperate Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.     Veratrum}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Robust, rhizomatous perennial herbs. Rhizomes stout, vertical, clothed above with remains of leaf-sheaths. Stems simple, fistular, leafy. Leaves alternate, broadly ovate to elliptical, many-veined, suberect and overlapping, narrowed into a long sheathing base. Flowers numerous, in a terminal panicle or raceme, hermaphrodite or occasionally male. Perianth-segments widely patent, white, greenish, reddish-brown or-black, elliptical to lanceolate, free to the base, persistent in fruit. Stamens 6, inserted at the base of the perianth-segments. Fruit a 3-locular capsule. Seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves glabrous, the upper linear-lanceolate; pedicels 
\par
  about equalling or slightly longer than the bracts;
\par
  perianth-segments 3·5-7 mm, reddish-brown to -black ................... {\b 1. nigrum} 
\par
Leaves shortly pubescent beneath, the upper broadly lance-
\par
  olate; pedicels much shorter than the bracts; perianth-
\par
  segments 7-15 mm, white to green or yellow ................................... {\b 2. album}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. V. nigrum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1044 (1753). Stems 50-100(-130) cm. Cauline leaves glabrous, the lower 10-25(-35) × 4-10(-20) cm, broadly elliptical, becoming smaller and narrower above. Inflorescence a panicle, branched below, or a simple raceme. Pedicels 3-7 mm. Flowers 9-15 mm in diameter. Perianth segments 3·5-7 × 2·5-4 mm, elliptical to oblong-elliptical, reddish-brown to -black. Capsule glabrous. 2n = 16. {\i Scrub, wood margins and mountain meadows. C., S. & S.E. Europe, from C. Russia southwards to S. C. Italy and Bulgaria.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga ?Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. V. album} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1044 (1753). Stems 50-175 cm. Cauline leaves glabrous or subglabrous above, shortly pubescent beneath especially on the veins, the lower 10-25 × 6-15 cm, elliptical to broadly elliptical, becoming shorter and narrower above. Inflorescence a much-branched panicle. Pedicels 2-3 mm. Flowers 15-25 mm in diameter. Perianth-segments 7-15 × 3-6 mm, elliptical to lanceolate, white outside and greenish inside to greenish-white or yellowish on both surfaces. Capsule sparsely pubescent. 2n = 16.{\i  Damp grassland, mainly in the mountains}.
\par

\par
16}
\par