{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 the length of the marginal veins; hairs acute. Keels of the palea sparsely long-ciliate for most of their length. 2n = 14.{\i  Screes and stony slopes; calcicole. • S.W. Bulgaria} ({\i Pirin Planina}); {\i E.C. Greece} ({\i Olimbos}). Bu Gr.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. P. minor} Gaudin,{\i  Alpina} ({\i Winterthur}) {\b 3}: 44 (1808). Densely caespitose; stems 5-30 cm, leafy for most of their length. Leaves 1-1·5(-2) mm wide; ligule 2-2*5 mm, subacute. Uppermost leaf without a distinct sheath. Panicle 2*5-3 cm, ovoid; branches terete. Spikelets with 4-6 florets. Lemma hairy for c. 1/2 of the length of the keel and marginal veins. Keels of the palea aculeolate. 2n = 28.{\i  Stony slopes and screes; calcicole. • Pyrenees; Sierra Nevada; Alps; mountains of Jugoslavia and Romania.} Au Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Rm.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. TICHOPOA Ascherson & Graebner. Perennial, rhizomatous, with stems strongly compressed above. Branches extravaginal. Leaves flat. Panicle-branches very short, moderately scabrid. Lemma glabrous, or shortly appressed-hairy on the keel and marginal veins, lanate at base. Keels of the palea aculeolate.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. P. compressa} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 69 (1753). Stems 20-40 cm, geniculate-ascending, smooth, strongly compressed in upper part, arising obliquely from the rhizome. Leaves 2-4(-5) mm wide, smooth, flat. Panicle 2-7(-10) cm, rather narrow to pyramidal; branches moderately scabrid. Spikelets with (2-)4-8 florets. Lemma glabrous, or shortly appressed-hairy below on keel and marginal veins. Anthers 1-1·2 mm. 2n = 42, 45, 49, 56.{\i  Walls, rocks and other dry places; somewhat calcicole. Most of Europe except the extreme north and west and some Mediterranean islands.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Lu Sb; not native in Hb.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. STENOPOA Dumort. (Sect.{\i  Hylopoa} Ascherson & Graebner). Laxly to densely caespitose perennials, never rhizomatous. Branches extravaginal. Leaves flat or somewhat convolute, tapering gradually to the apex. Panicle-branches terete, scabrid. Glumes subequal to unequal. Lemma hairy on the keel and marginal veins, not or sparsely lanate at base. Keels of the palea aculeolate to ciliate.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. P. flaccidula} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 128 (1852). Laxly caespitose. Stems 30-60 cm, smooth. Leaves 1-2 mm wide, flaccid; margins smooth or weakly scabrid. Ligule 2·5-3·5 mm, acute. Panicle 8-12 cm, lax, pyramidal; branches scabrid, in pairs at the lower nodes, patent, bearing spikelets only on the upper part of each branch. Spikelets 3·5-4 mm, mostly with 3 florets. Glumes subequal. Lemma appressed-hairy on the abaxial surface between keel and marginal veins, sparsely lanate at base.{\i  Shady places. Mountains of S. & E. Spain and Mallorca.} Bl Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. P. palustris} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 874 (1759) (incl. {\i P. tanfiljewii} Roshev.). Rather laxly caespitose. Stems (15-)40-80 cm, smooth. Leaves 1-2(-3) mm wide; margins smooth. Ligule 1-2·5 mm, rounded. Panicle (8-)12-20(-30) cm, narrowly pyramidal; branches scabrid, up to 5 at the lower nodes, erectopatent. Spikelets 3-5 mm, with 2-5 florets; glumes subequal. Lemma hairy on keel and marginal veins, sparsely lanate at base. 2n = 28.{\i  Wet grassland, marshes and forest-margins. Much of Europe, but absent from most of the west and parts of the south.} Au Be Br Bu Cr Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su [Hb].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. P. glauca} Vahl, {\i Fl. Dan.}{\b  6}({\b 17}): 3 (1790) ({\i P. caesia }Sm.; incl. {\i P. ganeschinii} Roshev.). Densely caespitose; stem (10-)17-35(-55) cm, stiffly erect, usually very glaucous, smooth to somewhat scabrid at apex. Leaves rather short and tapering, 2·5-3 mm wide. Ligule 1·2-2 mm, truncate. Panicle 3·5-7(-10) cm, ovoid, compact; branches 2-3(-4) at the lower nodes. Spikelets 4-6 mm, with 2-4(-5) florets; glumes subequal. Lemma hairy on keel and marginal veins, lanate at base. 2n = 42, 44, 49, 56, 63, 65, c. 70.{\i  Rocks, screes and other dry, open habitats. N. Europe; mountains of Europe southwards to the Pyrenees, S. Alps and N. Greece.} Au Br Cz Fa Fe Ga Gr He Is It Ju No Po Rs (N, C) Sb Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. P. nemoralis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 69 (1753). Laxly caespitose; stem 30-70 cm, smooth, rather leafy. Leaves 1·5-2(-3) mm wide; margins smooth; sheaths terete. Ligule up to 0·5 mm. Panicle 5-8(-10) cm, lax, elongate-ovoid; branches 2-5 at the lower nodes. Spikelets up to 4 mm, numerous, with 2-4 florets. Glumes unequal, the lower glume narrow, more or less subulate. Lemma hairy on keel and lower part of marginal veins, lanate at base. 2n = 28, 33, 42, 56. {\i Woods. Almost throughout Europe.} All except Az Bl Cr Sb.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  P. balbisii} Parl.,{\i  Fl. Ital.}{\b  1}: 360 (1850) ({\i P. capitata} Balbis), a poorly understood variant described from Sardegna and occurring also in Corse, probably does not warrant separation from {\b 27}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. P. rehmannii} (Ascherson & Graebner) Woloszczak,{\i  Fl. Polon. Exsicc.}{\b  10-11}: 1020 (1904) ({\i P. anceps} Rehmann, non Forster). Moderately densely caespitose; stem 30-40 cm, compressed, smooth. Leaves (3-)4-5 mm wide, slightly glaucous, with scabrid margins; sheaths of cauline leaves compressed, with a distinct raised keel. Ligule 0·3-0·5 mm, truncate. Panicle 10-12 cm, linear-triangular in outline, often drooping at the apex; branches 3-5 at the lower nodes. Spikelets 4-5 mm, with 3-5 florets; glumes subequal. Lemma hairy on keel and lower part of marginal veins, not lanate at base. Anthers 1·6-1·9 mm. 2n = 14. •{\i  S. & E. Carpathians.} Rm Rs (W).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 29-32}). {\b P. sterilis} group. Densely caespitose. Leaves flat or slightly folded or canaliculate, especially when dry, more or less scabrid on margins. Stems usually rather leafy. Spikelets narrow. Glumes subequal to equal.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    A biosystematic investigation of the whole range of variants in this group is required, as the plants are extremely variable in both macroscopic and microscopic characters. They occur in a wide range of habitats from near sea-level to 2200 m.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    Literature: G. Dihoru, {\i Studii Cerc. Biol.} (Ser. Bot.) {\b 20}: 95-106 (1968). G. Serbanescu, {\i op. cit.}{\b  19}: 23-31, 227-237 (1967).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Panicle narrow, subspicate, with short, erect, ± 
\par  sparsely scabrid branches; palea glabrous on surface 
\par  between keels; plant often glaucous
\par 2 Stems not leafy; leaves 0·5-1·3 mm wide; rhachilla 
\par  scabrid, not hirsute ...................................................................... {\b 32. stepposa}
\par 2 Stems leafy; leaves (0·8-)1·2-2 mm wide; rhachilla 
\par  finely papillose to hirsute ............................................................... {\b 31. sterilis}
\par 1 Panicle narrow to wide, ovoid to pyramidal; branches 
\par  patent to erect, sparsely to densely scabrid; palea 
\par  glabrous or hairy on surface between keels; plant not 
\par  or scarcely glaucous
\par 3 Stems smooth or slightly scabrid below the panicle;
\par  uppermost node concealed by sheath of the leaf below;
\par  glumes rather narrow, the upper (3·5-)4-5 mm; lemma 
\par  often violet- and gold-tinged .................................................... {\b 30. versicolor}
\par 3 Stems ± densely scabrid below the panicle; uppermost 
\par  node usually not concealed by sheath of the leaf below;
\par  glumes ovate-lanceolate, the upper (3-)3·5-3·8 mm;
\par  lemma usually not variegated .................................................. {\b 29. pannonica}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. P. pannonica} A. Kerner,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  14}: 84 (1864). Stems 25-45 cm. Leaves 1·5-2·5 mm wide. Ligule up
\par
\par 164}
\par