{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cenisia}: Stem usually leafy only in lower ½. Panicle 5-10 cm, lax, rather open, the branches more or less patent, sparsely to densely scabrid. Marginal veins of lemma hairy in lower 1/3. Keels of the palea aculeolate. Anthers 1·5-1·7 mm. 2n = 28, 49, 50-56.{\i  Calcicole. • Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b contracta} (E. I. Nyárády) E. I. Nyárády,{\i  Bul. Grad. Bot. Univ. Cluj }{\b 11}: 8 (1931): Stems leafy to about the middle. Panicle 4-7 cm, narrow, somewhat contracted, the branches moderately scabrid for most of their length. Marginal veins of lemma hairy in lower ½. Keels of the palea ciliate in lower half. Anthers 1·7-2 mm.{\i  S. Carpathians, mountains of Balkan peninsula and Kriti}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. MACROPOA F. Hermann ex Tzvelev. Perennial, rhizomatous; stem geniculate-ascending, slightly compressed at base. Branches intra- or extravaginal. Leaves 2-5 mm wide, canaliculate; ligule 1-2 mm, obtuse. Panicle-branches weakly scabrid. Lemma glabrous, not lanate at base. Keels of the palea aculeolate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. P. longifolia} Trin., {\i Mém. Acad. Sci. Pétersb.} ser. 6, {\b 4}({\b 2}) {\i Bot}.: 61 (1836). Stem 30-50(-60) cm, stout, somewhat compressed and with greyish remains of leaf-sheaths at base. Leaves 1-2 mm wide, tapering gradually to an abruptly mucronate apex. Ligule 1-2 mm, truncate. Panicle 6-9 cm, narrow; branches short, more or less erect. Spikelets with 2-4 florets. Glumes unequal. Lemma glabrous. Anthers 2·5-3·7 mm. {\i Meadows and open woods. Mountains of Krym}. Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus, N.E. Turkey, W. Iran.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Represented in Europe by the endemic subsp.{\b  fagetorum} (P. Smirnov) Tzvelev in Fedorov,{\i  Fl. Part. Eur. URSS}{\b  1}: 285 (1974) ({\i P. fagetorum }P. Smirnov).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. P. sibirica} Roshev.,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. Pétersb. }{\b 12}: 121 (1912). Stems (20-)50-120 cm, slender, somewhat compressed at base. Leaves 2-5 mm wide, tapering gradually to the apex. Ligule c. 1 mm, obtuse. Panicle 6-18 cm, pyramidal; branches elongate, more or less patent. Spikelets with (2-)3-4(-5) florets. Glumes unequal. Lemma glabrous. Anthers 1·5-2·5 mm. {\i Meadows and wood-margins. N.E. Russia.} Rs (N, C). ({\i N. & N.C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. HOMALOPOA Dumort. Densely caespitose perennials; stems compressed in lower half, especially where enclosed by strongly folded leaf-sheaths; branches extravaginal. Leaves flat or folded. Panicle-branches terete, sparsely to densely scabrid. Lemma glabrous or hairy only on the keel, lanate or not at base. Keels of the palea aculeolate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. P. chaixii} Vill. in L., {\i Syst. Pl. Eur.}{\b  1},{\i  Fl. Delph.} 7 (1786). Stems 50-120(-150) cm, stout. Leaves 6-10(-15) mm wide, abruptly contracted to the cucullate apex. Ligule 1-2 mm, truncate. Panicle 10-15 cm, ovoid, compact; branches short, erecto-patent, densely scabrid. Spikelets with 4-5 florets. Glumes unequal; keel scabrid at the apex. Lemma glabrous, with a scabrid keel, usually not lanate at base. 2n = 14.{\i  Woods, mainly in mountain districts. C. & S. Europe; introduced elsewhere with grass-seed, and naturalized in lawns and pastures.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W) [Br Da Fe Ho No *Rs (B, C) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. P. hybrida} Gaudin, {\i Alpina} ({\i Winterthur}){\b  3}: 46 (1808). Sometimes shortly creeping; stems 50-150 cm, stout. Leaves (4-)5-8 mm wide, flat, tapering gradually to the apex. Ligule 3-5 mm, rounded. Panicle 15-20 cm, conical; branches somewhat elongate, patent, sparsely scabrid. Glumes unequal; keel smooth or scabrid near the apex. Lemma hairy on the keel, sparsely lanate at base 2n = 14.{\i  Moist woods and pastures. Alps, Jura, E. & S. Carpathians, mountains of Jugoslavia}. Au Ga Ge Gr He It Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. P. remota} Forselles, {\i Linn. Inst. Skr.}{\b  1}: 6 (1807). Like {\b 16} but often with short epigeal stolons; lower leaves abruptly contracted to the cucullate apex; ligule 2-3 mm; panicle-branches very long, arcuate-patent; glumes subequal, scabrid on keel and lateral veins. 2n = 14.{\i  Moist woods. N., C. & E. Europe, southwards to Switzerland, C. Romania and S. Ukraine}. Au Cz Da Fe Ge He Hu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. LEPTOPHYLLAE J. R. Edmondson. Densely caespitose, shortly stoloniferous perennials, with numerous non-flowering shoots arising near the base; branches extravaginal. Leaves very slender, strongly folded. Panicle-branches sulcate, densely scabrid. Lemma sparsely hairy on the keel and marginal veins, very sparsely lanate at base. Keels of the palea weakly aculeolate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. P. stiriaca} Fritsch & Hayek, {\i Jahreskat. Wien. Bot. Tauschanstalt}{\b  1904}: 226 (1904) ({\i P. pratensis} var. stiriaca (Dörfler) Suess.). Slightly glaucous; stems (30-)50-80(-100) cm. Leaves (10-)30-40 cm × 0·2-0·3 mm, mostly arising from near the base of the stem, strongly folded, shortly hairy between the veins on the adaxial surface. Ligule 1-2 mm, rounded. Panicle (4-)7-11 (-18) cm, rather lax; branches erect. Spikelets with (2-)4-6 florets. 2n = 14.{\i  Rocks, screes and wood-margins. • E.C. Europe, extending southwards to Crna Gora.} Au Cz Ju Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. OREINOS Ascherson & Graebner. Laxly to densely caespitose perennials; branches extravaginal; short stolons sometimes present. Leaves flat or folded. Panicle-branches slender, terete to sulcate, smooth. Lemma hairy on the keel and marginal veins, lanate at base. Keels of the palea aculeolate to ciliate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. P. flexuosa} Sm.,{\i  Fl. Brit.}{\b  1}: 101 (1800) ({\i P. laxa} subsp.{\i  flexuosa} (Sm.) Hyl.). Laxly caespitose; stems 10-20(-30) cm, mostly leafy only at the base. Leaves 1-2 mm wide; ligule up to 3·5 mm, rounded-lacerate. Cauline leaves with a distinct sheath. Panicle 2·5-5·5 cm, ovoid; branches sulcate. Spikelets with 2-3 florets. Lemma hairy on keel and for c. 1/3 of the length of the marginal veins; hairs acute. Keels of the palea aculeolate. 2n = 42.{\i  Rocks and screes. • Mountains of N.W. Europe.} Br Is No Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. P. laxa} Haenke in J. Jirásek et al.,{\i  Beob. Reis. Riesengeb.} 118 (1791). Densely caespitose; stems (10-)13-20 cm, mostly leafy only at the base. Leaves 0·8-1·5(-2·5) mm wide; ligule up to 3 mm, acute, rounded-lacerate, or truncate. Cauline leaves with a distinct sheath. Panicle (2-)2·8-3·5(-7) cm; branches sulcate. Spikelets with 3-4 florets. Lemma hairy on keel and for c. 2/3 of the length of the marginal veins; hairs obtuse. Anthers 1-1·3 mm. 2n = 21, 28.{\i  Mountain rocks and grassy slopes; calcifuge. • From S.W. Germany and the Carpathians southwards to the Sierra Nevada, C. Appennini and S.W. Bulgaria}. Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b P. Nyaradyana} Nannf.,{\i  Symb. Bot. Upsal.}{\b  1}({\b 5}): 38 (1935), a glaucous variant of {\b 20} from the Carpathians, has longer, acute ligules and rather longer anthers (up to 1·7 mm).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. P. pirinica} Stoj. & Acht.,{\i  Bull. Inst. Roy. Hist. Nat. }({\i Sofia}){\b  12}: 181 (1939). Densely caespitose; stems 5-30 cm. Leaves 0·2-0·4 mm wide, filiform, mostly basal; ligule 0·4-0·6 mm, truncate. Cauline leaves with a distinct sheath. Panicle (1·8-)3-5·5(-6·5) cm, elongate-ellipsoid to narrow and subspicate; branches rather flexuous, terete, with relatively few spikelets. Spikelets with 3-6 florets. Lemma hairy on keel and for c. ½ of
\par

\par
163}
\par