{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 43 Ligule up to 3 mm, acute to truncate; panicle-branches
\par
   up to 5 at lower nodes; lemma hairy on keel and 
\par
   marginal veins, glabrous between the veins
\par
44 Plant ± laxly caespitose; stems (15-)40-80 cm, smooth;
\par
   panicle (8-)12-20(-30) cm .......................................................... {\b 25. palustris}
\par
44 Plant ± densely caespitose; stems 20-45(-65) cm,
\par
   scabrid; panicle 3-12(-17) cm ..................................... ({\b 29-32}). {\b sterilis} group
\par
37 Rhizomatous
\par
45 Stem strongly compressed, especially above, often 
\par
   purple-tinged at the nodes; lemma glabrous or sparsely
\par
   hairy ........................................................................................ {\b 23. compressa}
\par
45 Stem terete, without purple-tinged nodes; lemma usually
\par
   hairy on the veins
\par
46 Stem leafy for ¾ or more of its length; ligule 
\par
   usually less than 1 mm, truncate
\par
47 Lemma glabrous, not lanate at base ........................................... {\b 14. sibirica}
\par
47 Lemma hairy on keel and marginal veins, lanate at base
\par
   ....................................................................................... ({\b 6-9}).{\b  pratensis} group
\par
46 Stem leafy for about half its length; ligule 1·5-9 mm,
\par
   acute to rounded
\par
48 Stem 10-15(-20) cm; panicle 3-5 cm, rather open, with
\par
   few spikelets; glumes unequal, the upper wider and 
\par
   longer than the lower .................................................................... {\b 10. arctica}
\par
48 Stem (20-)25-40 cm; panicle 5-10 cm, open or contracted,
\par
   with ± numerous spikelets; glumes subequal
\par
49 Ligule (3-)5-9 mm, acute; spikelets greenish; lemma shortly
\par
   hairy on keel and marginal veins; anthers (1·2-)1·5-2 mm .......... {\b 12. cenisia}
\par
49 Ligule 2-5 mm, rounded to truncate; spikelets 
\par
   variegated with brownish, golden or violet bands; lemma ±
\par
   long-hairy on keel and marginal veins; anthers 2-2·4 mm ........ {\b 11. granitica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. OCHLOPOA Ascherson & Graebner. Annuals or shortlived perennials. Stems erect to procumbent or shortly creeping. Branches extravaginal. Leaves flat. Panicle-branches smooth. Lemma not lanate at base, more or less hairy on the veins.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. annua} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 68 (1753). Usually annual, erect to shortly creeping. Stems 5-30 cm, slightly compressed. Leaves (1-)2-3 mm wide, thin, flaccid, often transversely wrinkled. Panicle (1-)3-8 cm, more or less pyramidal; lower branches in pairs, patent or deflexed after anthesis. Spikelets not crowded towards the ends of the panicle-branches, with 3-5 closely spaced florets. Glumes unequal. Lemma usually sparsely hairy on veins. Palea ciliate along the whole length of keels. Anthers 0·6-0·8(-1) mm, 2-3 times as long as wide. Flowering throughout the year. 2n = 28.{\i  Disturbed ground. Throughout Europe.} All except Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  An allotetraploid formed from the hybrid {\b 2} × {\b 3} and producing sterile hybrids with both; a successful, almost cosmopolitan weed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. infirma} Kunth in Humb., Bonpl. & Kunth, {\i Nov. Gen. Sp. }{\b 1}: 158 (1817) ({\i P. annua} subsp. {\i exilis} (Tommasini) Murb.). Like {\b 1} but stems more strongly compressed; leaves 1-2 mm wide; panicle elongate-ovoid, the branches erecto-patent after anthesis; spikelets with 5-6 relatively widely spaced florets; anthers 0·2-0·5 mm, scarcely longer than wide. Flowering in spring. 2n = 14. {\i Sandy, usually coastal places. S. & W. Europe northwards to S.W. England.} Au Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b P. maroccana} Nannf., {\i Svensk Bot. Tidskr.}{\b  32}: 296 (1938), which is like {\b 2} but with anthers 0·7-0·9 mm, is probably a local autotetraploid variant; it has been recorded from S. & S.E. Spain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. supina} Schrader,{\i  Fl. Germ.} 289 (1806) ({\i P. annua} subsp.{\i  supina} (Schrader) Link,{\i  P. foucaudii} Hackel). Like {\b 1} but stouter, creeping and always perennial; panicle laxly pyramidal, the lower panicle-branches patent; lemma glabrous on keel, hairy on marginal veins; anthers 1·5-2·5 mm, 5-8 times as long as wide. Flowering in spring. 2n = 14.{\i  Pastures and damp places. Mountains of C. & S.W. Europe; Appennini; Fennoscandia; N.E. Russia.} Au Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hs ?Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, C, ?W) Su [Rs (B)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. COENOPOA Hyl. (Sect. {\i Triviales} Nannf.). Perennial; laxly caespitose, shortly stoloniferous, with numerous extravaginal non-flowering shoots arising from the base. Leaves flat. Panicle-branches densely scabrid. Lemma hairy on the keel, not or scarcely lanate at base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. trivialis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 67 (1753). Stems (30-)50-90 cm smooth or slightly scabrid near the apex. Leaves 2-4·5 mm wide, rather thin and soft; ligule 3·5-10 mm, acute. Panicle (9-)15-25 cm, ovoid-pyramidal; lower branches 3-5 together. Spikelets usually with 3 or more florets. Lemma shortly hairy on the keel, lanate at base. Keels of the palea aculeolate. 2n = 14+0-5B, 28. {\i Damp places and disturbed ground. Throughout Europe.} All except Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b trivialis}: Stolons slender, terete. Leaves pale green; ligule 3·5-10 mm. Panicle pyramidal, rather open.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species, but rare in the south}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sylvicola} (Guss.) H. Lindb. fil.,{\i  Öfvers. Finska Vet.Soc. Förhandl.}{\b  48}({\b 13}): 9 (1906) ({\i P. sylvicola} Guss.): Stolons moniliform, fleshy. Leaves bright green; ligule 5-10 mm. Panicle narrowly ovoid, somewhat contracted.{\i  S. Europe.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. feratiana} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 128 (1852). Like {\b 4} but leaves 1-2 mm wide; ligule 3·5-6·5 mm; lower panicle-branches mostly in pairs; spikelets always with 2 florets; lemma not lanate at base. •{\i  N.W. Spain, W. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. POA. Perennial, with long-creeping rhizomes; laxly to densely caespitose, with extravaginal branches. Leaves flat to folded. Panicle-branches terete, sparsely scabrid. Lemma hairy on the keel and marginal veins, copiously lanate at base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 6-9}). {\b P. pratensis} group. Usually more or less caespitose. Leaves 0·8-3(-4) mm wide. Panicle more or less lax, ovoid to pyramidal, the lower branches 2-5 together. Spikelets usually not proliferating.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The members of this group are highly variable and largely apomictic; specific limits are therefore difficult to define. The four taxa treated here as species may be considered ecotypic variants of{\i  P. pratensis} in its broadest sense. These taxa have probably arisen on more than one occasion, as a result of hybridization of various ancestral species followed by increase in chromosome number and disruption of the sexual breeding system. Intercrossing is now probably a rare event; within the limits imposed by their predominantly agamospermous breeding system, they can therefore be regarded as species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: G. Almgård, {\i Ann. Agric. Coll Sweden}{\b  26}: 77-119 (1960). J. Clausen,{\i  Euphytica }{\b 10}: 87-94 (1961). V. Jirásek, {\i Acta Horti Bot. Prag.}{\b  1963}: 60-68 (1964). E. Åkerberg, {\i Hereditas}{\b  28}: 1-126 (1942).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves 2-3·5(-4) mm wide, abruptly cucullate at apex;
\par
  lower panicle-branches usually in pairs ........................................ {\b 6. alpigena}
\par
1 Leaves 0·8-3 mm wide, gradually narrowed to a scarcely
\par
  cucullate apex; lower panicle-branches (2-)3-5 together
\par

\par
161}
\par