{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 with an awn 1·5 mm. Lemma 3·5-4 mm, blue-grey, hairy and long-ciliate in the proximal 2/3, with awns 0·5-1 mm. Palea as long as or longer than lemma. 2n = 14.{\i  Rock-crevices and screes; calcicole. • E. Alps.} Au It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Records from the S.W. Alps (Mont Cenis) are erroneous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. tenuifolia} Schrader, {\i Fl. Germ.} 272 (1806). Stems usually 20-30 cm. Leaves 0·4-0·6(-3) mm wide, usually junciform or setaceous, pruinose and more or less hairy above; sheaths usually glabrous, the basal reticulate. Inflorescence (10-)15(-30) mm. Glumes c. 4 mm, lanceolate to ovate, acute or acuminate. Lemma 4-5 mm, blue or grey, sparsely ciliate, with 1-3 awns up to 1·5 mm. Palea longer than lemma, ciliate on the keels.{\i  Limestone rocks. • Italy, W. Jugoslavia, N. Albania.} Al It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tenuifolia}: Leaves c. 0·6 mm wide, rarely wider (var.{\i  juncifolia }(Suffren) Marchesetti). Inflorescence usually 15-20 mm, lax. 2n = 28, 42. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par
 ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b kalnikensis} (Jáv.) Deyl,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 76}: 364 (1978) ({\i S. kalnikensis} Jáv.): Leaves 1-3 mm wide. Inflorescence 20-25 mm, often dense. 2n = 56.{\i  N.W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. comosa} Velen.,{\i  Abh. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.}{\b  7}({\b 1, 8}): 44 (1886). Stems up to 50 cm, c. 1 mm in diameter at apex. Leaves 2-3(-4) mm wide, glabrous, flat or convolute, the uppermost 1·5-4 cm, flat; sheaths glabrous. Inflorescence 7-17 × 7-12 mm, the bracts at its base ovate to lanceolate. Glumes 2-3 mm, lanceolate, long-ciliate. Lemma c. 3 mm, densely villous; middle awn 3-4·5 mm, the lateral 2-3 mm. Palea as long as lemma, villous; awns 2-3 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Mountain rocks; calcifuge. • C. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. tenerrima} (Fritsch) Hayek,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}){\b  94}: 206 (1918). Stems 10-30 cm, slender. Leaves 1-1·5 mm wide, usually convolute, subglabrous, the uppermost 0·5-1·2 cm. Inflorescence usually 9-14 × 7-8 mm, the bracts at its base broadly ovate. Glumes 2-3 mm, lanceolate, with awns 1-4 mm. Lemma 3-4 mm, densely hirsute; middle awn 2-3 mm, the lateral 0-1 mm. Palea usually longer than lemma; awns 1-2 mm. 2n = 28. {\i Mountain rocks. S. half of Balkan peninsula. }Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. sadlerana} Janka, {\i Term. Füz.}{\b  8}: 28 (1884) ({\i S. budensis} Ascherson & Graebner). Leaves (3-)4-5 mm wide, flat or folded, usually with more than 17 veins; sheaths hairy or glabrous. Inflorescence 18-25 × (7-)9-12 mm, dense. Glumes 4-5 mm, with awn c. 1 mm. Lemma 4-5 mm, ciliate on margin and veins, glabrous or sparsely hairy between the veins; middle awn 1-2 mm. Palea as long as or longer than lemma.{\i  Calcicole. • E.C. Europe.} Au Hu Ju Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sadlerana}: Leaves rigid, with stout marginal veins, the uppermost 0·8-1·5 cm; sheaths often hairy. Lemma usually glabrous between the veins. 2n = 56.{\i  Hungary, E. Austria, S.E. Czechoslovakia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tatrae} (Degen) Deyl,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 364 (1978) ({\i S. tatrae} (Degen) Deyl,{\i  S. bielzii} forma{\i  tatrae} Degen): Leaves soft, the uppermost usually 2-3 cm; sheaths glabrous. Lemma usually hairy between the veins. 2n = 56.{\i  W. Carpathians and S.E. Alps}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. heuflerana} Schur,{\i  Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien }{\b 6}: 203 (1856). Stems up to 70 cm. Leaves 2-3(-7) mm wide, strongly pruinose above when young, the uppermost 1·5-3(-5) cm; sheaths glabrous. Inflorescence usually 10-30 × 7-11 mm. Glumes usually 3·5-4·5 mm, narrowly lanceolate, sparsely ciliate; awn 0·5-2·5 mm. Lemma pubescent; awns (1-)2(-4) mm. Palea with awns up to 2 mm.{\i  Woods and rocks; calcicole. • E.C. Europe.} Cz Hu Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b heuflerana}: Laxly caespitose. Leaves flat or convolute, rarely folded. Glumes up to 4·5 mm. Lemma and palea up to 4·5 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b hungarica} (Ujhelyi) Deyl, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 364 (1978) ({\i S. hungarica} Ujhelyi): Densely caespitose. Leaves flat or folded. Glumes up to 6 mm. Lemma 5 mm. Palea 5-6 mm. 2n = 56.{\i  Czechoslovakia and Hungary}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. bielzii} Schur,{\i  Verh. Mitt. Siebenb. Ver. Naturw.}{\b  1}: 109 (1850). Stems rather stout. Leaves 1·5-2·5 mm wide, flat or convolute, the uppermost 2-3 cm; sheaths glabrous. Inflorescence (11-)16(-30) × 7-10 mm, the bracts at its base ovate to lanceolate. Glumes 4-10 mm, ovate-lanceolate, ciliate; awn up to 4 mm. Lemma 4-5 mm, hairy; middle awn 2-3 mm, the laterals 0·5-1 mm. Palea (3-)4(-6) mm, hairy, unawned or with awns up to 0·5 mm. 2n = 56. {\i Stony or grassy slopes. • Carpathians and mountains of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. coerulans} Friv.,{\i  Flora }({\i Regensb}.){\b  19}: 438 (1836) (incl. {\i S. orbelica} (Velen.) Hayek). Stems up to 25 cm, stout. Leaves 2-4 mm wide, glabrous, usually plicate, the uppermost 1-3 cm; sheaths densely villous. Inflorescence 15-20 × 8-12 mm, dense, the bracts at its base conspicuous, rounded. Glumes 4-7 mm, ciliate; awn (1-)2(-3) mm. Lemma 4·5-5 mm, villous; middle awn 3-4 mm, the laterals 1-2 mm. Palea longer than lemma; awns 1-2 mm. 2n = 56.{\i  Stony or grassy slopes. • Mountains of Balkan peninsula; S. Carpathians. }Al Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. korabensis} (Kümmerle & Jáv.) Deyl,{\i  Op. Bot. Cech.}{\b  3}: 141 (1946). Like {\b 10} but leaves usually hairy above, often with a continuous subepidermal layer of sclerenchyma; inflorescence 9-15 × 7-9 mm; glumes 3-4·5 mm; lemma 3-4·5 mm, densely appressed-hairy between the veins, the middle awn 2-3 mm, the lateral 0·5-1·5 mm. •{\i  Mountains of C. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b S. klasterskyi} Deyl,{\i  op. cit.} 144 (1946), from Bulgaria, is a related taxon requiring further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. vaginalis} Boiss. & Orph. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 4}): 130 (1859). Stems 30-40 cm, slender. Leaves 3-4 mm wide, folded, falcate, with pale setaceous apex up to 2 mm, the uppermost 3-6 cm, rarely less; sheaths pubescent or glabrous. Inflorescence 30-40 × 7-10 mm, rather dense. Glumes 5·5-6 mm, with stout awns 1-2 mm. Lemma 4-5·5 mm, ciliate and sericeous between the veins; middle awn 1-2 mm, the laterals 0·5-1 mm. Palea 4·5-6 mm, ciliate on the keels, unawned.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S. Greece} ({\i N. Peloponnisos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. S. doerfleri} Hayek,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  64}: 360 (1914). Stems up to 70 cm. Leaves up to 5·5 mm wide, with scabrid margins near the pungent apex, the uppermost more than 6 cm; sheaths glabrous. Inflorescence 25-30 × 15 mm, very dense. Glumes c. 6 mm, narrowly lanceolate, gradually narrowed into an awn 2-4 mm. Lemma 4·5-5·5 mm, narrowly lanceolate, sericeous; middle awn up to 5 mm, the laterals 2-3 mm. Palea longer than lemma, with awn 2-3 mm.{\i  Rock-crevices. • W. Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. S. wettsteinii} Dörfler & Hayek,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 94}: 206 (1918) (incl.{\i  S. gigantea }Dörfler &
\par

\par
175}
\par