{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Hayek). Like {\b 13} but the uppermost leaf 4-8 cm; inflorescence 20-25 × 11-14 mm; glumes c. 4 mm, ovate-lanceolate; awn 1-2 mm; lemma 4-4·5 mm, long-ciliate, pubescent between the veins; middle awn 1·5-2·5 mm, the laterals up to 0·5 mm; palea about as long as lemma, 2-dentate or shortly awned. 2n = 56.{\i  Mountain rocks. • Albania and S.W. Jugoslavia.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. S. robusta} Schott, Nyman & Kotschy, {\i Analecta Bot.} 1 (1854) ({\i S. nitida} auct. balcan., non Ten.). Stems up to 60 cm. Leaves up to 4·5 mm wide, flat or plicate, glabrous or sparsely pubescent, the uppermost 3-10 cm, in the lower 1/3 of the stem; sheaths glabrous. Inflorescence 6-9 mm wide, the bracts at its base lacerate, ciliate. Glumes 5-6 mm, lanceolate, ciliate; awn 1-2 mm. Lemma 3·5-4·5 mm; middle awn 1-1·5 mm, the lateral minute. Palea 3·5-4·5 mm, shortly awned. {\i Calcicole. • W. Jugoslavia and Albania.} Al ?Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b robusta}: Stems more than 1 mm in diameter at apex. Inflorescence usually 30-40 × 9-14 mm. Lemma shiny, puberulent. 2n = 56. {\i W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b skanderbeggii} (Ujhelyi) Deyl, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 364 (1978) ({\i S. skanderbeggii }Ujhelyi): Stems less than 1 mm in diameter at apex. Inflorescence usually 25-30 × 6-9 mm. Lemma glabrous. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. S. nitida} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  1}: 322 {\i & Prodr.} 10 (1811). Stems up to 70 cm. Leaves 3·5-6 mm wide, flat, rarely convolute, glabrous, glaucescent, with scabrid margins, the uppermost 3·5-7·5 cm, above the middle of the stem; sheaths glabrous or sparsely pubescent. Inflorescence 20-30 × 9-14 mm, dense. Glumes 5-5·5 mm, lanceolate, ciliate on the veins, with 3-5 awns, the middle 1-2 mm, the laterals 0·5 mm. Lemma 5-6 mm, ovate-lanceolate, usually glabrous; middle awn 1-2 mm, the laterals 0-5 mm. Palea 5·5-6·5 mm, shortly awned. 2n = 28. •{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Italy and Sicilia.} It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. S. alba} Sibth. & Sm., {\i Fl. Graec. Prodr. }{\b 1}: 52 (1806). Stems up to 50 cm. Leaves 3-5 mm wide, flat, soft, glaucescent, the uppermost 3-10 cm; sheaths sparsely pubescent. Inflorescence 20-30 × 6-7 mm, lax, whitish. Glumes up to 7 mm, narrowly lanceolate, ciliate on the veins; awn 1 mm. Lemma 3-4 mm, glabrous, 3- to 5-dentate, the middle tooth with an awn 1-1·5 mm. Palea 4·5-5 mm, ciliate on the keels.{\i  Woods and scrub. S.E. Bulgaria and Turkey-in-Europe.} Bu Tu. ({\i Caucasus to Lebanon}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. S. latifolia} (Adamovic) Degen,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok }{\b 4}: 133 (1905). Stems up to 40 cm, glabrous, slender. Leaves 3-4 mm wide, flat or plicate, the uppermost 3-6 cm, at about the middle of the stem; sheaths glabrous. Inflorescence usually 30-40 × 7-9 mm, dark bluish or grey, lax. Lemma 3-4·5 mm, the middle awn 1-2 mm, the laterals up to 0·7 mm. Palea c. 5 mm, 2-dentate, ciliate. 2n = 28. •{\i  Bulgaria, C. & E. Jugoslavia}. Bu ?Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. S. autumnalis} (Scop.) F.W. Schultz,{\i  Arch. Fl. Jour. Bot.} 296 (1861) ({\i S. elongata} Host). Stems up to 40 cm, slender. Leaves up to 4 mm wide, usually flat, glabrous, glaucescent, strongly scabrid, the uppermost 4-8 cm or more, above the middle of the stem; sheaths glabrous. Inflorescence 45-100 × 5-7 mm, lax, greyish or whitish. Glumes 5-6 mm, narrowly lanceolate; awn 1-5 mm, stout. Lemma 3-4·5 mm, lanceolate, sparsely ciliate at base; middle awn 0·5-1·5 mm, the laterals 0·5 mm. Palea 4-5 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Calcicole. • From N. & E. Italy to C. Albania.} Al It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. S. .anatolica} Deyl,{\i  Op. Bot. Cech.}{\b  3}: 104 (1946). Stems up to 70 cm, often scabrid at apex. Leaves up to 4 mm wide, flat or plicate, glabrous, the uppermost 3-12 cm, below the middle of the stem; sheaths glabrous. Inflorescence (35-)40-70 × 6-8 mm, often lax, usually whitish. Glumes 7-10 mm, narrowly lanceolate; awn 1·5-2 mm. Leaves 5-6 mm, lanceolate, glabrous or ciliate at base, the middle awn 1·5-2 mm. Palea 5·5-6·5 mm, ciliate, with awns up to 0·6 mm.{\i  Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i Anatolia and Caucasian region.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. S. argentea} (Savi) Savi,{\i  Bot. Etrusc. }{\b 1}: 66 (1808) ({\i S. cylindrica} DC.). Stems up to 50 cm, leafy at least to the middle. Leaves 3-5 mm wide, glabrous, scabrid on margins, the uppermost 3-10 cm; sheaths glabrous. Inflorescence 35-55(-120) × 6-8(-10) mm, whitish, rarely greyish. Glumes 5-7 mm, narrowly lanceolate, ciliate on the keel; awn 1-2·5 mm. Lemma 4·5-5·5 mm, glabrous; middle awn 1-1·5 mm. Palea little longer than lemma, shortly awned. 2n = 28.{\i  Limestone rocks. • Italy and S.E. France; N. & E. Spain}. Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable, especially in Italy, where plants apparently intermediate between {\b 16} and {\b 19} are found. Experimental investigation is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. S. albicans} Kit. ex Schultes, {\i Österreichs Fl}. ed. 2, {\b 1}: 216 (1814) ({\i S. caerulea }subsp. {\i varia} (Jacq.) Hayek,{\i  S. caerulea} subsp.{\i  calcarea} (Celak.) Hegi). Stems 10-45 cm, slender. Leaves (1·5-)2·5-3(-5) mm wide, flat or plicate, the uppermost not more than 1 cm; sheaths glabrous. Inflorescence 10-30 × 5-7(-9) mm, rather lax, bluish. Glumes 4-7 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, usually unawned, glabrous, rarely ciliate. Lemma 4-6 mm, ovate-lanceolate, sparsely ciliate on margins and veins, up to 5-dentate, the middle tooth with an awn. Palea 2-dentate, ciliate. 2n = 28.{\i  Dry, calcareous grassland. • W. & C. Europe, extending southwards to the N. Appennini and Crna Gora.} Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge Hb He †Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju Po ?Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b albicans}: Leaves 2·5-3(-5) mm wide, with 17-19 veins. Glumes 4-6 mm. Lemma 4-5 mm, the middle awn not more than 0·5 mm.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except C. & S.W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b angustifolia} (Hackel & G. Beck) Deyl, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 364 (1978) ({\i S. caerulea }var. {\i angustifolia} Hackel & G. Beck): Leaves 1·5-2 mm wide, with usually 15 veins. Glumes 5-7 mm. Lemma up to 6 mm, the middle awn 1-2 mm.{\i  C. & S.W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. S. caerulea} (L.) Ard., {\i Animadv. Bot. Spec. Alt.} 18 (1764) ({\i S. uliginosa} Opiz,{\i  S. caerulea} subsp.{\i  uliginosa} (Opiz) Hayek). Like {\b 22 a} but stems stouter; leaves pruinose above, often convolute, the uppermost 1-2 cm; inflorescence 10-14 × 7-9 mm, dense; glumes ciliate on margin and veins; lemma with an awn up to 1 mm. 2n = 28. {\i Usually in damp, calcareous habitats. From C. Sweden and N.W. Russia southwards to Crna Gora and C. Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Fe Ge He Hu ?It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. S. taygetea} Hayek,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 94}: 207 (1918). Stems 15-25 cm, leafy up to the middle. Leaves 0·5 mm wide, setaceous, with long hairs beneath, the uppermost up to 3 cm; sheaths glabrous. Inflorescence up to 15 × 11 mm, with silvery bracts up to 11 × 5 mm at base. Glumes 6-7 mm, acuminate or awned. Lemma 5-6 mm, with middle awn c. 1 mm. Palea longer than lemma, 2-dentate. 2n = 28. •{\i  S. Greece} ({\i Taïyetos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. S. rigida} Heuffel ex Reichenb., {\i Fl. Germ. Excurs. }140 (3) (1831) ({\i S. filifolia} Hoppe,{\i  S. haynaldiana} Schur). Stems c. 15 cm. Leaves 1-2(-3) mm wide, plicate, pruinose above, the upper
\par

\par
176}
\par