{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 deciduous. Lemma of fertile floret lanceolate, acute, long-ciliate on margin and marginal veins, otherwise papillose, 7- to 9-veined. {\i Dry, stony places. S., C. & S.E. Europe; S. Sweden S.W. Finland.} Al Au Be Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (*B, W, K, E) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable. Four subspecies may be recognized and it is possible that {\b M. cretica} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov}. {\b 2}({\b 13}): 54 (1853), from Kriti, may represent a further subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Panicle usually 12-25 cm, usually lobed; stem with 1 
\par
  internode below the panicle ......................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b magnolii}
\par
1 Panicle usually not more than 8 cm, usually unlobed;
\par
  stem with 2-4 internodes below the panicle
\par
2 Upper leaf-sheaths smooth, the lamina smooth or almost
\par
  so beneath ......................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b ciliata}
\par
2 All leaf-sheaths scabrid, the lamina scabrid beneath
\par
3 Spikelets greenish-white at anthesis; panicle usually
\par
  with more than 50 spikelets, not or weakly secund ........ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b taurica}
\par
3 Spikelets purplish at anthesis; panicle usually with 
\par
  fewer than 50 spikelets, secund after anthesis ........... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b monticola}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ciliata} (incl.{\i  M. flavescens} (Schur) Simonkai, {\i M. glauca} F. W. Schultz): Stem with 2-3 internodes below the panicle. Sheaths of upper leaves smooth, the lamina smooth or almost so beneath. Panicle usually not more than 8 cm, secund. Spikelets 5-7 mm. 2n = 18. {\i Throughout the range of the species, except for much of the south} .
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b taurica} (C. Koch) Tzvelev,{\i  Sched. Herb. Fl. URSS}{\b  19}: 53 (1972) ({\i M. taurica} C. Koch): Stem with 3-4 internodes below the panicle. Sheaths of all leaves scabrid, the lamina scabrid beneath. Panicle usually not more than 8 cm, not or weakly secund, usually with more than 50 spikelets. Spikelets (3-)4-6 mm, greenish-white at anthesis. 2n = 18.{\i  Aegean region; Krym}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b monticola} (Prokudin) Tzvelev, {\i loc. cit.} (1972) ({\i M. monticola} Prokudin): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but panicle secund after anthesis, usually with fewer than 50 spikelets; spikelets 5·2-6·5 mm, purplish at anthesis.{\i  S. Ukraine.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b magnolii} (Gren. & Godron) Husnot,{\i  Gram.} 56 (1898) ({\i M. magnolii} Gren. & Godron): Stem with 1 internode below the panicle. Panicle usually 12-25 cm, usually lobed, not secund. Spikelets (6-)7-9 mm.{\i  W. Mediterranean region, Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. M. transsilvanica} Schur,{\i  Enum. Pl. Transs.} 764 (1866). Like {\b 7}({\b a}) but leaves 2-6 mm wide, usually flat, with a prominent midrib; panicle dense, not secund; spikelets 5-9(-11) mm, the lower glume usually distinctly shorter than the upper. 2n = 18.{\i  Dry scrub and wood-margins. E.C. & E. Europe, extending locally westwards to E.C. France.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b transsilvanica}: Leaf-sheaths usually hairy; stem with 3(-4) internodes below the panicle. Spikelets purplish at anthesis.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b klokovii} Tzvelev,{\i  Sched. Herb. Fl. URSS}{\b  19}: 53 (1972): Leaf-sheaths often glabrous; stem with 2(-3) internodes below the panicle. Spikelets greenish-white, becoming golden after anthesis.{\i  Moldavia, S. & E. Ukraine}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. M. cupanii} Guss., {\i Fl. Sic. Prodr., Suppl.} 17 (1832). Like {\b 7}({\b a}) but panicle not more than 8 cm, usually lax; glumes unequal, the lower c. 2 mm shorter than the upper; lemma with all the veins long-ciliate.{\i  S. Italy and Sicilia; S.E. Spain.} Hs It Si. ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. M. bauhinii} All.,{\i  Auct. Fl. Pedem.} 43 (1789). Like {\b 7}({\b a}) but panicle lax; spikelets 8-10 mm, with 2 fertile florets; lemma glabrous in the distal 1/3.{\i  Dry places. • W. Mediterranean region.} Bl Co Ga It ?Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 41.      Schizachne}      Hackel
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Leaves flat or convolute; sheaths entire. Inflorescence a lax, secund panicle. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 3-5 hermaphrodite florets. Glumes somewhat unequal, membranous, the lower 3-, the upper 5-veined. Fertile lemma rounded on the back, coriaceous in fruit, 2-fid at apex and awned from just below the sinus; veins 7-9; callus with long hairs. Palea membranous, 2-keeled, shorter than the lemma. Lodicules 2, connate laterally.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. callosa} (Turcz. ex Griseb.) Ohwi, {\i Acta Phytotax. Geobot.} ({\i Kyoto}){\b  2}: 279 (1933). Shortly rhizomatous; stems 40-60 cm glabrous, smooth below, scabrid near apex. Leaves 1-4 mm wide, glabrous beneath, with sparse, fine, soft hairs above; ligule 1-1·5 mm. Panicle up to 10 cm, with few, long-pedicellate spikelets 10-12 mm. Glumes ovate-lanceolate, acute. Lemma 2-fid for c. ¼ its length; awn c. 12 mm, eventually divergent.{\i  Shady places. E. Russia, from} c. 55°{\i  to} 62°{\i  N.} Rs (N, C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe     {\b Glycerieae}      Endl. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves linear, flat; sheaths usually closed to the mouth; silica-bodies oblong, with several constrictions; 2-celled micro-hairs absent; ligule membranous. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets all hermaphrodite, laterally compressed or terete, with few to many florets. Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes and between the florets. Glumes shorter than the spikelet, unequal. Lemmas rounded on the back, herbaceous to chartaceous, usually scarious at apex, with 5-7 more or less parallel veins, unawned. Palea 2-keeled, membranous, about as long as lemma. Lodicules 2, truncate, connate, at least below, fleshy. Stamens 3, rarely 2. Ovary glabrous; styles 2. Grain with a linear hilum as long as the grain; embryo small; starch-grains compound. Chromosomes small; basic number 5.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 42.        Glyceria}      R.Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J. Holub. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous perennials. Leaves flat; sheaths often entire; ligule membranous. Inflorescence a panicle, with trigonous main axis. Spikelets ovate to linear in outline, with 3-many florets. Glumes unequal, hyaline, 1-veined, shorter than the lowest lemma. Lemma unawned, ovate to oblong-lanceolate, rounded on the back, 5- to 11-veined. Palea about as long as lemma. Lodicules 2, more or less connate, fleshy, glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All species grow in marshy ground or shallow water.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spikelets 2-10 mm, with 3-11 florets, ovate to oblong-
\par
  lanceolate in outline; keels of palea unwinged
\par
2 Spikelets 2-4 mm; lemma 1·4-2 mm; lower glume 0·4-0·9 mm, 
\par
  the upper 0·7-1·3 mm ........................................................................ {\b 5. striata} 
\par
2 Spikelets 4-10 mm; lemma 2·3-4 mm; lower glume 1-3 mm,
\par
  the upper 1·4-4 mm
\par
3 Stamens 2; anthers 0·5-0·8 mm; rhachilla densely covered
\par
  with slender pricklets; stems 4-5 mm in diameter ..................... {\b 4. lithuanica}
\par
3 Stamens 3; anthers (0·8-)0·9-1·8(-2) mm; rhachilla smooth or 
\par
  with few short, thick pricklets; stems 5-10 mm in diameter
\par

\par
179}
\par