{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 sterile spikelets narrow, the upper not much shorter and wider than the lower, all with awns 6-15 mm. Lemmas of fertile spikelets lanceolate, 5-veined, bidentate at apex, with a long awn from the sinus. 2n = 14.{\i  Cultivated fields and dry, open habitats. S. Europe; naturalized in C. Europe and casual further north.} Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu [Au Cz Ge Hu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. elegans} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl. }{\b 1}: 82 (1798) (incl. {\i C. polybracteatus} auct., non Poiret). Like {\b 2} but usually smaller; leaves 1-3 mm wide; panicle usually rather lax and lobed; upper lemmas of sterile spikelets much shorter and wider than the lower, resembling the lemmas of the fertile spikelets. 2n = 14.{\i  Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. callitrichus} W. Barbey,{\i  Herb. Levant.} 165 (1882). Like {\b 2} but uppermost leaf-sheath usually enclosing base of panicle; panicle ovoid to subglobose; awns of glumes and lemmas of sterile spikelets 15-20 mm.{\i  E. Kriti.} Cr. ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 29.        Lamarckia}     Moench
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a rather condensed secund panicle. Spikelets dimorphic, somewhat laterally compressed, falling in groups of 3-5; fertile spikelets with 1 floret and a sterile rudiment, surrounded by 2-4 sterile spikelets with many florets. Glumes thin, subequal, acute. Lemma of fertile spikelets chartaceous, awned, of the sterile spikelets membranous, unawned. Palea 2-keeled.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. aurea} (L.) Moench,{\i  Meth.} 201 (1794) ({\i Cynosurus aureus} L.). Stems 7-15(-20) cm. Leaves 2-6 mm wide; sheaths scabridulous on the ribs, the uppermost somewhat inflated; ligule 5-10 mm. Panicle up to 6 × 2·5 cm, oblong. Spikelets pedicellate, in groups of 3-5 at the ends of branches; pedicels villous. Sterile spikelets 5-8 mm; glumes linear-lanceolate; lemmas numerous, ovate, distichous, imbricate. Fertile spikelets with linear-lanceolate glumes and ovate lemma, 2-fid at apex, with a long awn from the sinus; sterile rudiment with a long awn. 2n = 14. {\i Open habitats. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 30.      Catabrosa}       Beauv.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Leaves flat; sheaths with connate margins. Inflorescence a lax panicle. Spikelets subterete, usually with 2 florets. Glumes unequal, shorter than spikelet, thin, the lower with no apparent vein, the upper prominently 3-veined. Lemma oblong when flattened, rounded on the back, membranous with a scarious apex, prominently 3-veined. Palea 2-keeled, similar in texture to the lemma.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. aquatica} (L.) Beauv.,{\i  Agrost.} 97, 157 (1812). Stoloniferous; stems 5-70 cm. Leaves up to 10 mm wide, smooth, soft, obtuse; ligule c. 5 mm, obtuse. Panicle up to 30 cm; branches in half whorls of 3-5, successive whorls alternating. Spikelets 3-4 mm. Glumes obovate, often purplish. Lemma 2·5-3·5 mm. 2n = 20.{\i  In shallow water and wet, sandy or muddy places. Most of Europe.} All except Az Bl Cr Lu Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 31.           Cinna}          L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a lax panicle. Spikelets hermaphrodite, laterally compressed, with 1 floret. Glumes subequal, longer than lemma, 1-veined, herbaceous, with wide scarious margin. Lemma indistinctly 3-veined, herbaceous, with wide scarious margin and dorsal awn. Palea somewhat shorter than lemma. Stamen 1.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. latifolia} (Trev.) Griseb. in Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Ross.}{\b  4}: 435 (1852). Laxly caespitose; stems 60-130 cm. Leaves up to 20 mm wide, scabrid; ligule up to 6 mm, lacerate. Panicle 15-30 cm. Spikelets c. 2 mm. Glumes lanceolate, acute. Lemma with a short, slender awn inserted a little below the apex.{\i  Damp woods. N. Europe, from} 53°{\i  N. in C. Russia to} 65°{\i  N. in Finland.} Fe No Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 32.        Apera}        Adanson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat or convolute. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 1 floret, rarely more. Glumes unequal, membranous, the lower 1-veined, the upper 3-veined, about as long as the lemma. Lemma obscurely 5-veined, chartaceous, rounded on the back, with a long, subapical awn. Palea about equalling lemma. Rhachilla shortly prolonged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  1 Panicle-branches long, patent .................................................. {\b 1. spica-venti} 
\par
1 Panicle-branches short, erect
\par
2 Upper glume unawned; anthers 0·3-0·4 mm ............................. {\b 2. interrupta}
\par
2 Upper glume shortly awned; anthers c. 1·5 mm ...................... {\b 3. intermedia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. spica-venti} (L.) Beauv.,{\i  Agrost. }31, 151 (1812) ({\i Agrostis spica-venti} L.). Stems 20-100(-120) cm. Leaves (1-)3-10 mm wide, flat, glabrous, scabrid above or on both surfaces; sheaths smooth or scabrid above, often purplish; ligule 3-12 mm. Panicle (7-)10-25(-32) × 3-15 cm; branches patent. Spikelets 2·5-3 mm, often purplish. Glumes lanceolate, acute, scabrid on the keel in the upper half. Lemma oblong-lanceolate, scabridulous above the middle, shortly bearded at base; awn 5-12 mm. Anthers 1-2 mm. 2n = 14. {\i Sandy places and cultivated ground. Most of Europe, but rare in the extreme south and probably only introduced in the north.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz *Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Tu [Co Fe No Rs (N, B) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b spica-venti}: Stems up to 120 cm; sheaths smooth or weakly scabrid above. Lower glume distinctly shorter than upper; lemma about as long as lower glume. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b maritima} (Klokov) Tzvelev,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 1968}: 23 (1968): Stems not more than 50 cm; sheaths scabrid. Lower glume almost as long as upper; lemma usually somewhat shorter than lower glume.{\i  Saline, sandy soils. S. Ukraine, S.E. Russia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. interrupta} (L.) Beauv.,{\i  Agrost.} 31, 151 (1812) ({\i Agrostis interrupta} L.). Stems 10-70 cm. Leaves 1-4 mm wide, convolute when dry, scabrid or puberulent above; sheaths smooth, often purplish; ligule 2-5 mm. Panicle 3-20 × 0·4-1·5 cm, more or less interrupted below, dense above; branches erect. Spikelets 2-2·5 mm, green or purplish. Glumes lanceolate, acute, scabrid on the keel in the upper half. Lemma oblong-lanceolate, scabridulous above the middle, shortly bearded at base; awn 4-10 mm. Anthers 0·3-0·4 m. 2n = 14.{\i  Sandy, usually open habitats. W. & C. Europe, extending to S. Italy and discontinuously to S.E. Russia; S.E. Sweden} ({\i Öland and Gotland}). ?Al Au *Br ?Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju ?Lu Rm Rs (K, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Local over much of its range, and in some regions doubtfully native.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. intermedia} Hackel,{\i  Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 20}: 430 (1905). Like {\b 2} but upper glume shortly awned; lemma glabrous at base; anthers c. 1·5 mm. {\i Turkey-in-Europe.} Tu. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par
172}
\par