{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  The species are very variable and often only weakly differentiated, frequently hybridizing. The following key makes no allowance for extreme variants or for hybrids.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: M. Deyl, {\i Op. Bot. Cech.}{\b  3}: 1-257 (1946).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems not more than 15 cm at anthesis; ligule more than
\par
  0·5 mm; sheaths open
\par
2 Bracts ovate to lanceolate; spikelets with 2-3 florets;
\par
  lemma with 5 awns, the middle 1·8-2·5 mm ...................................... {\b 1. ovata}
\par
2 Bracts suborbicular; spikelets often with 4 florets;
\par
  lemma with awns not more than 1 mm
\par
3 Inflorescence 8-13 × 8-12 mm, silvery, rarely greyish;
\par
  lemma unawned or with awns less than 0·05 mm ................. {\b 2. leucocephala}
\par
3 Inflorescence 5-7 × 5-7 mm, blue-grey; lemma with awns
\par
  0·5-1 mm ............................................................................ {\b 3. sphaerocephala}
\par
1 Stems usually more than 15 cm at anthesis; ligule usually
\par
  less than 0·5 mm; sheaths closed, or open at the top only
\par
4 Basal sheaths reticulate .............................................................. {\b 4. tenuifolia}
\par
4 Basal sheaths not reticulate
\par
5 Lemma hirsute or villous on and between the veins
\par
6 Middle awn of lemma at least as long as the lemma .................... {\b 5. comosa}
\par
6 Middle awn of lemma shorter than the lemma
\par
7 Leaves 1-1·5 mm wide ............................................................... {\b 6. tenerrima}
\par
7 Leaves at least 1·5 mm wide
\par
8 Lemma sparsely hairy between the veins
\par
9 Young leaves not pruinose; spikelets with 2-3 florets;
\par
  lemma 4-5 mm ............................................................................. {\b 7. sadlerana}
\par
9 Young leaves whitish-pruinose above; spikelets with 3-4
\par
  florets; lemma 3-4 mm .............................................................. {\b 8. heuflerana}
\par
8 Lemma densely hirsute between the veins
\par
10 Sheaths glabrous; inflorescence (11-)16(-30) × 7-10 mm,
\par
   subcylindrical .................................................................................. {\b 9. bielzii}
\par
10 Sheaths hirsute or villous; inflorescence globose or ovoid
\par
11 Inflorescence 15-20 × 8-12 mm; leaves glabrous; lemma
\par
   4·5-5 mm .................................................................................. {\b 10. coerulans}
\par
11 Inflorescence 9-15 × 7-9 mm; leaves hirsute above;
\par
   lemma 3-4·5 mm .................................................................... {\b 11. korabensis}
\par
5  Lemma glabrous or pubescent only between the veins
\par
12 Lemma densely pubescent between the veins
\par
13 Inflorescence 7-11 mm wide
\par
14 Spikelets with 3-4 florets; glumes 3·5-4·5(-6) mm;  young
\par
    leaves pruinose above, the uppermost usually less than 3 cm . {\b 8. heuflerana}
\par
14 Spikelets with 2-3 florets; glumes 5·5-6 mm; leaves
\par
   glaucescent, the uppermost more than 3 cm ............................. {\b 12. vaginalis}
\par
13 Inflorescence 11-15 mm wide
\par
15 Inflorescence 15 mm wide; glumes c. 6 mm, the awn 
\par
   2-4 mm; lemma 4·5-5·5 mm, the middle awn up to 5 mm;
\par
   palea 5-6·5 mm, with awns 2-3 mm .......................................... {\b 13. doerfleri}
\par
15 Inflorescence 11-14 mm wide; glumes c. 4 mm, the awn
\par
   1-2 mm; lemma 4-4·5 mm, the middle awn 1·5-2·5 mm;
\par
   palea c. 4·5 mm, with awns up to 0·5 mm .............................. {\b 14. wettsteinii}
\par
12 Lemma sparsely pubescent to glabrous between the veins
\par
16 Lemma sparsely pubescent between the veins
\par
17 Leaves hirsute above .................................................................... {\b 25. rigida}
\par
17 Leaves glabrous or subglabrous on both surfaces
\par
18 Very densely caespitose; stem more than 1 mm in 
\par
   diameter at apex; lemma 3·5-4·5 mm, shiny, puberulent ............. {\b 15. robusta}
\par
18 Laxly caespitose; stem less than 1 mm in diameter
\par
   at apex; lemma 4·5-6 mm, pubescent ......................................... {\b 26. insularis} 
\par
16 Lemma glabrous between the veins
\par
19 Uppermost leaf more than 3 cm
\par
20 Inflorescence not more than 30 mm
\par
21 Inflorescence 9-14 mm wide, very dense; lemma 5-6 mm,
\par
   with 3-5 awns ................................................................................. {\b 16. nitida}
\par
21 Inflorescence 6-7 mm wide, rather lax; lemma 3-4 mm,
\par
   with 3-5 teeth .................................................................................... {\b 17. alba}
\par
20 Inflorescence more than 30 mm
\par
22 Inflorescence lax
\par
23 Inflorescence 30-40 × 7-9 mm, usually bluish; uppermost
\par
   leaf in the middle of the stem ...................................................... {\b 18. latifolia}
\par
23 Inflorescence (35-)40-100 mm, usually whitish
\par
24 Inflorescence 45-100 × 5-7 mm; uppermost leaf above 
\par
   the middle of the stem; glumes 5-6 mm; lemma 3-4·5 mm,
\par
   with middle awn 0·5-1·5 mm ................................................. {\b 19. autumnalis}
\par
24 Inflorescence 35-70 × 6-8 mm; uppermost leaf below the
\par
   middle of the stem; glumes 7-10 mm; lemma 5-6 mm, with
\par
   middle awn 1·5-2 mm ............................................................... {\b 20. anatolica}
\par
22 Inflorescence dense
\par
25 Laxly caespitose; inflorescence usually 6-8 mm wide;
\par
   uppermost leaf about the middle of the stem;
\par
   lemma 4·5-5·5 mm ..................................................................... {\b 21. argentea}
\par
25 Usually densely caespitose; inflorescence usually 6-9
\par
   mm wide; uppermost leaf in the lower 1/3 of the stem;
\par
   lemma 3·5-4·5 mm ....................................................................... {\b 15. robusta} 
\par
19 Uppermost leaf not more than 3 cm 
\par
26 Palea shortly awned
\par
27 Leaves mostly with 7-13 veins, usually hairy above ................... {\b 25. rigida}
\par
27 Leaves mostly with 13 or more veins, usually glabrous .......... {\b 26. insularis} 
\par
26 Palea 2-fid, unawned
\par
28 Middle awn of lemma not more than 0·5 mm .......................... {\b 22. albicans}
\par
28 Middle awn of lemma 1-2 mm
\par
29 Bracts at base of inflorescence up to 11 × 5 mm, very 
\par
   conspicuous, spathe-like, silvery ............................................... {\b 24. taygetea}
\par
29 Bracts at base of inflorescence small, inconspicuous,
\par
   not spathe-like
\par
30 Young leaves pruinose above; inflorescence 10-14 × 7-9 mm,
\par
    dense .......................................................................................... {\b 23. caerulea}
\par
30 Young leaves not pruinose; inflorescence 10-30 mm
\par
31 Leaves (1·5-)2·5-3(-5) mm wide; inflorescence 5-7(-9) mm wide,
\par
   lax; lemma up to 6 mm ............................................................... {\b 22. albicans}
\par
31 Leaves (3-)4-5 mm wide; inflorescence 9-12 mm wide,
\par
   dense; lemma 4-5 mm ................................................................ {\b 7. sadlerana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. ovata} (Hoppe) A. Kerner,{\i  Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung. }{\b 1}: 109 (1881) ({\i S. tenella} Host,{\i  S. microcephala} DC.). Stems 3-10 cm, elongating after anthesis. Leaves 1-1·5 mm wide, flat or convolute, flaccid, hairy or subglabrous above; sheaths shiny. Inflorescence 6-10 × 4-6 mm, the bracts at its base ovate to lanceolate. Glumes 2 mm, ovate, abruptly contracted into an awn 1-2 mm. Lemma c. 2 mm, broadly ovate, dark blue, glabrous or ciliate, with 5 awns, the middle 1·8-2·5 mm, the lateral c. 1 mm. Palea longer than lemma, with awns 1-1·5 mm.{\i  Rocks and screes above }2000{\i  m.; calcicole. • Alps, mainly in the east.} Au Ga Ge It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. leucocephala} DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 3}: 76 (1805) ({\i S. sphaerocephala} auct., non Ard.). Stems c. 15 cm, elongating after anthesis. Leaves 1-2 mm wide, convolute or flat; sheaths subglabrous. Inflorescence 8-13 × 8-12 mm, the bracts at its base suborbicular, with acuminate apex. Glumes ovate, very shortly awned. Lemma 4-4·5 mm, broadly ovate, silvery, hairy in the proximal 1/3, usually unawned. Palea shorter than the lemma.{\i  Rock-crevices and screes; calcicole. • S.E. Alps.} Au He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. sphaerocephala} Ard., {\i Animadv. Bot. Spec. Alt.} 20 (1764). Stems up to 12 cm, elongating after anthesis. Leaves c. 1 mm wide, flat or convolute, glabrous but ciliate; sheaths glabrous. Inflorescence 5-7 × 5-7 mm, globose. Glumes ovate-lanceolate,
\par

\par
174}
\par