{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 33.       Psilurus}    Trin.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves filiform. Inflorescence a slender, flexuous spike with widely spaced, distichously arranged spikelets sunk in the joints of the tardily disarticulating angular rhachis. Spikelets laterally compressed, sessile, with 1 hermaphrodite floret. Terminal spikelet with 2 small, 1-veined glumes, the lower glume absent in the other spikelets. Lemma linear-lanceolate, much longer than the glumes, membranous, with an apical awn. Palea 2-veined, as long as the lemma. Rhachilla sometimes prolonged, with a terminal sterile floret. Stamen 1.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. incurvus} (Gouan) Schinz & Thell., {\i Viert. Naturf. Ges. Zürich}{\b  58}: 40 (1913) ({\i P. aristatus} (L.) Duval-Jouve,{\i  P. nardoides} Trin.). Stems up to 35 cm, numerous, slender, smooth, glabrous. Leaves 1-5 cm × c. 0·5 mm; ligule very short, truncate. Lemma c. 4 mm; awn 3-5 mm. Anthers 0·4 mm. Caryopsis c. 4 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Dry, open habitats. S. Europe}. Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 34.        Mibora}       Adanson
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat. Inflorescence spike-like, unilateral. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 1 floret. Glumes subequal, membranous, longer than the floret, 1-veined, persistent. Lemma 5-veined, truncate, densely hairy, thinner than the glumes. Palea as long as lemma, hairy.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. minima} (L.) Desv., {\i Obs. Pl. Angers} 45 (1818). Stems 2-15 cm, filiform, tufted. Leaves up to 2(-4) cm, mostly at the base of the plant, glabrous, with an obtuse, cartilaginous apex; sheaths with a wide scarious margin, glabrous, the lower without lamina; ligule up to 1 mm, truncate. Inflorescence 0·5-2 cm, usually purplish, very slender. Spikelets 1·8-3 mm, subsessile, in 2 rows along one side of the rhachis. Glumes oblong to elliptic-oblong, obtuse to slightly emarginate, rounded on the back. Lemma often denticulate at apex. Anthers 1-1·7 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Sandy and other light soils, damp in winter. S., W. & W.C. Europe, northwards to} c. 53° {\i N. in Wales; an occasional casual elsewhere.} Be Br ?Bu Ga Ge Gr Ho Hs †It Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 35.         Briza}          L.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Subglabrous annuals or perennials. Inflorescence usually much branched. Spikelets ovoid or broadly triangular, laterally compressed; florets 4-20. Glumes ovate-orbicular, cordate, 3- to 9-veined, with wide scarious margin. Lemma suborbicular, cordate, 7- to 9-veined, closely imbricate. Palea ovate to obovate, obtuse, shorter than to almost equalling the lemma, with 2 narrowly winged keels. Ovary glabrous; styles terminal. Grain rounded dorsally, flattened ventrally.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perennial, with non-flowering shoots; ligule 0·5-1·5 mm ............... {\b 1. media} 
\par 1 Annual, without non-flowering shoots; ligule at least 2 mm
\par 2 Spikelets (10-)14-25 mm, not more than 12 ................................. {\b 2. maxima}
\par 2 Spikelets 3-5(-7) mm, usually numerous
\par 3 Leaves at least 2 mm wide; panicle-branches patent;
\par    pedicels mostly longer than spikelets ............................................. {\b 3. minor}
\par 3 Leaves not more than 1 mm wide; panicle-branches erect;
\par    pedicels shorter than spikelets ...................................................... {\b 4. humilis}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 1. B. media} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 70 (1753). Laxly caespitose perennial 15-100 cm. Stems erect. Leaves 2-7 mm wide, flat, scabridulous on the margin; sheaths smooth; ligule 0·5-1·5 mm. Panicle 4-18 cm, erect, much-branched, lax; lower branches (1-)2 together; pedicels mostly longer than spikelets, very slender. Spikelets 4-7(-12) mm, numerous, pendent, usually purplish; florets 4-12. Glumes 2·5-3·5 mm, concave, cucullate, suborbicular, 3- to 5-veined, subcoriaceous. Lemma c. 4 mm, like the glumes, 7- to 9-veined. Palea somewhat shorter than lemma. 2n = 14, 28.{\i  Grassland. Most of Europe, but only as a casual in the extreme north.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Sb.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b media}: Usually 15-60 cm. Leaves 2-4 mm wide. Panicle-branches patent. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b elatior} (Sibth. & Sm.) Kohlena,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss. }{\b 1912}({\b 1}): 130 (1912) ({\i B. elatior} Sibth. & Sm.): Usually 50-100 cm. Leaves 4-7 mm wide. Panicle-branches erect. {\i S.E. Europe}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. maxima} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 70 (1753). Annual 10-60 cm. Stems erect or geniculate below. Leaves 3-8 mm wide, flat, scabridulous on the margin; sheaths smooth; ligule 2-5 mm. Panicle 2-10 cm, secund, drooping at apex; branches usually solitary, each with 1-3 spikelets; pedicels very slender. Spikelets (10-) 14-25 mm, 1-12, pendent, glabrous or appressed-pubescent, often reddish-brown; florets 7-20. Glumes 5-7 mm, concave, suborbicular, 5- to 9-veined, subcoriaceous. Lemma 6-8 mm, like the glumes, 7- to 9-veined. Palea up to 2/3 as long as lemma. 2n = 14.{\i  Open habitats. S. Europe; cultivated for ornament elsewhere and frequent as a casual and occasionally naturalized. }Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Br Rs (E)].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. B. minor} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 70 (1753). Annual (5-)10-60 cm. Stems erect. Leaves 3-10 mm wide, flat, scabridulous above and on margin; sheaths smooth; ligule 3-6 mm. Panicle 3-20 cm, erect, much-branched, lax; lower branches 1-2 together, patent; pedicels mostly longer than the spikelets, very slender. Spikelets 3-5 mm, numerous, usually pale green; florets 4-8. Glumes 2-3·5 mm, concave, cucullate, suborbicular, 3- to 5-veined, subcoriaceous. Lemma 1·5-2 mm, like the glumes, but papillose on the back, 7- to 9-veined. Palea somewhat shorter than lemma. 2n = 10.{\i  Open habitats. S. & W. Europe, northwards to S. England.} Al Az Bl *Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Be].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. B. humilis} Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 1}: 66 (1808) ({\i B. spicata} Sibth. & Sm., non Burm. fil.). Like {\b 3} but rarely more than 20 cm; leaves up to 1 mm wide; panicle-branches short, erect; pedicels mostly shorter than spikelets; glumes and lemma acute, smooth, not cucullate. 2n = 14.{\i  Rocky slopes and dry, open places. S.E. Europe.} Al Bu Cr Gr Rs (K) Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe      {\b Seslerieae}      Koch
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Poeae} but silica-bodies elliptical or saddle-shaped; inflorescence a dense, cylindrical to globose panicle, subtended by glumelike bracts; lemma membranous, often hairy or scabrid, 4- to 5-dentate and often shortly awned at apex; ovary hairy or glabrous at apex; grain with basal, punctiform hilum.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 36.        Sesleria}        Scop.   
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By M. Deyl. 
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 More or less caespitose perennials. Leaves flat, plicate or involute; ligule short, truncate or obtuse. Inflorescence spike-like, cylindrical to globose, often bluish, greyish or whitish; bracts at base of inflorescence well-developed. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 2-5 florets. Glumes unequal, membranous, 1- to 3-veined. Lemma 5-veined, membranous, with 2-5 usually aristulate teeth at apex. Palea as long as or longer than lemma.
\par
\par 173}
\par