{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 most 0·5-1(-2) cm. Inflorescence 15-20 × 7-8 mm, greyish or whitish. Glumes 5-6 mm, acute or shortly awned. Lemma (3-)4-5 mm, ovate-lanceolate, usually glabrous between the veins, sparsely ciliate; middle awn 0·5-1 mm. Palea longer than lemma, shortly awned. {\i Usually calcicole. • Mountains of Romania and N. & C. parts of Balkan peninsula. }Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rigida}: Mature leaves with 7-13 veins, usually with a continuous subepidermal layer of sclerenchyma, hairy above. Stems shorter than leaves. Sheaths usually hairy.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, except the extreme south}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b achtarovii} (Deyl) Deyl,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 76}: 364 (1978) ({\i S. achtarovii} Deyl): Mature leaves with at least 13 veins, without a continuous subepidermal layer of sclerenchyma, glabrous or subglabrous above. Stems longer than leaves. Sheaths glabrous.{\i  S. Bulgaria; Thasos.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. serbica} (Adamovic) Ujhelyi, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  62}: 64 (1959), from serpentine soils in C. & E. Jugoslavia, appears to be an ecotypic variant of 25. It has 2n = 28.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. S. insularis} Sommier,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Ital.}{\b  1905}: 126 (1905) ({\i S. corsica} (Hackel) Ujhelyi). Stems up to 65 cm, slender. Leaves 1·5-5 mm wide, flat or convolute, usually with 13-21 veins, glabrous or sparsely pubescent, the uppermost 1-3(-10) cm; sheaths glabrous. Inflorescence 15-45 × 7-8(-12) mm, usually dense. Glumes 4-6(-9) mm, ciliate, with awn (1-)2-3 mm. Lemma (4-)5-6 mm, shortly pubescent between the veins, ciliate. Palea 4-5·5 mm, ciliate and shortly awned. 2n = 28. •{\i  W. & C. Mediterranean region.} Al Bl Co It Ju Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  1 Uppermost leaf at least 8 cm; awn of lemma not more than 1 mm 
\par
   ............................................................................................  ({\b b}) subsp. {\b italica}
\par
1 Uppermost leaf not more than 3 cm; awn of lemma at least 1 mm
\par
2 Leaves not more than 2 mm wide; inflorescence 25-40 mm
\par
  ........................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b insularis}
\par
2 Leaves at least 2·5 mm wide; inflorescence 15-25 mm
\par
  ........................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b sillingeri}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b insularis}: Leaves 1·5-2 mm wide, the uppermost up to 3 cm. Inflorescence 25-40 × 7-8 mm. Lemma 5-6 mm, with awn (1-)2-4 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Islands of W. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b italica} (Pamp.) Deyl, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 364 (1978) ({\i S. caerulea} var. {\i italica} Pamp.): Leaves 3-5 mm wide, the uppermost 8-10 cm. Inflorescence 40-45 × 8-10 mm. Lemma 4-4·5 mm, with awn 0·5-1 mm.{\i  N. Appennini}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b sillingeri} (Deyl) Deyl, {\i loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i S. sillingeri} Deyl): Leaves 2·5-4 mm wide, the uppermost 1-3 cm. Inflorescence 15-25 × 7-12 mm. Lemma 4·5-5 mm, with awn 1-2 mm.{\i  From Bosna to Albania}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 37.     Oreochloa}      Link
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By M. Deyl. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizomatous perennials. Leaves linear or setaceous. Inflorescence a distichous or unilateral spike-like panicle; bracts at base of inflorescence absent, or very small. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 3-7 florets. Glumes unequal, membranous, obscurely 1- to 3-veined. Lemma obscurely 5- to 7-veined, membranous, usually unawned. Palea shorter than lemma.
\par

\par
 All species grow on exposed mountain grassland, rocks or screes, and are calcifuge.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant caespitose; rhizomes short; leaves rigid
\par
2 Transverse section of leaf with sclerenchyma beneath the veins 
\par
  only; ligule 3-6 mm; rhachis often sparsely hirsute ....................... {\b 1. disticha}
\par
2 Transverse section of leaf with a continuous subepidermal
\par
  layer of sclerenchyma; ligule 0·2-1 mm; rhachis glabrous .............. {\b 2. blanka}
\par
1 Plant not caespitose; rhizomes long, slender; leaves soft
\par
3 Sheaths not covering the nodes of the flowering stem ............ {\b 3. seslerioides}
\par
3 Sheaths covering the nodes of the flowering stem ........................ {\b 4. confusa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. disticha} (Wulfen) Link, {\i Hort. Berol. }{\b 1}: 44 (1827) ({\i Sesleria disticha} (Wulfen) Pers.). Densely caespitose; stems up to 25 cm, glabrous or puberulent above. Leaves up to 15 cm × 0·6 mm, involute, rigid, setaceous, with bands of sclerenchyma beneath the veins only; sheaths usually densely hairy, overlapping; ligule 3-6 mm. Inflorescence 9-14 × 7-9 mm; rhachis often sparsely hirsute. Glumes 3·5-4 mm, ovate-lanceolate. Lemma 4-5 mm, broadly ovate-lanceolate, shortly hairy in the lower 2/3, acute or shortly aristate, brownish, with a slate-coloured band below the apex and wide hyaline margin. Palea long-ciliate on the keels. 2n = 14. •{\i  Alps and Carpathians.} Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. O. blanka} Deyl,{\i  Op. Bot. Cech.}{\b  3}: 244 (1946). Like {\b 1} but leaves with a continuous subepidermal layer of sclerenchyma; sheaths usually glabrous; ligule 0·2-1 mm; rhachis glabrous; glumes 2·5-3·5 mm, broadly ovate; lemma 3·5-4 mm, with hairs up to 0·8 mm. 2n = 14. •{\i  Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. O. seslerioides} (All.) K.Richter,{\i  Pl. Eur.}{\b  1}: 70 (1890) ({\i O. pedemontana} Reuter). Not or scarcely caespitose, with long, slender rhizomes; stems 15-40 cm. Leaves up to 10 cm × 1-2 mm, smooth, soft, flat or convolute; sheaths glabrous, not covering the nodes of the flowering stem; ligule 1-1·5 mm. Inflorescence 5-15 × 5-12 mm; rhachis glabrous. Glumes 2-3 mm, broadly ovate. Lemma 4-4·5 mm, broadly ovate. Palea long-ciliate on the keels. 2n = 14. •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. O. confusa} (Coincy) Rouy, {\i Fl. Fr.}{\b  14}: 168 (1913) ({\i O. pedemontana} sensu Willk., non Reuter). Like {\b 3} but smaller; leaves usually scabrid on the veins; ligule of upper leaves up to 4 mm; sheaths overlapping and covering the nodes of the flowering stems. •{\i   Mountains of N.W. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 38.       Ammochloa}      Boiss.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a head of spikelets. Spikelets laterally compressed, with many florets. Glumes subequal, broadly membranous, coriaceous in the middle, 1-veined. Lemma broadly ovate, mucronate, becoming coriaceous, 5-veined. Palea 2-keeled. Lodicules absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. palaestina} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 13}): 52 (1853) ({\i A. subacaulis} Balansa). Stems up to 5 cm, stout, smooth, glabrous. Leaves up to 6 cm × 3 mm; sheaths whitish below; ligule 1-2 mm, lacerate. Inflorescence of 2-6 spikelets. Spikelets c. 10 mm, greenish-white. Glumes asymmetrically obovate. Lemma somewhat asymmetrical, scabrid or shortly ciliate on the keel.{\i  Dry, sandy places. E. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 39.      Echinaria}       Desf.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual. Leaves usually flat. Inflorescence a dense, ovoid or globose, prickly head. Spikelets subsessile, somewhat compressed laterally, with (1-)3-4 florets. Glumes subequal, membranous, the lower with 2(-5) strong, excurrent veins, the upper with an excurrent midrib. Lemma coriaceous, with 5(-7) very strong veins, produced as flattened awns, which are deflexed at
\par

\par
177}
\par