{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 maturity. Palea as long as lemma, the 2, rarely 5, veins produced as flattened awns. Lodicules absent. Styles connate near base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. capitata} (L.) Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  2}: 385 (1799). Stems 1·5-25 cm, erect or ascending, smooth. Leaves up to 2 mm wide, puberulent; ligules very short, ciliolate. Inflorescence 5-15 mm. Lemma c. 2 mm, the middle awn 4-6 mm, longer than the laterals. 2n = 18.{\i  Open habitats. S. Europe. }Al Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe     {\b  Meliceae}    Reichenb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Poeae} but silica-bodies elongate, with rounded ends; leaf-sheaths closed to the mouth; inflorescence a panicle; spikelets slightly compressed laterally, with 1-several fertile florets and (1-)2-3 sterile lemmas; glumes about equalling florets; lemma more or less coriaceous, rounded on the back; lodicules truncate, connate laterally; grain with a linear hilum; chromosomes small or medium-sized; basic number 9.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 40.       Melica}       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Leaves flat or convolute; sheaths entire. Inflorescence a usually rather lax, often simple panicle. Spikelets slightly compressed laterally, with 1-several hermaphrodite florets and 2-3 sterile lemmas forming a terminal, clavate structure. Glumes more or less unequal, firmly membranous, 3- to 5-veined. Fertile lemma rounded on the back, coriaceous in fruit; veins 5-9(-13), sometimes obscure. Palea membranous, 2-keeled, 2-dentate. Lodicules 2, connate laterally.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: W. Hempel, {\i Feddes Repert. }{\b 81}: 131-145 (1970); 657-712 (1971).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lemma hairy
\par
2 Lemma elliptical, obtuse, glabrous in distal 1/3 ........................ {\b 10. bauhinii}
\par
2 Lemma lanceolate, acute, hairy to apex
\par
3 Lemma hairy all over the back ...................................................... {\b 9. cupanii}
\par
3 Lemma with a glabrous band on the back
\par
4 Panicle usually rather lax and secund; leaves convolute,
\par
  without a prominent midrib .............................................................. {\b 7. ciliata}
\par
4 Panicle dense, not secund; leaves usually flat, with a
\par
  prominent midrib .................................................................. {\b 8. transsilvanica}
\par
1 Lemma glabrous
\par
5 Panicle dense, cylindrical; spikelets numerous; leaves
\par
  5-15 mm wide ............................................................................... {\b 6. altissima} 
\par
5 Panicle lax, racemose or with patent branches; spikelets
\par
  mostly fewer than 20; leaves 1-6(-7) mm wide
\par
6 Glumes unequal, the lower scarious in the distal ½ ....................... {\b 5. minuta}
\par
6 Glumes subequal, the lower scarious in the distal ¼
\par
7 Spikelets eventually nodding, with 2-3 fertile florets
\par
8 Ligule not more than 0·5 mm, truncate ........................................... {\b 1. nutans}
\par
8 Ligule 1-2·5 mm, ovate ...................................................................... {\b 2. picta}
\par
7 Spikelets always erect, with 1 fertile floret
\par
9 Panicle with erecto-patent branches; pedicels of lower
\par
  spikelets mostly much longer than the spikelets ............................ {\b 3. uniflora}
\par
9 Panicle simple or sparingly branched; pedicels not 
\par
  longer than the spikelets .............................................................. {\b 4. rectiflora}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. nutans} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 66 (1753). Rhizomatous; stems 20-60 cm, slender, scabridulous near apex. Leaves 2-6 mm wide, flat, puberulent above; sheaths scabridulous, the lower purplish; ligule very short, truncate. Panicle 4-20 cm, lax, secund, simple or sparingly branched below. Spikelets 6-8 mm, eventually nodding, with 2-3 fertile florets, falling together when ripe. Glumes ovate to elliptical, obtuse, rounded on the back, persistent. Lemma of fertile florets elliptical to elliptic-oblong, obtuse, strongly veined, slightly longer than glumes, not shining. 2n = 18.{\i  Shady and often rocky places. Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region and the islands.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu [Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. picta} C. Koch,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  21}: 395 (1848). Like {\b 1} but rhizomes short; ligule 1-2·5 mm, ovate; lemma of fertile florets rather obscurely veined, shining. 2n = 18.{\i  C. & E. Europe, northwards to S.E. Finland.} Au Bu Cz Fe Ge Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. M. uniflora} Retz.,{\i  Obs. Bot.}{\b  1}: 10 (1779). Rhizomatous; stems 20-60 cm, slender, smooth. Leaves 3-7 mm wide, flat, puberulent above; sheaths deflexed-hairy or glabrous, with a bristle 1-4 mm at the mouth on the side opposite to the lamina; ligule very short. Panicle 6-22 cm, lax, sparingly branched; pedicels of lower spikelets mostly much longer than the spikelets. Spikelets 4-7 mm, erect, with 1 fertile floret. Glumes elliptical, subacute, rounded on the back, persistent. Lemma of fertile floret elliptical, obtuse, slightly shorter than the glumes. 2n = 18.{\i  Shady places. Europe, northwards to Scotland and S.W. Finland and eastwards to Moldavia.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Rs (N, C, K, E) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. M. rectiflora} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 13}): 56 (1853). Like {\b 3} but rhizomes short; leaves 2-3 mm wide, glabrous; sheaths without a bristle at the mouth on the side opposite to the lamina; panicle simple or sparingly branched; pedicels not much longer than the spikelets; glumes oblong.{\i  Rocks. • S. Greece, Kriti and Karpathos.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. M. minuta} L.,{\i  Mantissa} 32 (1767). Laxly caespitose; stems 10-60(-100) cm, slender, smooth. Leaves 1-4 mm wide, when convolute, up to 8 mm wide when flat, glabrous or sparsely hairy above; sheaths glabrous; ligule up to 5 mm, truncate or lacerate. Panicle 4-20 cm, lax, with often patent branches or sometimes simple. Spikelets 5-9 mm, eventually nodding, with 2 fertile florets. Glumes ovate-lanceolate, unequal, deciduous, the upper acuminate. Lemma of fertile florets ovate-oblong, with scarious apex, strongly 9- to 11-veined. 2n = 18, 36.{\i  Dry, rocky places. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable. A number of taxa have been described at specific or subspecific level, but they seem poorly defined morphologically and also lacking in ecological or geographical distinction.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. M. altissima} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 66 (1753). Laxly caespitose; stems 60-250 cm, stout, retrorsely scabrid. Leaves 5-15 mm wide, flat, retrorsely scabrid beneath; sheaths retrorsely scabrid; ligule up to 5 mm, ovate. Panicle 10-20 cm, dense, often interrupted below, with short, erect branches. Spikelets 7-10 mm, eventually nodding, with 2 fertile florets. Glumes ovate, obtuse to subobtuse, subequal, deciduous. Lemma of fertile florets ovate, acute, with wide scarious margin, strongly 9- to 13-veined. 2n = 18.{\i  Woods and scrub. From S.C. Czechoslovakia and C. Russia southwards to N. W. Bulgaria.} *Au Bu Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. M. ciliata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 66 (1753). Caespitose to shortly creeping; stems 20-60(-100) cm, slender. Leaves 1-4 mm wide, usually convolute and rigid, without a prominent midrib sheaths sometimes shortly and sparsely hairy; ligule up to 4 mm, oblong, lacerate. Panicle 4-8(-25) cm, erect, usually rather lax, with usually short, erect (rarely erecto-patent) branches. Spikelets 4-8 mm, with 1 fertile floret. Glumes subequal, ovate, acute,
\par

\par
178}
\par