{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Much of Europe, but absent from the islands, the north-west and most of Fennoscandia. }Al Au Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A highly variable species which recent authors regard as being restricted in the narrow sense to the mountains of C. and S.E. Europe, whereas {\b V. lobelianum} Bernh. in Schrader, {\i Neues Jour, Bot.}{\b  2}({\b 2}): 356 (1808), described from Switzerland, is recorded from most parts of the range given above for {\b 2}, and is sometimes sympatric with it. It differs from{\b  2} in having the perianth-segments greenish on both surfaces and longer bracts, but other reputed differences in pedicel-length, flower-size and in hairiness do not seem to apply unambiguously to it and it must be regarded as of doubtful status. It has 2n = 32.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b V. misae} (Sirj.) Loesener fil., {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  24}: 65 (1927), which occurs in Arctic Russia, is like {\b 2} but has stems not more than 40 cm, leaves glabrous on both surfaces, and narrower (2-3 mm wide), subacute, yellowish-green perianth-segments. Intermediates, however, are reported between this and {\i V. lobelianum}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from N. Portugal and perhaps W.C. Spain differ from {\b 2} in having glabrous leaves and greenish-white perianth-segments 8-10 mm. They may constitute a further species or subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.     Asphodelus}          L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By I.B.K. Richardson & B.E. Smythies. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or rhizomatous perennials. Leaves linear, all basal. Flowers white or pale pink, numerous, in a dense raceme or panicle; bracts persistent, scarious. Pedicels articulated. Perianth segments 6, free or united only at the base, patent. Stamens 6, free; filaments expanded at base; anthers dorsifixed, introrse. Fruit a loculicidal capsule; seeds 6.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Slender annual or short-lived perennial with hollow, subterete
\par
   leaves and slender roots; capsule 4-5 mm in diameter .............. {\b 1. fistulosus}
\par
1 Robust perennial with flat leaves and napiform to fusiform
\par
   roots on a short rhizome; capsule (5-)6-18 mm in diameter
\par
2 Bracts dark brown; inflorescence usually simple ............................. {\b 2. albus}
\par
2 Bracts whitish, sometimes becoming brown on drying;
\par
  inflorescence usually branched
\par
3 Capsule 8-20 mm
\par
4 Capsule 8-14 mm, ovoid; inflorescence much-branched,
\par
  the terminal branch scarcely exceeding the laterals ...................... {\b 3. ramosus}
\par
4 Capsule 16-20 mm, globose; inflorescence unbranched or
\par
  with few, short lateral branches .......................................................... {\b 2. albus}
\par
3 Capsule 5-7 mm
\par
5 Capsule obovoid ............................................................................ {\b 4. aestivus}
\par
5 Capsule mitriform, ± 3-lobed at apex .................................. {\b 5. bento-rainhae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. fistulosus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }309 (1753) ({\i A. tenuifolius} Cav.). Annual or short-lived perennial with numerous slender roots. Leaves 3-35 × c. 0·4 cm, hollow, subterete. Scape 15-70 cm, hollow, simple or branched. Bracts scarious. Perianth-segments 5-12 mm, oblong, obtuse. Capsule 5-7 × 4-5 mm. 2n = 28, 56. {\i Roadsides, cultivated ground and dry, sandy or rocky places. Mediterranean region and S.W. Europe.} Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. albus} Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 3 (1768) (incl. {\i A. arrondeaui} Lloyd, {\i A. subalpinus} Gren. & Godron). Perennial with swollen roots. Leaves 15-60 × (0·5-)1-2(-3) cm, flat. Scape 30-100(-150) cm, solid, usually simple, or with a few, short branches at base of inflorescence. Perianth-segments 15-20(-30) mm, narrowly elliptical.{\i  Meadows, heaths, open woods and mountain pastures. S. Europe, extending northwards to N.W. France, Switzerland and Hungary. }Al Bu Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b albus}: Bracts dark brown. Capsule 8-15 × 6-13 mm. 2n = 28, 56.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b villarsii} (Verlot ex Billot) I.B.K. Richardson & Smythies,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 368 (1978) ({\i A. cerasiferus} auct., non Gay,{\i  A. villarsii} Verlot ex Billot): Bracts whitish-scarious. Capsule 16-20 × 18-25 mm. 2n = 78.{\i  S.W. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. ramosus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 310 (1753) ({\i A. cerasiferus }Gay, incl. {\i A. lusitanicus} Coutinho, {\i A. messeniacus} Heldr.). Perennial with napiform roots. Leaves 15-40 × 1-3(-4) cm, flat, somewhat keeled. Scape 40-150 cm, solid, usually much-branched, the lateral branches almost as long as the terminal. Bracts scarious to pale green. Perianth-segments 15-20 mm, lanceolate or linear-oblong, obtuse. Capsule 8-14 × 5-11 mm, ovoid. 2n = 28, 56, 84.{\i  S.W. Europe, extending locally eastwards to S.W. Greece}. Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants said to be of hybrid origin involving{\b  3} and {\b 4} have been called {\b A. chambeironii} Jordan,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr}. {\b 7}: 736 (1860) ({\i A. morisianus} Parl.). They are intermediate between the parents in flower- and fruit-characters and occur in S.W. Europe where the ranges overlap. It has been suggested that {\b 3} is itself of hybrid origin, possibly involving {\b 2}({\b a}) and {\b 4}, but further study is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. aestivus} Brot., {\i Fl. Lusit. }{\b 1}: 525 (1804) ({\i A. microcarpus} Viv.). Like {\b 3} but roots fusiform; leaves 25-45 × (0·5-)1-2(-4) cm; scape 100-200 cm, with somewhat shorter lateral branches; perianth-segments 10-14 mm; capsule 5-7 × 4-5 mm, obovoid. 2n = 28, 56, 84.{\i  Dry grassland and rocky or sandy ground. Mediterranean region, Portugal. }Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. bento-rainhae} P. Silva,{\i  Agron. Lusit. }{\b 18}: 20 (1956). Like {\b 3} but with sessile swollen roots; leaves 25-45 × 0·3-1·2 cm; scape 90-130 cm, sparingly branched or simple; perianth-segments 10-14 mm; capsule 6·5-7 × 6-8 mm, mitriform, 3-lobed at apex. {\i Pastures and cultivated fields. • C. Portugal} ({\i Serra da Gardunha}). Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b  6.          Asphodeline}            Reichenb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous perennial herbs with short, non-bulbous stock and fleshy roots. Leaves linear, alternate, with wide, scarious, sheathing base. Flowers numerous, yellow or white, in a dense terminal raceme; bracts persistent, scarious, each subtending 1-3(-5) flowers. Pedicels articulated. Perianth with a very short tube and narrow, patent, 3-veined segments. Stamens and style curved downwards, the stamens unequal; filaments glabrous, dilated at the base; anthers dorsifixed, introrse. Fruit aloculicidal capsule; seeds 6.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers white .................................................................................. {\b 3. taurica} 
\par
1 Flowers yellow
\par
2 Stem leafy throughout; bracts c. 25 × 10 mm .................................... {\b 1. lutea}
\par
2 Stem leafy only in lower part; bracts not more than 15 × 3 mm . {\b 2. liburnica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. lutea} (L.) Reichenb.,{\i  Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 116 (1830). Stem 40-80 cm, stout, erect, entirely covered by sheathing leaf-bases. Lower leaves up to 35 cm × 1·5-3(-5) mm, narrowly linear, recurved, the upper shorter and suberect. Raceme 10-20 cm. Bracts 20-30 × 8-12 mm, ovate, cuspidate. Pedicels c. 20 mm, articulated near the middle. Perianth-lobes 20-25 × 4-7 mm, greenish-yellow. Capsule 10 mm, globose; seeds 4-5 mm, trigonous, black. 2n = 28.{\i  Stony ground and dry grassland. Balkan peninsula and Aegean region, extending to Istra and S.E. Romania; C. & S. Italy, Sicilia. }Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Rm Si Tu.
\par

\par
17}
\par