{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Lemma densely and stiffly hairy in lower half, panicle 
\par
  1·5-4 cm usually pyramidal .......................................................... {\b 2. concinna}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. algida} (Solander) R. Br. in Parry,{\i  Jour. Voy. N.W. Pass., Suppl. App.} 284 (1824). Caespitose. Stems 2·5-8 cm, usually scarcely exceeding the leaves, often procumbent. Leaves 1-2 mm wide, rounded at apex; ligule 1·2-1·6 mm, triangular. Panicle 1-2 cm × 3-5 mm, dense; branches smooth. Glumes 0·3-0·6 mm, the lower smaller, usually caducous, the upper sometimes so. Lemma 1·3-1·6(-1·8) mm, broadly ovate, glabrous or somewhat hairy in the lower half, especially on the veins, often violet, with a wide, purplish-brown, hyaline margin and apex. Palea almost equalling lemma, glabrous or spinulose on the keels. Stamens (1-)2; anthers 0·3-0·5 mm. Grain dark brown, equalling the palea, widest at or just above the middle. 2n = 28.{\i  Damp, open habitats; nitrophilous. Arctic Europe, Iceland and mountains of Fennoscandia.} Fe Is No Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. concinna} (Th. Fries) Lindeb., {\i Bot. Not. }{\b 1898}: 155 (1898). Like {\b 1} but stems up to 15(-25) cm, well-exserted from the leaves; panicle 1·5-4 cm × 10-30 mm, usually pyramidal with patent branches; both glumes usually caducous; lemma and keels of palea densely and stiffly hairy; stamens usually 1; grain widest below the middle. 2n = 28.{\i  Damp, open habitats. Svalbard and arctic Russia; mountains of Fennoscandia from }62°{\i  to} 63° 15' {\i N}. No Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Fennoscandia are generally smaller than those from Svalbard and have narrower panicles. They have been described as var.{\i  algidiformis} (H. Sm.) Holmberg. In Russia this name has been applied to similar plants intermediate between {\b 1} and {\b 2}, of supposed hybrid origin and occurring with the putative parents. The status of such plants requires investigation as do also the occasional reports of sterile hybrids between {\b 1} and {\b 2}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 23.        Sclerochloa}     Beauv.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.A. Stace. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a raceme or with few, usually simple, racemose branches near the middle. Spikelets with 3-5 florets, the lower 2-3 fertile and the upper 1-3 male or sterile, disarticulating tardily below each floret or pedicel. Glumes strongly keeled. Lemma with 5-7 prominent, thick veins, strongly keeled, rounded to emarginate, chartaceous, with broad hyaline margin. Palea almost equalling lemma, 2-veined, very strongly 2-keeled, tapering to apex. Anthers slightly exserted at anthesis. Grain 2·5-3·5 mm including a stylopodium 0·7-1 mm, narrowly triangular-ovoid, more or less trigonous, free, glabrous; hilum punctiform, basal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. dura} (L.) Beauv.,{\i  Agrost.} 98, 177 (1812). Stems up to 16 cm, procumbent to erect. Inflorescence 1-4 cm, rigid, more or less secund; pedicels stout, up to 1 mm. Spikelets 6-10 mm, narrowly oblong, crowded. Glumes somewhat asymmetrical, glabrous, oblong-ovate, with wide hyaline margins; lower glume 2-3 mm, obtuse to emarginate, with (1-)3(-5) veins; upper glume 3·5-5 mm, rounded to emarginate, with (5-)7-9 veins. Lowest lemma 4·8-6 mm, the upper much shorter, glabrous, rounded to emarginate, sometimes very shortly mucronate. Anthers 0·8-1·5 mm. Lowest rhachilla-segments 2-2·5 mm, the upper shorter. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry places. S. & S.C. Europe, but absent from the islands; S. part of U.S.S.R.; casual and perhaps locally naturalized further north.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (*C, W, K, E) Tu [Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 24.      Dupontia}      R. Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Leaves folded or flat. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets somewhat compressed laterally, with 1-4(-5) florets. Glumes subequal, about as long as the spikelet, membranous, with a wide hyaline margin. Lemma finely 3(5)-veined, the lateral veins extending to about the middle, the middle vein sometimes excurrent as a mucro or short awn, scarious, usually hairy in the lower part, bearded at base. Palea shorter than lemma. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Glumes truncate, obtuse; lemma with long hairs at base 
\par
  and short hairs on the whole surface; stamens c. 2 mm ................... {\b 1. fisheri} 
\par
Glumes acuminate; lemma with long hairs at base, otherwise
\par
  glabrous; stamens c. 3 mm ....................................................... {\b 2. psilosantha}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. fisheri} R. Br. in Parry,{\i  Jour. Voy. N.W. Pass., Suppl. App. }291 (1824). Rhizomatous. Stems 10-25(-40) cm, rather stout. Leaves 1-4 mm wide, smooth and glabrous, longitudinally folded; sheaths often purplish; ligule c. 1 mm, truncate. Panicle 2-5(-12) cm; branches erect or sometimes patent or the lower deflexed. Spikelets c. 4 mm, usually with 2 florets. Glumes and lemma purple, with golden hyaline margins. Glumes ovate-lanceolate to ovate, truncate, obtuse. Lemma with long hairs at base and short hairs on the surface, unawned. Stamens c. 2 mm. 2n = 88.{\i  Wet tundra. Svalbard, Arctic Russia.} Rs (N) Sb. ({\i Circumpolar}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. D. psilosantha} (Rupr.) Griseb. in Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Ross.}{\b  4}: 386 (1852). Like {\b 1} but spikelets 5-8 mm, usually with 1 floret; glumes acuminate; lemma with long hairs at base, otherwise glabrous, usually mucronate or awned; stamens c. 3 mm. 2n = 44.{\i  Wet tundra. Svalbard, Arctic Russia.} Rs (N) Sb. ({\i Circumpolar.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants intermediate between {\b 1} and {\b 2} are of fairly frequent occurrence and further work may show that {\b 2} should be regarded as a variety of {\b 1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 25.     Arctagrostis}     Griseb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By G. Halliday. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Robust, rhizomatous perennials. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a narrow panicle. Spikelets with 1 floret. Glumes subequal, the upper up to ¾ as long as the floret. Lemma 3-veined, the mid-vein occasionally excurrent from the back as a short mucro. Palea similar to the lemma, indistinctly 2-keeled.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. latifolia} (R. Br.) Griseb. in Ledeb., {\i Fl. Ross.}{\b  4}: 434 (1852). Stems 10-70 cm, rigid, with persistent yellowish-brown sheaths below and on the rhizome. Leaves up to 18 cm × 2-7 mm, acute, finely scabrid; ligule 3-5 mm, broadly rounded, entire. Inflorescence 4-13 cm × 6-20 mm, dense, often somewhat interrupted below; branches scabrid. Spikelets purplish. Glumes ovate-lanceolate, usually glabrous. Lemma 3·5-5·5 mm, lanceolate, acute, scabrid, with a scarious, entire or slightly erose apex; lateral veins indistinct. Palea almost equalling the lemma. Anthers 1·5-2·5 mm. 2n = 56, ?62.{\i  Wet tundra. Arctic Europe, extending southwards to} c. 65° {\i N. in N. Ural.} Fe No Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 26.       Dactylis}        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Leaves flat or involute. Inflorescence a panicle with spikelets in dense clusters on the patent to erect branches. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 2-5 florets. Glumes subequal, keeled, somewhat curved, the lower 1-, the upper 3-veined. Lemma 5-veined, chartaceous, mucronate or shortly awned at apex. Palea about as long as lemma.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: K. Domin,{\i  Acta Bot. Bohem.}{\b  14}: 3-147 (1943).
\par

\par

\par
170}
\par