{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min28}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min28}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1056}{\nofchars6023}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 G. L. Stebbins & M. Zohary,}{\i\fs28  Univ. Calif Publ. Bot.}{\b\fs28  31}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 1-39 (1959).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. D. glomerata}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  71 (1753). Caespitose, often glaucous. Stems up to 100(-200) cm, erect or decumbent; non-flowering shoots usually strongly compressed. Leaves scabrid; ligule 2-10 mm, acute or lacerate. Panicle 1-15(-26) cm. Spikelets 5-9 mm. Glumes lanceolate to ovate, long-acute, scabrid or ciliate on the keel. Lemma lanceolate, scabrid or ciliate on the keel, the lowest 3-7 mm. Anthers 3-4 mm. 2n = 14, 28+0-4B.}{\i\fs28  Meadows, roadsides, open woodland and stony hillsides. Almost throughout Europe, though probably introduced in parts of the north}{\fs28 . }{\i\fs28 All except}{\fs28  Sb.
\par 
\par   A very variable species which, owing to its agricultural importance, has been studied intensively in some parts of its range. It includes diploids and tetraploids, which can usually be distinguished from one another by the size of their stomata and pollen-grains; in other characters there seems to be largely parallel variation.
\par 
\par   Several of these variants have been given specific or subspecific rank but most of them do not seem to be clearly distinguishable except by chromosome number, average characteristics of populations and behaviour in cultivation. In the present state of knowledge a formal taxonomic treatment of these populations at specific or subspecific rank does not seem possible.
\par 
\par   The most widespread of the diploids in Europe is }{\b\fs28 D. glomerata }{\fs28 subsp. }{\b\fs28 aschersoniana}{\fs28  (Graebner) Thell., }{\i\fs28 Allgem. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  17}{\fs28 : 34 (1911) (}{\i\fs28 D. polygama}{\fs28  Horv\'e1tovszky, }{\i\fs28 D. aschersoniana}{\fs28  Graebner), which occurs mainly in W. & C. Europe. More local are subsp. }{\b\fs28 woronowii}{\fs28  (Ovcz.) Stebbins & Zohary,}{\i\fs28  Univ. Calif. Publ. Bot. }{\b\fs28 31}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 9 (1959) (}{\i\fs28 D. woronowii }{\fs28 Ovcz.), which is doubtfully recorded from Krym, subsp.}{\b\fs28  reichenbachii}{\fs28  (Hausm. ex Dalla Torre & Sarnth.) Stebbins & Zohary,}{\i\fs28  loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1959), from the mountains of N. Italy, subsp.}{\b\fs28  ibizensis}{\fs28  Stebbins & Zohary,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\fs28  12 (1959), from Islas Baleares (Ibiza), subsp.}{\b\fs28  juncinella}{\fs28  (Bory) Stebbins & Zohary,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\fs28  13 (1959), from S. Spain (}{\i\fs28 Sierra Nevada, }{\fs28 2200 2900}{\i\fs28  m}{\fs28 ) and subsp.}{\b\fs28  lusitanica}{\fs28  Stebbins & Zohary,}{\i\fs28  loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1959), from C. Portugal.
\par 
\par   Tetraploid populations have been divided into subsp. }{\b\fs28 glomerata}{\fs28 , which occurs throughout the range of the species, except the south, subsp.}{\b\fs28  hispanica}{\fs28  (Roth) Nyman, }{\i\fs28 Consp.}{\fs28  819 (1882) (incl. subsp.}{\i\fs28  rigida}{\fs28  (Boiss. & Heldr.) Hayek), in the southern and western parts of the range of the species, and}{\b\fs28  D. marina}{\fs28  Borrill,}{\i\fs28  Jour. Linn. Soc. London}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Bot.}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 56}{\fs28 : 437 (1961), from coastal habitats in Portugal and the Mediterranean region.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 D. glomerata}{\fs28  subsp. }{\b\fs28 slovenica}{\fs28  Domin in Domin & Podp., }{\i\fs28 Klic \'dapln\'e9 Kvetene Rep. Cesk.}{\fs28  903 (1928), from the W. Carpathians, has stems 100-200 cm, with a swollen tuberous base, and a panicle 20-26 cm. It probably represents another tetraploid population.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 27.      Beckmannia}{\fs28        Host
\par }{\fs24  By \'86T.G. Tutin. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Inflorescence of racemosely arranged, simple or sparingly branched, dense unilateral spikes. Spikelets somewhat laterally compressed, obovate in outline, subsessile, in 2 rows on the rhachis. Glumes a little shorter than lemma, navicular, more or less inflated, deciduous. Lemma lanceolate. Palea 2-keeled. Lodicules acuminate. Ovary glabrous; styles short.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28  Flowering stems usually tuberous at base; spikelets with 2 
\par   fertile florets; glumes strongly inflated; anthers c. 1\'b78 mm
\par   ................................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. eruciformis}{\fs28  
\par Flowering stems not tuberous at base; spikelets with 1 
\par   fertile floret; glumes slightly inflated; anthers c. 0\'b78 mm 
\par   .................................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. syzigachne}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. B. eruciformis}{\fs28  (L.) Host,}{\i\fs28  Gram. Austr. }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 : 5 (1805). Perennial; flowering stems 30-150 cm, usually tuberous at base. Leaves 4-10 mm wide, flat, scabrid; sheaths ribbed; ligule 5-8 mm, acute. Inflorescence usually 18-25 cm; spikes 1-3 cm, erect to erecto-patent. Spikelets 2\'b75-3 mm, obovate in outline, with 2 fertile florets. Glumes equal, strongly inflated, with a green or rarely purplish keel, whitish coriaceous sides and scarious margin. Lemma usually shortly mucronate, puberulent on the back. Anthers c. 1\'b78 mm. 2n = 14. }{\i\fs28 Damp ground and in shallow water. E. & E.C. Europe, extending westwards to Italy.}{\fs28  Al Bu Cz Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Tu [Ge].
\par 
\par   (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 eruciformis}{\fs28 : Laxly caespitose, with creeping rhizomes. Basal internode of stems tuberous.}{\i\fs28  Throughout most of the range of the species.}{\fs28 
\par   (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 borealis}{\fs28  Tzvelev, }{\i\fs28 Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Leningrad}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 10}{\fs28 : 81 (1973): Densely caespitose, without creeping rhizomes. Basal internode of stems not tuberous.}{\i\fs28  N. & E. Russia}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. B. syzigachne}{\fs28  (Steudel) Fernald,}{\i\fs28  Rhodora }{\b\fs28 30}{\fs28 : 27 (1928). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but annual; stems 30-120 cm, never tuberous at base; spikes up to 2 cm; spikelets with 1 fertile and sometimes 1 sterile floret; glumes slightly inflated; lemma glabrous on the back. Anthers c. 0\'b78 mm.}{\i\fs28  Wet places. S. Ural}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 near Bajmak}{\fs28 ). Rs (C). (}{\i\fs28 Temperate Asia and North America}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 28.     Cynosurus}{\fs28        L.
\par }{\fs24  By \'86T.G. Tutin. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennials or annuals. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a more or less unilateral condensed panicle. Spikelets dimorphic, the fertile laterally compressed, with 1-5 florets, the sterile below the fertile and consisting of narrow, rigid glumes and lemmas. Glumes of fertile spikelets thin, subequal, acute. Lemma chartaceous, with an apical awn. Palea 2-keeled, shortly 2-fid at apex, about as long as lemma.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28  1 Perennial; lemma of fertile spikelet with awn shorter 
\par   than the lemma .............................................................................. }{\b\fs28 1. cristatus}{\fs28  
\par 1 Annual; lemma of fertile spikelet with awn longer than 
\par   the lemma
\par 2 Awns of glumes and lemmas of sterile spikelet 15-20 mm,
\par   pink at base; uppermost sheath usually reaching or 
\par   enclosing base of inflorescence at anthesis .............................. }{\b\fs28 4. callitrichus}{\fs28 
\par 2 Awns of glumes and lemmas of sterile spikelet 6-15 mm;
\par   uppermost sheath far below the inflorescence at anthesis
\par 3 Leaves 3-9 mm wide; panicle dense; upper lemmas of 
\par   sterile spikelets not much shorter and wider than lower ............. }{\b\fs28 2. echinatus}{\fs28 
\par 3 Leaves 1-3 mm wide; panicle rather lax; upper lemmas of
\par   sterile spikelets much shorter and wider than lower ....................... }{\b\fs28 3. elegans}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. C. cristatus}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  72 (1753). Perennial. Stems 15-75 (-90) cm, wiry. Leaves 0\'b75-2 mm wide; sheaths smooth, the uppermost far below the inflorescence at anthesis; ligule c. 1 mm. Panicle up to 7(-8\'b75) \'d7 0\'b77 cm, narrowly oblong, with flat, zigzag axis. Spikelets 3-5 mm, distichous. Glumes and lemmas of sterile spikelets linear-lanceolate, shortly awned, membranous, with green, ciliate keel, the upper lemmas similar to but shorter than the lower. Lemmas of fertile spikelets lanceolate, obscurely veined, shortly awned, more or less hairy. 2n = 14.}{\i\fs28  Meadows and pastures. Most of Europe.}{\fs28  All except Bl Cr Fa Is Sb.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. C. echinatus}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  72 (1753). Annual. Stems (10-) 20-60 cm, smooth. Leaves 3-9 mm wide; sheaths smooth, the uppermost not reaching the inflorescence at anthesis; ligule 2-4 mm. Panicle 1-4 \'d7 0\'b77-1\'b75 cm (excluding awns), ovoid to oblong, unilateral, dense. Spikelets 8-10 mm. Glumes and lemmas of
\par 
\par 171}
\par }