{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe     {\b Bromeae}        Dumort.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves linear, flat; sheaths closed to the mouth, soon splitting; silica-bodies oblong; 2-celled micro-hairs absent; ligule membranous. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets all hermaphrodite, laterally compressed or terete, with several to many florets, with distinct, often long pedicels. Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes and below each floret. Glumes shorter than the spikelet, unequal. Lemma herbaceous to coriaceous, with a scarious margin, with 5-13 veins, 2-fid at apex, usually awned from below the sinus, rounded or keeled on the back. Palea 2-keeled. Lodicules 2, entire, connate below, glabrous. Stamens 3 or 2. Ovary with a terminal, fleshy, hairy appendage; styles 2, inserted laterally. Grain with a linear hilum as long as the grain. Starch-grains simple. Chromosomes large; basic number 7.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 44.         Bromus}      L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.M. Smith. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, biennial or perennial. Leaves flat, or somewhat involute; ligule membranous, often jagged. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets with 1-many florets; glumes 1- to 9-veined, persistent at maturity, the upper usually the larger; lemma few- to many-veined, unawned or with a subterminal awn. Grain normally adherent to the palea, and tightly enclosed within the lemma; hilum narrow, elongate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   All the annual species ({\b 1-7} and {\b 20-35}) commonly occur as ruderals and as weeds of cultivated ground, though most of them are also found in dry grassland, especially in the southern part of their range. This range of habitat may be presumed, unless other information is given. On account of their ruderal and weedy habit it is almost impossible to delimit with any confidence the boundaries between native and naturalized and between naturalized and casual occurrence for these species, and many of them are fairly frequent casuals outside the countries listed for them here.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: H. Scholz, {\i Willdenowia}{\b  6}: 139-159 (1970). P. M. Smith,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  30}: 361-375 (1970). R. Tournay,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. Bruxelles}{\b  31}: 289-299 (1961).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lower glume 1-veined; upper glume 3-veined; spikelets
\par
  parallel-sided or cuneiform and wider at the top
\par
2 Annual; awn usually longer than lemma; spikelets 
\par
  cuneate, wider at the top
\par
3 Lemma at least 20 mm
\par
4 Panicle usually lax, spreading; callus-scar almost circular ......... {\b 1. diandrus}
\par
4 Panicle usually dense, stiffly erect; callus-scar ± elliptical ........... {\b 2. rigidus}
\par
3 Lemma not more than 20 mm
\par
5 Panicle drooping, usually lax; most panicle-branches as
\par
  long as or longer than the spikelets
\par
6 Panicle simple, the branches each bearing 1(-3) spikelets;
\par
  lemma 14-20 mm ............................................................................. {\b 3. sterilis}
\par
6 Panicle always compound, usually secund, with the longer
\par
  branches bearing at least 4 spikelets; lemma 9-13 mm ................ {\b 4. tectorum}
\par
5 Panicle erect, often dense; most panicle-branches 
\par
  shorter than the spikelets, or spikelets subsessile
\par
7 Panicle lax, the spikelets not densely crowded; panicle-
\par
  branches 10 mm or more; lemma at least 3 mm wide ............. {\b 5. madritensis}
\par
7 Panicle very dense, the spikelets densely crowded on 
\par
  branches 1-10 mm; lemma less than 3 mm wide
\par
8 Lemma 1-1·5 mm wide; panicle 4-5 cm, with 1-2 spikelets on each 
\par
  branch; awns often somewhat curved outwards at maturity .... {\b 6. fasciculatus}
\par
8 Lemma at least 2 mm wide; panicle usually more than 4 cm, the 
\par
  branches each with 4-5 spikelets; awns straight at maturity ............ {\b 7. rubens}
\par
2 Perennial; awn not longer than the lemma, rarely absent;
\par
  spikelets parallel-sided
\par
9 Lemma unawned or with an awn not more than 3 mm; leaves flat; 
\par
  plant with long, creeping rhizomes, not caespitose
\par
10 Awn absent or not more than 1·5 mm; lemma glabrous, or
\par
   scabrid only at the margin, very rarely pubescent at base ............. {\b 8. inermis}
\par
10 Awn 1·5-3 mm; lemma with long hairs on the marginal 
\par
   veins and at base, glabrous elsewhere ......................................... {\b 9. sibiricus}
\par
9 Lemma with an awn more than 3 mm; leaves flat or folded
\par
  and appearing setaceous; rhizomes present or absent;
\par
  plant usually caespitose
\par
11 Panicle wide, lax; branches patent or nodding; spikelets
\par
   pendent or patent
\par
12 Panicle large, very lax; branches long, nodding, with 
\par
   pendent spikelets; lowest panicle-node with 2 branches,
\par
   each with several spikelets; scale at lowest panicle-node
\par
   ciliate .......................................................................................... {\b 10. ramosus}
\par
12 Panicle lax; branches and spikelets patent; lowest 
\par
   panicle-node with 3-5 branches, some with one spikelet;
\par
   scale at lowest panicle-node not ciliate .................................... {\b 11. benekenii}
\par
11 Panicle erect, usually narrow; branches erect or 
\par
   patent; spikelets erect
\par
13 Basal sheaths decaying into a persistent fibrous reticulum
\par
14 Leaves and sheaths tomentose-ciliate with short dense
\par
   silky hairs and sparse long cilia; leaves flat, narrow
\par
15 Upper glume unawned; lemma 12-14 mm; lowest panicle-node
\par
   with 2-3 branches; spikelets greenish-yellow ....................... {\b 16. tomentellus}
\par
15 Upper glume shortly awned; lemma 6-7 mm; lowest 
\par
   panicle-node with 4-5 branches; spikelets usually 
\par
   purplish-green ......................................................................... {\b 17. moesiacus}
\par
14 Leaves and sheaths glabrous, or somewhat hairy but not
\par
   tomentose-ciliate
\par
16 Basal leaves more than 10 cm, 2-3 mm wide, flaccid,
\par
   flat except sometimes near the apex; lemma 11-13 mm;
\par
   spikelets not flecked with purple ................................................ {\b 18. riparius}
\par
16 Basal leaves rarely more than 10 cm × 1·5 mm, somewhat
\par
   rigid and involute throughout their length; lemma 8-12
\par
   mm; spikelets often flecked with purple ............................ {\b 19. cappadocicus}
\par
13 Basal sheaths remaining intact, or decaying into per-
\par
   sistent, parallel fibres, not forming a reticulum
\par
17 Rhizome long; leaf-sheaths usually with dense, grey-
\par
   white hairs; lemma c. 9 mm, scabrid on the veins ................ {\b 13. pannonicus}
\par
17 Not with the above combination of characters
\par
18 Upper leaves often wider than the lower, flat or 
\par
   somewhat convolute; plant caespitose, not rhizomatous ............. {\b 12. erectus}
\par
18 Leaves all of similar width; plant rhizomatous 
\par
19 Lemma c. 20 mm; leaves flat, or slightly convolute at
\par
   the apex; rhizome short .............................................................. {\b 15. pindicus} 
\par
19 Lemma 8-10 mm; leaves setaceous-complicate; rhizome 
\par
   long ............................................................................. {\b 14. moellendorffianus}
\par
1  Lower glume 3- to 7- veined, the upper 5- to 9-veined;
\par
   spikelets ovate or lanceolate, tapering towards the top
\par
20 Perennial; spikelets strongly compressed; lemma 
\par
   strongly keeled; awn shorter than the lemma or absent,
\par
   always straight, arising very near the apex
\par
21 Spikelets lanceolate to ovate; glumes cucullate; lemma
\par
   mucronate, or with a short, slender awn up to 1 mm;
\par
   palea c. ½ as long as lemma ................................................. {\b 36. willdenowii}
\par
21 Spikelets linear-lanceolate; glumes acute; lemma with 
\par
   an awn 4-10 mm; palea about equalling the lemma ................. {\b 37. carinatus}
\par
20 Annual; spikelets subterete; lemma rounded on the back;
\par
   awn about as long as the lemma, arising well below the
\par
   apex, often curved, rarely short or absent
\par

\par
182}
\par