{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Lemma 12-14 mm, oblong-lanceolate, with short apical teeth; awn somewhat shorter than lemma, straight or weakly divaricate. Anthers c. 3 mm. {\i Mountain pastures. Kriti}. Cr. ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. B. moesiacus} Velen., {\i Fl. Bulg.} 616 (1891). Caespitose; stems 20-40 cm. Leaves 3-5 cm, flat, the lower 1-1·5 mm wide, the upper up to 4 mm wide, tomentose, lanate and with sparse long hairs; lower sheaths decaying into persistent, reticulate fibres. Panicle c. 8 × 4 cm, erect, rather lax, the lower branches 4-5 at a node, about as long as the spikelets; spikelets up to 20 × 4 mm, linear-oblong, with 6-9 florets, usually hairy. Glumes 4-5 mm, the upper with an awn c. 1 mm, from near the apex. lemma 6-7 mm, broadly lanceolate, often tinged with purple, the apical teeth short; awn straight, erect, about as long as the lemma. Palea slightly shorter than lemma. Anthers c. 2 mm.{\i  Dry hillsides; calcicole. • S.W. Bulgaria.} Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. B. riparius} Rehmann,{\i  Notizbl. Veg. Gest. Schwarz. Meer} 83 (1872) ({\i B. fibrosus} Hackel, {\i B. erectus} auct. ross., non Hudson). Densely caespitose, sometimes with very short rhizomes; stems 30-90 cm, slender, erect or decumbent at the base. Leaves 10-20 cm × 2-3 mm, flaccid, scabrid, the margins sometimes with brittle cilia; sheaths with long, patent or retrorse hairs, the basal decaying into persistent, reticulate fibres. Panicle 10-20 × 3-7 cm, erect, rather lax, the branches scabrid, each with 1-2 spikelets; spikelets 20-30 mm, lanceolate, usually pale green, with 5-7 florets. Lower glume 8-10 mm, the upper 9-12 mm. Lemma 11-13 mm, oblong-lanceolate, usually glabrous, sometimes appressed-hairy; awn 5-8 mm, straight or slightly curved. Palea shorter than lemma. Anthers 2·5-3·5 mm. 2n = 70.{\i  Meadows, scrub and rocky hillsides. S.E. Europe, extending northwards to C. Russia}. Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Robust variants with hairy inflorescences from Romania and Bulgaria have been distinguished as{\b  B. barcensis} Simonkai,{\i  Enum. Fl. Transs. }584 (1887) ({\i B. fibrosus} subsp.{\i  barcensis} (Simonkai) Hayek), but the status of this taxon is very doubtful.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. B. cappadocicus} Boiss. & Balansa,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  4}: 306 (1857). Densely caespitose, sometimes with very short rhizomes; stems 25-45 cm, slender, erect. Leaves up to 10 cm × 1·5 mm, the cauline often only 1-2 cm, rather tough, sparsely hairy, flat or weakly involute, acuminate; basal sheaths decaying into persistent, reticulate fibres, eventually enveloping the lower part of the stems in a spongy mass. Panicle erect, with slender, flexuous branches, each with 1-2 spikelets; spikelets often greenish-purple. Lower glume 5-7 mm, the upper 7-8 mm. Lemma 8-10 mm, lanceolate, shortly hairy; awn straight or curving slightly outwards. Palea shorter than lemma. Anthers 2-2·5 mm. 2n = 42.{\i  Rocky ground. S. half of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cappadocicus}: Leaf-sheaths glabrous or shortly pubescent. Panicle 5-9 cm, with 2-3 nodding branches at lowest node. Spikelets 14-20 mm, with 5-8 florets, glabrous; awn 4-6 mm. {\i S. Albania and Macedonia.} ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lacmonicus} (Hausskn.) P.M.Sm., {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 360 (1978) ({\i B. lacmonicus} Hausskn.): Leaf-sheaths with long, patent hairs. Panicle 5-6 cm, with 5 erect or ascending branches at lowest node. Spikelets 11-15 mm, with 3-5 florets, densely hairy; awn 5-8 mm. •{\i  S. Bulgaria to C. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. BROMUS. Annuals or rarely biennials. Spikelets lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, terete or slightly compressed. Lower glume 3- to 5-veined, the upper 5- to 7-veined. Lemma rounded on the back, usually shallowly emarginate and with 2 apical teeth, rarely entire. Awn straight, patent or recurved, about as long as lemma, rarely absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. B. arvensis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 77 (1753). Stems 80-110 cm, erect, glabrous. Leaves 10-20 cm × 2-6 mm, flat, linear-acuminate, sparsely hairy; sheaths with scattered hairs. Panicle up to 30 × 20 cm, very lax, erect at first, finally patent or nodding; branches long, slender, rough, with up to 10 spikelets; spikelets 10-25 mm, oblong-lanceolate, with 4-10 florets. Lower glume 4-6 mm, the upper 6-8 mm. Lemma 7-9 mm, broadly elliptical or obovate, shallowly 2-dentate; awn 6-10 mm, straight, slender. Palea about equalling the lemma. Anthers up to 5 mm, never less than half as long as lemma. Grain 7-9 mm, flat, thin. 2n = 14.{\i  S. & S.C. Europe; widely naturalized further north}. Al Bl Bu Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (*C, W) Tu [Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ge Ho No Po Rs (N, B) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp. {\b segetalis} H. Scholz, {\i Willdenowia}{\b  6}: 145 (1970) ({\i B. secalinus} subsp.{\i  billotii} (F. W. Schultz) Ascherson & Graebner), has been recorded from C. Europe as a weed in crops of Secale. It has the lemma c. 6 mm, divaricate in fruit, and a rather thick, weakly incurved grain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. B. pseudosecalinus} P.M. Sm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  77}: 63 (1968). Stems 30-60 cm, erect, slender; sheaths hairy. Panicle 5-10 cm, lax, contracted and somewhat nodding after flowering; spikelets 8-12 mm, lanceolate at first, becoming ovate, glabrous, disarticulating tardily at maturity; florets imbricate at first, erecto-patent after anthesis. Glumes and lemmas corneous, obscurely veined; lemma 5-6 mm, the bluntly angled margins becoming inrolled, revealing the rhachilla; awn 2-6 mm, straight or slightly flexuous. Palea shorter than lemma. Anthers 1·25-1·75 mm. Grain 4-4·5 mm, longitudinally incurved at maturity. 2n = 14. •{\i  Britain and Ireland.} Br Hb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The distribution is imperfectly known.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. B. secalinus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 76 (1753). Stems 20-120 cm, erect, usually stout. Leaf-sheaths usually glabrous or the lower very obscurely hairy, rarely with uniform, fine, stiff hairs. Panicle 5-20 cm, lax, often secund and nodding after flowering; spikelets 12-20 mm, glabrous or hairy, lanceolate at first, later ovate; florets imbricate at first, erecto-patent after anthesis. Glumes and lemma corneous, obscurely veined. Lemma 6·5-9(-10) mm, shallowly emarginate at the apex, or entire, the inrolled margins revealing the rhachilla; awn up to 8 mm, straight or flexuous, sometimes absent. Palea equalling lemma. Anthers 1-2 mm. Grain 6-9 mm, longitudinally inrolled at maturity. 2n = 28.{\i  S. & S.C. Europe; widely naturalized further north.} *Az Bu Co ?Cr Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju *Lu Rm Rs (W) Sa Si [Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ge He Ho No Po Rs (N, B, C) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. B. bromoideus} (Lej.) Crépin,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Belg.}{\b  6}: 399 (1867) ({\i B. arduennensis} Dumort.). Stems 60-130 cm, erect, stout. Leaf-sheaths glabrous. Panicle 18-20 cm, lax, erect at first, often secund later; spikelets 25-30 mm, ovate-lanceolate, glabrous or hairy; florets imbricate at first, erecto-patent after anthesis. Glumes and lemmas corneous, with prominent veins; glumes often shortly awned below the apex. Lemma (11-)12-14 (-16) mm, deeply emarginate, with 2 apical setae 1-3 mm, and a prominent triangular or rounded tooth on each margin, with the margins inrolling somewhat at maturity; awn 8-12 mm, stout straight, arising below the apical sinus of the lemma, which may hence appear 3-awned. Palea shorter than lemma. Anthers 2-3 mm. Grain 8 mm, inrolled at maturity. 2n = 28.{\i  Formerly in S.E. Belgium, just extending into France, among crops of} Triticum{\i  spelta; now extinct except in Botanic Gardens.}•  †Be †Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. B. grossus} Desf. ex DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 3}: 68 (1805). Stems 60-130 cm, erect, stout. Leaf-sheaths hairy or
\par

\par
186}
\par