{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min28}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min29}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1057}{\nofchars6030}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 glabrous. Panicle 14-18 cm, lax, erect, often secund later; spikelets 18-50 mm, ovate-lanceolate, glabrous or hairy. Glumes and lemmas corneous, but with the veins sometimes prominent below; glumes sometimes shortly awned below the apex. Lemma (8-)10-12(-14) mm, bluntly angled, with a shallow apical sinus; awn 8-12 mm, stout, straight, arising below the sinus. Palea about equalling lemma. Anthers 2-3 mm. Grain 10-12 mm, a little shorter than lemma, inrolled at maturity. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  Among crops of Triticum spelta. \bullet  Belgium; an occasional casual elsewhere.}{\fs28  Be.
\par 
\par  For a full account of the origins, taxonomy and relationships of }{\i\fs28 B. grossus, B. bromoideus}{\fs28  and their varieties see R. Tournay,}{\i\fs28  Bull. Jard. Bot. Bruxelles }{\b\fs28 38}{\fs28 : 295-380 (1968).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 25. B. commutatus}{\fs28  Schrader, }{\i\fs28 Fl. Germ. }{\fs28 353 (1806). Stems 40-120 cm, erect or ascending, glabrous. Lower leaf-sheaths softly hairy, the upper usually glabrous or nearly so. Panicle-branches and pedicels slender, mostly longer than the spikelets; spikelets oblong-lanceolate, So\'f3n disarticulating. Lower glume 5-7 mm, the upper 6-9 mm. Lemma 8-11\'b75 mm, obovate-oblanceolate, bluntly angled on the margins, acute, with overlapping margins; awn 3-10 mm. Palea shorter than lemma. Grain thin, flat, slightly shorter than the palea. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  Most of Europe except Fennoscandia and the N. & E. parts of the U.S.S.R.}{\fs28  Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (*B, C, W, K) Si [Da Su].
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 commutatus}{\fs28 : Panicle 6-25 cm, soon nodding, lax; spikelets 15-25 \'d7 4-6 mm, usually glabrous; lowest rhachilla segment 1\'b75 mm, awn straight. Anthers c. 1\'b75 mm. }{\i\fs28 Throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 neglectus}{\fs28  (Parl.) P.M. Sm.,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  76}{\fs28 : 360 (1978) (}{\i\fs28 Serrafalcus neglectus}{\fs28  Parl.): Panicle 10-15 cm, erect, somewhat contracted at first; spikelets 18-25 \'d7 5-7 mm, hairy; lowest rhachilla-segment 1\'b75-1\'b775 mm; awn weakly divaricate. Anthers 2-3 mm. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Italy and Sicilia; once recorded from E. Greece}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 26. B. racemosus}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  ed. 2, 114 (1762). Stems 20-110 cm, erect or ascending, glabrous or rarely shortly pubescent. Lower leaf-sheaths hairy, the upper glabrous or with scattered hairs. Panicle 4-15 \'d7 1-5 cm, erect, narrow, sometimes nodding in fruit; branches and pedicels slender, at least some longer than the spikelets; spikelets 10-15 \'d7 3-5 mm, lanceolate, glabrous, So\'f3n disarticulating; lowest rhachilla-segment 0\'b75-1 mm. Lower glume 4-6 mm, the upper 4-7 mm. Lemma 6\'b75-8 mm, elliptical or narrowly oblanceolate, rounded to a cucullate apex; awn 5-9 mm, straight. Palea shorter than lemma. Anthers 1\'b75-3 mm. Grain thin, flat, slightly shorter than palea. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  Much of Europe, northwards to S. Fennoscandia, but absent from most of the U.S.S.R.}{\fs28  Al Au Be Br Bu Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rs (E) Si Su.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 27. B. hordeaceus}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  77 (1753). Stems erect, procumbent or ascending. Leaf-sheaths hairy. Panicle erect, usually dense, sometimes reduced to 1 spikelet; pedicels mostly shorter than the spikelets. Glumes usually unequal. Lemma chartaceous, with prominent veins, the margin narrowly hyaline. Palea shorter than lemma. Anthers usually less than 1 mm. Grain shorter than palea. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  Almost throughout Europe}{\fs28 . }{\i\fs28 All except}{\fs28  Sb, but only casual in Fa and Is.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Awns stout, flattened at the base, divaricate, patent or
\par   recurved in fruit; panicle very dense; spikelets hairy
\par 2 Panicle with few spikelets; leaf-sheaths and spikelets
\par   densely hairy; stems rarely more than 15 cm, stout;
\par   lemma 6\'b75-8\'b75 mm, bluntly angled ...................................... (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 ferronii}{\fs28 
\par 2 Panicle with many spikelets; leaf-sheaths and spikelets
\par   shortly pubescent; stems usually 15-25 cm, sometimes 
\par   longer; lemma 8-11 mm, rounded at the margin .......... (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 molliformis}{\fs28 
\par 1 Awns terete at the base, straight or curving slightly 
\par   outwards in fruit; panicle usually open at first, sometimes
\par   contracted in fruit; spikelets hairy or glabrous
\par 3 Stems 1-8(-12) cm, procumbent or ascending; lemma 6\'b75-7\'b75 mm;
\par   awn straight or curving slightly outwards in fruit ............ (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 thominii}{\fs28 
\par 3 Stems 3-80 cm, usually erect; lemma 8-11 mm; awn straight, 
\par   erect .............................................................................. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 hordeaceus}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28   (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 hordeaceus}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 B. mollis}{\fs28  L.): Sometimes biennial; stems 3-80 cm, usually erect. Leaf-sheaths strongly hairy. Panicle (3-)5-10 cm; spikelets 12-25 \'d7 4-6 mm, lanceolate, with 6-12 florets, usually hairy. Lemma 8-11 mm, bluntly angled; awn 4-11 mm, stout, straight, erect. Anthers 0\'b72-2 mm.}{\i\fs28  Throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 molliformis}{\fs28  (Lloyd) Maire & Weiller in Maire,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Afr. Nord}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 : 255 (1955) (}{\i\fs28 B. molliformis}{\fs28  Lloyd): Stems 15-25(-60) cm, erect. Leaves and sheaths shortly pubescent. Panicle up to 10 cm, very dense, with numerous spikelets; branches and pedicels very short and stiff; spikelets 12-17 \'d7 6 mm, ovate-lanceolate with 6-10 florets, softly hairy, often reddish. Glumes more or less equal. Lemma 8-11 mm, obovate-oblanceolate, rounded at the margins; awn 6-10 mm, stout, patent or recurved at maturity, often twisted below. Anthers up to 1\'b75 mm, usually much less. }{\i\fs28 S. Europe}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 ferronii}{\fs28  (Mabille) P.M. Sm.,}{\i\fs28  Watsonia}{\b\fs28  6}{\fs28 : 330 (1968) (}{\i\fs28 B. ferronii}{\fs28  Mabille): Sometimes biennial; stems 2-15(-20) cm, usually erect; leaf-sheaths densely hairy. Panicle 2-5 cm, very dense; spikelets 8-18 \'d7 3-6 mm, ovate-oblong, with 4-7 florets, densely hairy. Lemma 6\'b75-8\'b75 mm, broadly lanceolate, bluntly angled; awn 2-5\'b75 mm, stout, flattened at base, recurved or patent in fruit. Anthers 0\'b72-1\'b75 mm.}{\i\fs28  On cliff-tops. \bullet   N.W. Europe}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 thominii}{\fs28  (Hard.) Maire & Weiller,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Afr. Nord}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 : 256 (1955) (}{\i\fs28 B. thominii}{\fs28  Hard.): Stems 1-8(-12) cm, procumbent or ascending. Leaf-sheaths shortly hairy. Panicle 1-3 cm, erect, dense, often simple; spikelets 8-12 \'d7 2-3 mm, lanceolate, with 3-5 florets, hairy or glabrous. Lemma 6\'b75-7\'b75 mm, ovate-lanceolate, bluntly angled; awn 3-7 mm, slender, terete, sometimes weakly divaricate in fruit. Anthers c. 1 mm.}{\i\fs28  Mainly on maritime sands. \bullet  W. Europe}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par   Hybrids between }{\b\fs28 27}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) and }{\b\fs28 29}{\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 B}{\fs28 . \'d7}{\b\fs28  pseudothominii}{\fs28  P.M. Sm., }{\i\fs28 Watsonia}{\b\fs28  6}{\fs28 : 330 (1968) (}{\i\fs28 B. thominii}{\fs28  auct., non Hard.)), occur frequently; they are fertile and segregate. They tend to resemble }{\b\fs28 27}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) more than }{\b\fs28 29}{\fs28  but usually have glabrous lemmas, often with a wider and more distinctly angled margin and the grain usually equals the palea. They are particularly common in ruderal habitats.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 28. B. interruptus}{\fs28  (Hackel) Druce,}{\i\fs28  Jour. Bot.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 London}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 33}{\fs28 : 344 (1895). Sometimes biennial; stems 20-100 cm, erect. Leaf-sheaths hairy. Panicle 2-8 cm, narrow, stiffly erect, usually interrupted; spikelets 10-17 mm, broadly ovoid, with 5-10 florets, hairy, subsessile, often densely clustered in threes, the florets crowded and closely imbricate. Lemma 7\'b75-9 mm, chartaceous, with prominent veins, rounded or very bluntly angled on the margins; awn 3-8 mm, straight or flexuous. Palea shorter than lemma, 2-fid almost to the base. Anthers 1-1\'b75 mm. Grain shorter than palea. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  Formerly among crops of}{\fs28  Onobrychis}{\i\fs28  and}{\fs28  Trifolium}{\i\fs28  spp. in S. & E. England; now apparently extinct.}{\fs28  \bullet  \'86Br.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 29. B. lepidus}{\fs28  Holmberg,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Not.}{\b\fs28  1924}{\fs28 : 326 (1924). Sometimes biennial; stems 4-70 cm, erect, usually slender. Panicle
\par 
\par 187}
\par }