{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. B. erectus} Hudson,{\i  Fl. Angl.} 39 (1762). Caespitose; stems 15-120 cm, erect, slender or stout and rigid, usually glabrous. Leaves up to 35 cm, linear-acuminate, tough, glabrous or sparingly hairy, the lower often involute, 2-3 mm wide, the upper flat, 4-6 mm wide; sheaths glabrous or hairy. Panicle erect, the branches ascending or rarely patent, each with 1-4 spikelets; spikelets linear-lanceolate when young, becoming oblong. Glumes acuminate. Lemma narrowly lanceolate, with somewhat inrolled margins at maturity; awn slender. 2n = 42, 56.{\i  Meadows dry banks, roadsides and waste places; calcicole. S., W. & C. Europe, northwards to N. England; naturalized in Fennoscandia and W. part of U.S.S.R. }Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju ?Lu Po Rm Rs (W) Sa Si [Da Fe Hb No Rs (B, C) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaf-sheaths lanate, the lower eventually decaying into
\par
  parallel fibres; panicle dense; lemma 8-9 mm ........... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b condensatus} 
\par
1 Leaf-sheaths not lanate, the lower remaining intact 
\par
  when dead; panicle lax; lemma more than 9 mm
\par
2 Glumes subequal; panicle short, contracted; pedicel equalling 
\par
  or shorter than the spikelet; florets overlapped for ¾ of
\par
  their length by the floret below; lemma hairy or glabrous . ({\b a}) subsp. {\b erectus}
\par
2 Glumes markedly unequal; panicle elongate, lax; pedicel
\par
  often longer than the spikelet; florets overlapped only
\par
  by the apex of the floret below; lemma glabrous
\par
3 Plant up to 100 cm; lemma 13-18 mm, distinctly longer 
\par
  than the upper glume; lower sheaths with dense, short 
\par
  hairs ........................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b stenophyllus}
\par
3 Plant not more than 40 cm; lemma c. 10 mm, about equal-
\par
  ling the upper glume; lower sheaths glabrous or with 
\par
  scattered, long hairs ................................................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b transsilvanicus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b erectus}: Stems up to 100 cm. Leaves and sheaths glabrous or with scattered long hairs, the sheaths remaining intact when dead. Panicle 10-20 cm, erect, elliptical, the pedicels equalling or shorter than the spikelets; spikelets 15-25 mm, with rhachilla-segments up to 2·5 mm. Lower glume 7-12 mm, the upper 8-14 mm. Lemma 10-15 mm, glabrous or sometimes hairy; awn 2-8 mm, straight. Palea scarcely shorter than lemma. Anthers 4-7 mm.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b condensatus} (Hackel) Ascherson & Graebner,{\i  Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 580 (1901): Stems up to 60 cm, densely caespitose. Leaf-sheaths lanate, eventually decaying into persistent, parallel fibres. Panicle 8-11 cm, erect, narrow, with densely crowded spikelets, the pedicels usually much shorter than the spikelets; spikelets up to 18 mm, with 5-6 crowded florets, the rhachilla-segments c. 1·5 mm. Lower glume 6-8 mm, the upper 7-10 mm. Lemma 8-9 mm, usually glabrous; awn 3-5 mm. •{\i  S. Alps and adjacent lowlands, N.W. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b stenophyllus} (Link) Ascherson & Graebner, {\i op. cit.} 583 (1901): Stems up to 100 cm, densely caespitose. Leaves glabrous, the lower sheaths remaining intact when dead, shortly hairy. Panicle 15-25 cm, lax, the pedicels often much longer than the very lax spikelets; spikelets 35-40(-50) mm, with 7-10 florets; rhachilla-segments up to 6 mm. Lower glume 7-9 mm, the upper 9-11 mm. Lemma 13-18 mm, glabrous; awn 6-9 mm, straight. Palea shorter than lemma. Anthers 4-6 mm. •{\i  N. Italy and N. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b transsilvanicus} (Steudel) Ascherson & Graebner, {\i loc. cit.} (1901): Stems up to 40 cm, caespitose. Leaves glabrous or hairy; lower sheaths with sparse, long hairs or glabrous, remaining intact when dead. Panicle 15-20 cm, lax, with long, slender branches often with 1 spikelet, mostly longer than the very lax spikelets; spikelets 30-40 mm, with 7-10 florets; rhachilla-segments 4-5 mm. Lower glume 6-8 mm, the upper 8-10 mm. Lemma c. 10 mm, glabrous; awn up to 8 mm, curving slightly outwards when mature. Palea shorter than lemma. Anthers c. 3 mm. •{\i  From N. Italy to S. Bulgaria and C Romania}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. B. pannonicus} Kummer & Sendtner,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 32}: 757 (1849). Rhizomatous; stems up to 70(-130) cm, erect, sometimes laxly caespitose. Leaves linear, flat. Panicle 8-12 cm, erect, lax; branches erect, 3-5 at lowest panicle-node, each with 1 spikelet; spikelets usually glabrous, with 5-7 florets. Glumes 6-7 mm, narrowly lanceolate. Lemma c. 9 mm, scabrid on the veins; awn 7-8 mm, slender, straight. Anthers 3-4 mm.{\i  Dry grassland and stony slopes. E.C. Europe, extending southwards to C. Jugoslavia.} Cz Hu Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pannonicus}: Leaves and sheaths with numerous, long greyish hairs; basal sheaths remaining intact. Spikelets 14-17(-25) mm, remaining erect.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b monocladus} (Domin) P.M. Sm., {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 76}: 360 (1978) ({\i B. monocladus }Domin): Leaves and sheaths glabrous, rarely sparsely hairy, basal sheaths breaking down into fibres. Spikelets c. 20 mm, sometimes drooping at maturity. 2n = 28.{\i  On dolomitic soils. S. Czechoslovakia, N. Hungary.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. B. moellendorffianus} (Ascherson & Graebner) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  3}: 208 (1932). Rhizomatous; stems up to 40 cm, erect, slender, fragile. Leaves setaceous-complicate; sheaths glabrous, or hairy only at apex. Panicle up to 5 cm, lax; branches with 1 spikelet, often much shorter than the spikelets; spikelets 15-23 mm, glabrous, glossy, with 5-6 closely imbricate florets. Lower glume c. 7 mm, the upper c. 11 mm. Lemma 8-10 mm, about equalling the upper glume, with wide hyaline margins distally; awn straight, almost as long as lemma. Palea shorter than lemma.{\i  Rocky ground. • W.C. Jugoslavia} ({\i near Sarajevo and Travnik}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. B. pindicus} Hausskn.,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver.} nov. ser., {\b 13-14}: 53 (1897). Laxly caespitose, rhizomatous; stems up to 100 cm, glabrous. Leaves flat throughout, occasionally somewhat convolute at the apex, all c. 3 mm wide, rather tough and rigid; dead basal sheaths remaining intact or decaying into parallel fibres. Panicle 12-28 cm, erect, dense; branches 1-2 at the lower nodes, as long as or often shorter than the spikelets often with 1 spikelet; spikelets 40-50 mm, lax, erect, becoming 10-12 mm wide at maturity, glabrous, with 6-7 florets. Lower glume 10-11 mm, the upper 11-12 mm, acuminate. Lemma 16-20 mm, linear-lanceolate, with wide, hyaline margins and long, acute apical teeth; awn c. 10 mm, straight. Anthers 4-5 mm.{\i  Damp schistose rocks. • N.C. Greece }({\i Pindhos, above Metsovon}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. B. tomentellus} Boiss., Diagn. {\i Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 7}): 126 (1846). Caespitose; stems up to 60 cm, glabrous, rigid, erect or geniculately ascending. Leaves 10-20 cm × 3-7 mm, flat, tomentose; sheaths tomentose, with dense, short white hairs and sparse longer hairs, decaying into a whitish reticulum of persistent anastomosing fibres. Panicle up to 10 × 4 cm, compact, erect or rarely nodding, rarely with more than 10 spikelets; branches short, glabrous or shortly hairy, the lower 2-3 at a node; spikelets 25-35 × 5-7 mm, lax, oblong, becoming cuneiform when mature, usually hairy, pale greenish-yellow, with 6-10 florets. Lower glume 10-14 mm, the upper 10-16 mm, acute, unawned.
\par

\par
185}
\par