{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 2-10 cm, erect, rather narrow, lax or dense. Spikelets 5-15 × 2-4 mm, lanceolate, usually glabrous and shiny; florets closely imbricate at first, later a little divaricate. Glumes unequal. Lemma (4·5-)5·5-6·5 mm, broadly ovate, with sharply angled, wide hyaline margins; awn 2-5·5 mm, straight. Palea shorter than lemma. Anthers 0·5-2 mm. Grain exceeding the palea. 2n = 28.{\i  Established in N.W. & N.C. Europe and in S. Scandinavia; casual elsewhere in C. Europe. Of unknown origin and nowhere certainly native.} [*Be *Br Cz Da ?Ga *Ge Hb Ho Su.]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  B. oostachys} Bornm., {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  20}: 69 (1924), is probably a pathological variant of {\i B. lepidus}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  B. brachystachys} Hornung,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 16}: 417 (1833), formerly occurred in C. Germany, but has not been seen since 1936. It appears to have affinities with {\b 29} and with {\b 20}. It differs from the former in its large panicle c. 20 cm and from the latter in the short lemma (4-5 mm) and in the grain being longer than the palea.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. B. scoparius} L., {\i Cent. Pl.}{\b  1}: 6 (1755) ({\i B. rigens} L.). Stems 10-50 cm, erect or ascending, often tillering abundantly. Leaves 5-20 cm × 2-5 mm, with long, patent hairs on the upper surface; sheaths glabrous or sparsely hairy. Panicle 1-7 × 0·5-3 cm, erect, very dense, cuneate at the base, sometimes interrupted and appearing verticillate; branches and pedicels very short, usually much shorter than the spikelets; spikelets 10-20(-25) × 2-3 mm, oblong-lanceolate, densely crowded, subsessile, hairy or glabrous, with 5-10 florets. Glumes narrow, the lower 3-4 mm, the upper 5-7 mm. Lemma 7-8(-10) mm, oblong-lanceolate, the margin not angled, shortly 2-fid at the apex, often concave on the back when fully ripe; awn 7-9(-12) mm, equalling or exceeding lemma, flattened and twisted at the base, patent or recurved at maturity. Palea slightly shorter than lemma. Anthers 0·25-0·5 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  S. Europe.} Al Bu Cr Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. B. alopecuros} Poiret,{\i  Voy. Barb.}{\b  2}: 100 (1789) ({\i B. alopecuroides }Poiret). Stems stout, erect or decumbent at the base, glabrous. Leaves flat, softly hairy; sheaths, especially the lower, softly hairy. Panicle 10-15 × 1-3 cm, narrow, dense, erect; branches and pedicels rigid, shorter than the spikelets; spikelets 20-50 × 4-7 mm, erect, crowded, hairy or glabrous, narrowly lanceolate, with 8-15 florets. Glumes unequal. Lemma narrowly lanceolate; awn at least as long as lemma, stout, twisted below and patent at maturity, arising up to 5 mm below the apex of the lemma. Palea somewhat shorter than lemma. 2n = 14.{\i  Mediterranean region, westwards to Sicilia.} Cr Gr It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alopecuros}: Stems 20-80 cm. Spikelets often 3 at each node; lemma 10-15 mm, with broadly triangular teeth at the apex. Anthers 0·5-1 mm.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b caroli-henrici} (W. Greuter) P.M. Sm.,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 360 (1978) ({\i B. caroli-henrici} W. Greuter): Stems up to 40 cm. Spikelets usually borne singly at the nodes, even in robust plants; lemma 11-15(-17) mm, with acuminate teeth at the apex. Anthers 0·75-1·5 mm.{\i  Kriti}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. B. lanceolatus} Roth, {\i Catalecta Bot.}{\b  1}: 18 (1797) ({\i B. macrostachys} Desf.). Stems up to 70 cm, erect or geniculately ascending, glabrous or rarely puberulent near the panicle, sometimes hairy at the nodes. Leaves up to 30 cm × 3-5 mm, acute or acuminate, flat, flaccid, glabrous or softly hairy; sheaths hairy, sometimes densely so, with soft white hairs. Panicle 5-10(-15) cm, erect, dense when immature or depauperate, becoming laxer with age; panicle-branches and pedicels scabrid or hairy, rather rigid and tough, mostly shorter than the spikelets; spikelets 20-50 × 6-10 mm, lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, with 8-20 florets, usually with dense, long hairs. Lower glume 5-9 mm, the upper 8-12 mm. Lemma 11-20 mm, oblanceolate with a bluntly angled margin, often deeply 2-fid at apex; awn 6-12 mm, flat, often twisted at the base, patent at maturity. Palea much shorter than lemma. Anthers c. 1 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  S. Europe.} Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. B. intermedius} Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 114 (1827). Stems up to 60 cm, erect or ascending, usually glabrous. Leaves up to 25 cm × 2-4 mm, flat, often ciliate; sheaths hairy. Panicle 5-10 (-20) cm, lax, erect or nodding; branches 1-2(-5) at a node, with 1-3 spikelets, at least some longer than the spikelets, slender, flexuous or coiled, often producing a tangled panicle; spikelets 10-15 mm, lanceolate, with short, often crispate hairs. Lower glume 4-6 mm, the upper 6-8 mm. Lemma 6-9 mm, oblong-lanceolate, deeply emarginate at the apex; awn usually as long as lemma, slightly flattened and twisted at the base, patent or recurved at maturity. Palea shorter than lemma. Anthers 0·75-1 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Mediterranean region, Bulgaria.} Al Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. B. japonicus} Thunb., {\i Fl. Jap.} 52 (1784) ({\i B. patulus} Mert. & Koch). Stems erect or ascending, glabrous. Leaves 10-20 cm × 2-4 mm, softly hairy; sheaths hairy. Panicle usually large, effuse; branches mostly longer than the spikelets, 2-5 at lower nodes, slender and flexuous, with 1-3 spikelets; spikelets 20-40 mm, with 6-12 florets, glabrous or hairy. Lower glume 4-5 mm, the upper 6-7 mm. Lemma broadly lanceolate, shortly 2-dentate at the apex; awn flattened at base. Palea much shorter than lemma. Anthers c. 1 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe, extending to C. Russia, C. Italy and C. France; doubtfully native in the west and north.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b japonicus}: Stems 20-80 cm. Panicle 10-18 cm, the branches patent or nodding; spikelets ovate-lanceolate. Lemma 8-9 mm, not or obscurely angled; awn 6-10 mm, usually shorter than the lemma, divaricate.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b anatolicus} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Pénzes,{\i  Bot. Közl.}{\b  33}: 118 (1936): Stems 15-60 cm; panicle 10-12 cm, nodding; spikelets oblong-lanceolate. Lemma 10-12 mm, conspicuously angled; awn 10-18 mm, usually longer than the lemma, recurved in fruit.{\i  S. Krym.} ( {\i C. & S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. B. squarrosus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 76 (1753) ({\i B. wolgensis} Fischer ex Jacq.). Stems 20-60 cm, erect or geniculately ascending, glabrous. Leaves 5-15 cm × 4-6 mm, flat or slightly infolded, hairy-sheaths hairy, often with dense, long cilia. Panicle up to 20 cm very lax, often with few spikelets, racemose or subracemose, secund; panicle-branches mostly equalling or shorter than the spikelets, slender, often simple; spikelets 15-70 × 7-15 mm, broadly oblong or broadly ovate-lanceolate, hairy or glabrous, with 8-30 florets. Lower glume 5-7 mm, the upper 6-9 mm. Lemma 8-11 × 6-8 mm, with an angled margin, and an apical sinus, rarely entire; awn up to 10 mm, longer on the upper lemmas, flattened and sometimes twisted at the base, divaricate at maturity. Palea much shorter than lemma. Anthers 1-1·25 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Europe, northwards to C. France, S. Czechoslovakia and C. Russia.} Al Au Bl Bu Cr Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   B. briziformis} Fischer & C. A. Meyer in Fischer, C. A. Meyer & Trautv.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Petrop.}{\b  3}: 30 (1837), from S.W. Asia, is a frequent casual in parts of C. Europe. It is an annual
\par

\par
188}
\par