{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 22 Grain thick, longitudinally inrolled; margins of lemma
\par
   inrolled, not or scarcely overlapping in fruit;
\par
   rhachilla disarticulating tardily; panicle lax
\par
23 Lemma not more than 6·5 mm; lower sheaths softly hairy
\par
24 Lemma 6-6·5 mm; panicle very lax. patent or drooping;
\par
   stems 80-110 cm ......................................................................... {\b 20. arvensis}
\par
24 Lemma 5-6 mm; panicle narrow, contracted; stems not
\par
   more than 60 cm ............................................................ {\b 21. pseudosecalinus}
\par
23 Lemma at least 6·5 mm; sheaths often glabrous
\par
25 Lemma 6·5-9(-10) mm; anthers 1-2 mm ................................ {\b 22. secalinus}
\par
25 Lemma (8-)10-14(-16) mm; anthers 2-3 mm
\par
26 Apical sinus of lemma very deep, the teeth 1-3 mm, 
\par
   awn-like, the lemma usually appearing 3-awned; margin
\par
   of lemma with a lateral tooth or lobe ................................... {\b 23. bromoideus}
\par
26 Apical sinus of lemma shallow, the teeth short and wide;
\par
   lateral teeth or lobes absent ......................................................... {\b 24. grossus}
\par
22 Grain thin, flat or feebly rolled; margins of lemma 
\par
   gaping and overlapping in fruit; rhachilla fragile,
\par
   Soón disarticulating; panicle lax or dense
\par
27 Palea split almost to the base ............................................... {\b 28. interruptus}
\par
27 Palea entire or shallowly emarginate
\par
28 Lemma 4·5-6·5 mm, with wide, hyaline, sharply angled
\par
   margin; ripe grain exceeding palea .............................................. {\b 29. lepidus}
\par
28 Lemma usually more than 6·5 mm, with narrow, hyaline, rounded
\par
   or bluntly angled margin; grain not exceeding palea
\par
29 Awn terete, arising not more than 1·5 mm from apex of lemma, 
\par
   straight or only weakly divaricate in fruit, sometimes absent
\par
30 Panicle usually dense; most pedicels shorter than 
\par
   their spikelets; lemma papery, with prominent veins;
\par
   anthers rarely more than 1 mm, usually much less ............... {\b 27. hordeaceus}
\par
30 Panicle lax; most pedicels longer than their spikelets;
\par
   lemma corneous, with obscure veins; anthers more than 1 mm
\par
31 Anthers(3-)4-5 mm; panicle up to 30 cm; palea about
\par
   equalling the lemma ................................................................... {\b 20. arvensis}
\par
31 Anthers not more than 3 mm; panicle usually not more 
\par
   than 15 cm; palea shorter than lemma
\par
32 Lemma 6·5-8 mm, with rounded margins; lowest rhachilla-
\par
   segment 0·5-1 mm .................................................................. {\b 26. racemosus}
\par
32 Lemma 8-11·5 mm, with bluntly angled margins; lowest
\par
   rhachilla-segment 1·5-1·75 mm ........................................... {\b 25. commutatus}
\par
29 Awn flattened at base, arising more than 1·5 mm from 
\par
   apex of lemma, markedly divaricate, patent or deflexed
\par
   at maturity, sometimes twisted at base
\par
33 Panicle dense, erect, sometimes interrupted or verti-
\par
   cillate; panicle-branches and pedicels much shorter 
\par
   than their spikelets
\par
34 Spikelets (20-)25-50 mm (excluding awns); lemma 12-15 mm; 
\par
   awn 12-15 mm, usually twisted at the base and patent .......... {\b 31. alopecuros}
\par
34 Spikelets (8-)12-20(-25) mm (excluding awns);
\par
   lemma 6·5-9(-11) mm; awn 6·5-9(-12) mm, usually only
\par
   slightly twisted
\par
35 Lemma not more than 2 mm wide; grain narrowly elliptical,
\par
   c. 1 mm wide; panicle obovoid-cuneate or branches 
\par
   verticillate ................................................................................. {\b 30. scoparius}
\par
35 Lemma 3-5 mm wide; grain oblanceolate, more than 1 mm 
\par
   wide; panicle ovoid to ovoid-oblong, often with few 
\par
   spikelets ................................................................................. {\b 27. hordeaceus}
\par
33 Panicle lax, erect or nodding, somewhat contracted only 
\par
   when young or depauperate; at least some panicle-branches
\par
   and pedicels as long as or longer than their spikelets
\par
36 Panicle lax, nodding; pedicels mostly longer than 
\par
   spikelets, or panicle racemose
\par
37 Panicle usually secund, racemose, with few, somewhat
\par
   laterally compressed spikelets; spikelets up to 70 mm;
\par
   lemma up to 7 mm wide ......................................................... {\b 35. squarrosus}
\par
37 Panicle usually compound, with numerous, terete spikelets;
\par
   spikelets not more than 40 mm; lemma not more than  
\par
   4 mm wide ................................................................................ {\b 34. japonicus}
\par
36 Panicle lax, erect; pedicels mostly equalling or 
\par
   shorter than spikelets
\par
38 Lemma 6-9 mm; panicle with slender, flexuous branches
\par
   and pedicels; spikelets 15-25 mm, often tangled,
\par
   usually with short, crispate hairs .......................................... {\b 33. intermedius}
\par
38 Lemma 12-20 mm; panicle with stout, usually rigid 
\par
   branches and pedicels; spikelets 20-50 mm, usually not
\par
   tangled, usually with dense, long hairs .................................. {\b 32. lanceolatus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. GENEA Dumort. Annuals or rarely biennials. Spikelets lanceolate only when young, soon becoming cuneate, wider at the top. Lower glume 1-veined, the upper 3-veined. Awn longer than the lemma, usually flattened and scabrid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. diandrus} Roth,{\i  Bot. Abh.} 41 (1787) ({\i B. gussonii} Parl.). Stems 35-90 cm, erect or decumbent, hairy below the panicle. Leaves rough, with scattered hairs; sheaths with patent hairs. Panicle often up to 25 cm, very lax, nodding, the branches 2-4 at a node, patent, very rough, mostly bearing a single spikelet; spikelets 50-70 mm, narrowly cuneate when mature. Lower glume 15-25 mm, subulate, the upper 20-35 mm, linear-lanceolate. Lemma 20-35 mm, lanceolate, gradually tapering to a deeply emarginate apex; awn 35-65 mm, straight, flat and very scabrid; callus-scar almost circular. Palea shorter than lemma. Stamens 2-3; anthers 1-5 mm. 2n = 56.{\i  Mediterranean region and S.W. Europe.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [*Az Be Br Rs (K)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. rigidus} Roth, {\i Bot. Mag.} ({\i Zürich}) {\b 4}({\b 10}): 21 (1790) ({\i B. maximus} Desf., {\i B. villosus} Forskål). Stems 20-40 cm, erect, pubescent at least near the inflorescence. Leaves 10-25 cm × 4-6 mm, covered with dense, short hairs; sheaths with patent hairs. Panicle 15-20 cm, dense, erect; branches shorter than the spikelets, often hairy; spikelets 25-35 mm, erect, glabrous or hairy. Glumes mostly hyaline except for the veins, the lower 15-18 mm, linear-lanceolate, the upper 20-25 mm, narrowly lanceolate. Lemma 22-25 mm, linear-lanceolate, deeply 2-fid at the apex; awn 30-50 mm, straight, flattened, very stout and rough; callus-scar more or less elliptical. Palea distinctly shorter than lemma. Stamens 2; anthers c. 1 mm. 2n = 42.{\i  S. & W. Europe, northwards to N.W. France and Hungary}. Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si Tu [Cz].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b B. hispanicus} Rivas Ponce, {\i Lagascalia}{\b  3}: 53 (1973), described from Spain, is closely related to or conspecific with {\b 2}. It appears to differ mainly in the somewhat laxer panicle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. B. sterilis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 77 (1753). Stems 5-100 cm, glabrous, erect or geniculately ascending. Leaves 5-20 cm × 2-6 mm, flaccid, softly hairy; sheaths pubescent. Panicle 10-20 × 7-12 cm, very lax; branches mostly much longer than the spikelets, patent or nodding, with 1(-3) spikelets; spikelets 20-35 × 4-8 mm, scabrid, compressed, hairy or glabrous, cuneate, with 5-9 florets. Lower glume 6-14 mm, subulate, the upper 10-20 mm, linear-lanceolate. Lemma 14-20 × 2-4 mm, narrowly lanceolate, with acute apical teeth 1-3 mm; awn 15-30 mm, slender, straight, usually longer than lemma. Palea almost equalling lemma. Stamens 3; anthers 1 mm. 2n = 14. {\i S., W. & C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden.} All except Az Fa Is Rs (N, C) Sb, but only as an alien in Fe and Rs (B).
\par

\par
183}
\par