{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 in Germany, differs from{\b  5} in having spikelets 5-7 × 5 mm, the lemma not prominently veined, the palea 2·5-3 mm, firmer, and the leaf-sheaths open to the top.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. GLYCERIA. Stock short. Stems slender, often decumbent and ascending. Leaf-sheaths compressed. Panicle wide to narrow, sometimes with few spikelets only. Spikelets 8-30 mm, terete before anthesis. Palea winged on the keels. Stamens 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. G. nemoralis} (Uechtr.) Uechtr. & Koernicke,{\i  Bot. Zeit.}{\b  24}: 121 (1866). Stems 40-100 cm. Leaves acute to acuminate, pale green. Panicle 15-28 cm, not secund, broadly oblong, with many spikelets; branches suberect, patent in fruit, 3-5 at central panicle-nodes, nearly smooth, the longer with 5-16, the shorter with 1-6 spikelets. Spikelets pale green, sometimes partly tinged with violet, becoming yellowish to brownish. Glumes obtuse, the lower 1·5-2·5 mm, the upper 2·5-3 mm. Lemma 3-3·5 mm, broadly elliptical to obovate, very obtuse, smooth, with 3 long, very prominent veins alternating with 4 shorter indistinct veins, the hyaline apex long-decurrent. Palea narrowly obovate, firm, as long as or longer than the lemma, with very narrowly winged keels and two small teeth at apex. Anthers 1-1·5 mm, yellow. 2n = 20.{\i  Wet woods. E., E.C. & S.E. Europe.} Bu Cz Ge Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, ?E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. G. declinata} Bréb.,{\i  Fl. Normand.} ed. 3, 354 (1859). Stems 10-50(-65) cm, often arcuately ascending. Leaves 3-18 cm, abruptly contracted at the top, greyish- to bluish-green. Panicle 5-25 cm, narrow, with few spikelets only, often spiciform, secund, contracted in fruit; branches 1-3 at central panicle-nodes, smooth, the longer with 1-6, the shorter with 1(-2) spikelets. Spikelets narrowly oblong, rather lax, greyish-green or purplish. Lower glume 1·5-2·5 mm, ovate, subacute to acute, the upper 2·5-4 mm, elliptical, subobtuse. Lemma 3·5-4·5 mm, oblong-ovate, prominently 7-veined, scabrid, narrowly hyaline and with 3-5 distinct obtuse or acute teeth at apex. Palea oblong-lanceolate, deeply divided into 2 somewhat divergent aristate teeth at apex, distinctly exceeding the lemma. Anthers 0·6-1·1 mm, usually violet. 2n = 20. {\i W. & C. Europe, extending eastwards to White Russia and northwards to S. Fennoscandia.} Au Az Be Br Co Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs ?Hu It Lu No Po Rm Rs (?B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. G. fluitans} (L.) R. Br.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Nov. Holl. }179 (1810). Stems (20-)40-120(-150) cm. Leaves acuminate, dark to greyish-green. Panicle 10-40(-50) cm, secund, lax, linear, often interrupted, contracted after anthesis; branches 1-2(-3) at central panicle-nodes, the longer with 1-4 spikelets, the shorter with 1(-2) spikelets. Spikelets oblong-linear, lax. Glumes oblong, 1(-3)-veined, the lower 2-3 mm, acute, the upper 3-4·5 mm, obtuse to subacute. Lemma 5·5-7·5 mm, oblong, prominently 7-veined, narrowly hyaline at apex, entire, acute or subacute, scabridulous. Palea oblong-lanceolate, shallowly 2-fid, with 2 short teeth, equalling the lemma. Anthers 1·5-2·5(-3) mm, usually violet. 2n = 40.{\i  Most of Europe.} All except ?Az Bl Cr Rs (K) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Iceland with shorter, more obtuse and undulate-crenulate lemmas were described as var.{\i  islandica} A. Löve; they require further investigation. Plants with shorter and more obtuse lemmas named by C. European authors subsp.{\b  poiformis} Fries,{\i  Nov. Fl. Suec., Mantissa}{\b  2}: 7 (1839), belong at least partly to {\b 11}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. G. spicata} (Biv.) Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Syn.}{\b  2}: 784 (1845). Like {\b 8} but spikelets of shorter branches and lateral spikelets of longer branches subsessile; glumes obtuse; lemma 5-6 mm, rounded to truncate, slightly crenulate and broadly hyaline at apex, weakly veined; anthers 1·1-1·6 mm. {\i E. & C. Mediterranean region.} Co Gr It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The status of this taxon is uncertain and further investigation is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. G. plicata} (Fries) Fries,{\i  Nov. Fl. Suec., Mantissa }{\b 3}: 176 (1842). Stems (30-)40-80(-100) cm. Leaves acuminate, dark- to bluish-green. Panicle 10-40 cm, not secund, compound, much-branched, broadly oblong; branches suberect, patent in fruit, 3-5 at central panicle-nodes, the longer with 5-15(-19), the shorter with 1-5 spikelets. Spikelets greyish-green. Glumes very obtuse, the lower 1·5-2·3 mm, ovate, the upper 2·5-4 mm, obovate. Lemma 3·5-4·5 mm, broadly elliptical, very obtuse, usually slightly crenulate and broadly hyaline at apex, with 7 equally prominent veins, scabridulous. Palea oblong-ovate, rounded above, with 2 small teeth at apex, shorter than or as long as the lemma. Anthers 0·7-1·3 mm, yellow. 2n = 40.{\i  Most of Europe, northwards to} 62° 30' {\i N. in N.W. Russia}. All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is ?Lu Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. G}. × {\b pedicellata} Townsend,{\i  Ann. Nat. Hist.} ser. 2,{\b  5}: 105 (1850) ({\i G. fluitans } ×{\i  plicata}). Stems 50-130 cm, ascending from a creeping, branched base. Leaves acuminate, green. Panicle 10-50 cm, lanceolate to oblong, lax; branches erect, later patent, smooth, 2-3 at central panicle-nodes, the longer with up to 9 spikelets, the shorter with 1-2 spikelets. Spikelets persistent after anthesis, lax, subacute at apex, pale greyish-green. Glumes obtuse, smooth, the lower 2-3 mm, the upper 3-4·5 mm. Lemma (4·4-)5-5·5(-6·6) mm, oblong-elliptical, obtuse, broadly hyaline at apex, prominently veined, scabridulous. Palea equalling lemma, oblong-ovate, with 2 short teeth at apex. Anthers 1-1·8 mm, pale yellow, indehiscent, with imperfect pollen.{\i  N., W. & C. Europe.} Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu Ju No Po Rs (B) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   This luxuriant sterile hybrid is nearer to {\i G. plicata} in habit; it spreads vegetatively and may often occur without the parents.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 43.      Pleuropogon}      R.Br. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By G. Halliday. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a unilateral raceme, with solitary, remote, pedicellate, drooping spikelets. Spikelets somewhat compressed laterally, with 3-6 florets. Glumes unequal, shorter than the lowest floret. Lemma widest in upper half, scabrid with short, appressed hairs, with 7 parallel or slightly diverging veins extending beyond the middle, the middle vein occasionally excurrent from the back as a short mucro. Palea nearly equalling lemma, the two prominent keels each with one scabrid awn from just above the base and as long as the palea, another shorter one from the middle and sometimes one or more small teeth above this.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. sabinei} R. Br. in Parry,{\i  Jour. Voy. N.W. Pass., Suppl. App.} 289 (1824). Rhizomatous. Stems 8-20 cm. Leaves 2-10 cm, those of the non-flowering shoots, especially when floating, up to 30 cm × 1·5-3 mm, acute, smooth; ligule 2-3·5 mm, triangular, rounded. Panicle up to 8 cm. Spikelets 8-15 mm, purple. Glumes broadly ovate, the upper less than half as long as the lowest floret. Lemma 3-4 mm, oblanceolate, with a scarious, rounded or slightly erose apex, not keeled. Anthers 2 mm.{\i  Shallow pools in tundra. Arctic Europe} ({\i N. Ural, Vajgac, Svalbard}). Rs (N) Sb. ({\i Circumpolar}.)
\par

\par
181}
\par