{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  2. A. liburnica} (Scop.) Reichenb., {\i loc. cit.} (1830). Like {\b 1} but stem 25-60 cm, rather slender, leafy only in lower half; leaves not more than 25 cm × 2·5 mm; bracts not more than 15 × 3 mm, deltate-orbicular, with long arista; pedicels articulated near the base. 2n = 14, 28.{\i  Rocky and bushy places. Balkan peninsula, extending to Istra; Kriti; S. Italy.} Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. taurica} (Pallas ex Bieb.) Kunth,{\i  Enum. Pl.}{\b  4}: 561 (1843). Stem 30-65 cm, stout, erect, the lower part concealed by sheathing leaf-bases, the upper part (where the leaves grade into bracts) usually exposed. Lower leaves 20-30 cm × 1·5-2 mm, narrowly linear, more or less erect, the upper much shorter. Raceme 15-25 cm. Bracts up to 35 × 10 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Pedicels c. 15 mm, articulated above the middle. Perianth-lobes 15-20 × 4-6 mm, white, with a greenish midrib. Capsule 8 mm, globose; seeds 5 mm, triquetrous, black. 2n = 28.{\i  Mountain rocks and screes; calcicole. C. part of Balkan peninsula; Krym. }Al Bu Gr ?Ju Rs (K).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. parviflora} Baker,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London }({\i Bot.}) {\b 15}: 276 (1876), is known only from the type-specimen, which was grown from seed collected near Istanbul (but possibly in Asia). It is probably a variant of {\b 3}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 7.     Anthericum}           L.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, scapose perennial herbs with short, non-bulbous stock and somewhat fleshy roots. Leaves linear, tapered to an acute apex, with scarious, sheathing base. Flowers rotate, in a lax raceme or panicle. Bracts mostly small and scarious (the lowest sometimes leaf-like). Pedicels usually articulated. Perianths segments patent during anthesis, free or very shortly connate at extreme base, 3-veined, without distinct claw, white. Stamens equal, shorter than or equalling perianth-segments; filaments straight, glabrous, not dilated; anthers basifixed, introrse. Fruit a loculicidal capsule; seeds 2-8 in each loculus.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perianth-segments 16-22 mm, exceeding the stamens by 6-10 mm  {\b 1. liliago}
\par 1 Perianth-segments 10-14 mm, exceeding the stamens by 
\par  not more than 2 mm
\par 2 Leaves 1·5-2(-5) mm wide; inflorescence a simple raceme;
\par  capsule ovoid-ellipsoid, subacute ................................................ {\b 2. baeticum}
\par 2 Leaves (1·5-)4-7 mm wide; inflorescence usually a 
\par  panicle; capsule depressed-globose, obtuse ................................. {\b 3. ramosum}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. liliago} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 310 (1753). Stem 20-70 cm. Leaves 12-40 cm × (1·5-)3-7 mm, flat or somewhat canaliculate. Inflorescence a raceme usually of 6-10 flowers, rarely with a few short branches at the base. Pedicels 9-12 mm at anthesis, exceeding bracts. Perianth-segments 16-22 mm, narrowly oblong-elliptical; stamens 9-13 mm. Style curved, ascending in distal part. Capsule 8-10 mm, ovoid; seeds 3 mm, trigonous, dull black. 2n = 32, 48, 64.{\i  Open woods, dry grassland and stony slopes. From Belgium and S. Sweden southwards to N. Portugal, S. Italy and Greece}. Al Au Be Bu ?Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He †Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Su [Rs (W)].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. baeticum} (Boiss.) Boiss.,{\i  Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 619 (1842). Like {\b 1} but less robust; leaves 8-16 cm × 1·5-2(-3) mm; raceme always simple; pedicels not more than 6 mm at anthesis, not exceeding bracts; perianth-segments 10-14 mm; style less conspicuously curved; capsule c. 5 mm. 2n = 30.{\i  Wet meadows. • Mountains of S. Spain.} Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  In this species the articulation of the pedicel is very near the base, and often so low as to be scarcely recognizable.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. ramosum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 310 (1753). Like {\b 1} but inflorescence usually a pyramidal panicle (rarely reduced to a simple raceme); perianth-segments 10-14 mm; style straight; capsule 5 × 6 mm, depressed-globose, obtuse. 2n = 30, 32.{\i  Dry, sunny places and open scrub. From N. France, S. Sweden and Latvia southwards to the Pyrenees, C. Italy, Turkey and Krym.} Al Au ?Be Bu Cz Da Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b   8.         Paradisea}       Mazzuc.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Anthericum} but inflorescence always a raceme; flowers campanulate; perianth-segments suberect below, patent towards apex, with fairly distinct claw; pedicels articulated or not; style and stamens curved upwards in distal half; anthers dorsifixed, versatile.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Raceme secund; perianth 30-50 mm; pedicels not articulated ...... {\b 1. liliastrum}
\parRaceme not secund; perianth 20-25 mm; pedicels articulated ...... {\b 2. lusitanica}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. liliastrum} (L.) Bertol., {\i Fl. Ital.}{\b  4}: 133 (1840). Stem 30-50 cm × 2-3 mm. Leaves 12-25 cm × 3-5 mm, flat. Raceme lax, secund, with 4-10(-20) flowers. Bracts 12-40 mm, subulate, exceeding the pedicels. Pedicels not articulated. Perianth-segments 30-50 mm, with oblong-elliptical limb. Stamens shorter than perianth; style slightly longer. Capsule 13-15 mm, ellipsoid-trigonous. Seeds 3 mm, trigonous, black. 2n = 16. {\i Mountain meadows. • Pyrenees, Alps, Jura, N. & C. Appennini.} Au Ga He Hs It Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. lusitanica} (Coutinho) Samp.,{\i  Lista Esp. Herb. Port.} 28 (1913). Like {\b 1} but more robust, with stem 80-120 cm and leaves 30-40 cm × 7-20 mm; raceme denser, with 20-25 flowers, not secund; pedicels articulated near the base, about equalling the bracts; perianth-segments 15-20 mm. 2n = 32, 64. {\i Woods, meadows and marshes. • Mountains of N. Portugal and W.C. Spain}. Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b   9.         Eremurus}        Bieb.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Anthericum} but more robust and with fusiform, tuberous roots; inflorescence a long, dense raceme with very numerous flowers; perianth cup-shaped, white or yellow, with segments shorter than the stamens.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Flowers yellow; capsule globose; seeds brownish, concolorous
\par  or with slightly darker streaks ................................................... {\b 1. caucasicus} 
\parFlowers white; capsule broadly conical; seeds grey, with
\par  black spots and brownish streaks ................................................... {\b 2. tauricus}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. caucasicus} Steven, {\i Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  4}: 251 (1832) ({\i E. spectabilis} Bieb. pro parte). Stem 100-200 cm. Leaves 15-40 cm × 15-70 mm, suberect and somewhat canaliculate, glaucous. Raceme 25-70 × 5-8 cm; pedicels longer than the linear bracts, deflexed in fruit. Perianth-segments 8-10 mm, pale yellow. Stamens 15-18 mm; anthers reddish or ange. Style arcuate-deflexed. Capsule c. 12 mm, globose. Seeds acutely triquetrous, transversely rugulose, brown, concolorous or with slightly darker streaks.{\i  Stony slopes and steppes. S. Ukraine.} Rs (K, E). ({\i S.W. & S.C. Asia.})
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   The European populations have been separated as{\b  E. thiodanthus} Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 14}: 5 (1951), and {\b E. jungei} Juz., {\i op. cit.} 7 (1951); but the rather inadequate descriptions suggest, especially in view of the considerable variability among Asiatic populations of{\i  E. caucasicus}, that they are only varietally distinct.
\par
\par 18}
\par