{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. B. tectorum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 77 (1753). Stems 5-90 cm, erect, slender, glabrous or slightly puberulent. Leaves 4-16 cm × 2-4 mm, softly hairy; lower sheaths hairy, the upper sometimes glabrous. Panicle 5-20 cm, lax or rather dense, at first erect, then nodding and mostly secund, often pale green tinged with purple, shining when glabrous; branches slender, hairy, flexuous, with up to 8 spikelets; spikelets 10-20 × 3-4 mm, nodding, narrow at first, becoming cuneate when ripe, with 4-8 florets, hairy or glabrous. Glumes with hyaline margins, the lower 5-8(-9) mm, the upper 7-11(-13) mm. Lemma 9-12 × 2-3 mm, lanceolate; awn 10-18 mm, slender, straight. Palea distinctly shorter than lemma. Stamens 3; anthers 0·5-1 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Europe, northwards to N. France, S. Fennoscandia and C. Russia.} ?Al Au Be Bu Co Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Su Tu [Br Fe Rs (B)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. B. madritensis} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl.}{\b  1}: 5 (1755). Stems up to 60 cm, erect or ascending, glabrous except sometimes near the panicle. Leaves up to 20 cm × 2-4 mm, linear, acute, flat, glabrous or pubescent; lower sheaths hairy, the upper often glabrous. Panicle 3-15 × 2-6 cm, erect; branches 2-3 at a node, up to 3 cm; spikelets 30-50 × 7-12 mm, cuneate, wider at the top, lax, with 6-10 florets, hairy or glabrous. Lower glume 5-10 mm, the upper 10-15 mm, both very narrow. Lemma 12-20 × 3-3·5 mm, narrowly oblong-lanceolate, with apical teeth 2-3 mm, the margins somewhat inrolled at maturity; awn 12-20 mm, straight or weakly divaricate. Palea shorter than lemma. Stamens 2; anthers 0·5-1 mm. 2n = 28, 42.{\i  S. & W. Europe, northwards to N.W. France.} Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [Br Hb].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. B. fasciculatus} C. Presl,{\i  Cyper. Gram. Sic.} 39 (1820). Stems 4-25 cm, erect or geniculate at base, sometimes hairy below the panicle. Leaves and sheaths softly hairy, the lamina 2-10 cm × 1-2 mm. Panicle 4-5 × 0·7-1·2 cm, stiffly erect; branches rigid, shorter than the spikelets, glabrous or hairy; spikelets 20-30 mm (excluding awns), broadly cuneate. Lower glume 7-8 mm, subulate, the upper 12-14 mm, narrowly lanceolate. Lemma 13-15 × 1-1·5 mm, with somewhat incurved margins, glabrous or hairy, gently curved outwards at maturity, deeply emarginate at the apex; awn 13-18 mm, about equalling the lemma, rough, straight or slightly divaricate. Palea shorter than lemma. Stamens 3; anthers 0·5-4 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  S. Greece, S. Italy and islands of the Mediterranean region.} Bl Co Cr Gr It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. B. rubens} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl.}{\b  1}: 5 (1755). Stems 10-40 cm, erect or ascending, glabrous below, often hairy below the inflorescence. Leaves up to 12 cm × 5 mm, flat, hairy; sheaths softly pubescent. Panicle 2-10 × 2-5 cm, erect, very dense, cuneate at base, often reddish-brown; branches and pedicels much shorter than the spikelets, pubescent; spikelets 18-25 × 2-6 mm, cuneate, hairy or glabrous, subsessile, with 4-8 florets. Lower glume 5-7 mm, subulate, the upper 8-10 mm, lanceolate, both with wide, hyaline margins. Lemma 10-13 × 2-3 mm, oblong-elliptical, strongly veined and 2-fid for c. 4 mm; awn 8-12 mm, straight, reddish. Palea shorter than lemma, very narrow. Stamens 2 or 3; anthers 0·5-1 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Mediterranean region and S.W. Europe.} ?Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Depauperate plants of{\b  5} and {\b 7} are hard to separate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. PNIGMA Dumort. Perennials. Spikelets narrow, more or less parallel-sided when mature, terete. Lower glume 1(-3) veined, the upper 3(-5)-veined. Lemma rounded or weakly keeled on the back. Awn usually shorter than the lemma, rarely absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. B. inermis} Leysser,{\i  Fl. Hal. }16 (1761). Strongly rhizomatous; usually glabrous; stems 30-150 cm, erect, glabrous or rarely hairy below the nodes. Leaves up to 9 mm wide, flat, usually glabrous; sheaths glabrous, or rarely the lower pubescent. Panicle 10-25 cm, erect, spreading, the branches 3-7 at a node; spikelets 15-30 × 3-5 mm, usually glabrous, lanceolate or linear-oblong, with 5-10 florets. Glumes unequal, at least the upper with an obtuse hyaline apex. Lemma 8-10 mm, glabrous or scabrid only at the margin, very rarely pubescent at base, obtuse or shallowly emarginate, usually unawned, but sometimes with a weak awn up to 1·5 mm. Palea somewhat shorter than lemma. Anthers 4-5 mm. 2n = 56.{\i  Europe, westwards to the Netherlands and N.W. Italy; cultivated for fodder in parts of E. & E.C. Europe.} Au ?Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Ho *Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Tu [Br Da Fe He Is No Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  There are numerous agricultural varieties. Considerable natural variation exists, and many varieties or forms have been recognized on minor characters of indumentum distribution or awn development.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. B. sibiricus} Drobov, {\i Trav. Mus. Bot. Acad. Pétersb. }{\b 12}: 229 (1914) ({\i Zerna occidentalis} Nevski, ?{\i B. vogulicus} Soczava). Creeping, rhizomatous; stems 20-100 cm, covered at the base by pale brown, entire, usually glabrous leaf-sheaths. Leaves flat, glabrous or sparsely hairy. Panicle 3-15 cm, erect, narrow and rather dense, the branches often shorter than the spikelets, each bearing 1-2 spikelets. Spikelets 12-25 mm, narrowly oblong, often dark purple, with 4-8 florets. Lower glume 5-8 mm, the upper 7-10 mm. Lemma lanceolate, hairy at the base and on margins only, with a short, straight awn 1·5-3 mm. Palea shorter than lemma. Anthers 2-4 mm.{\i  Meadows, screes and maritime sands. N.E. Russia.} Rs (N, C). ({\i Temperate Asia, N. America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. B. ramosus} Hudson, {\i Fl. Angl.} 40 (1762) ({\i B. asper }Murray). Erect, laxly caespitose; stems 40-190 cm, puberulent. Leaves 10-60 cm × 6-15 mm, flaccid, flat, sparsely hairy, the lower wider than the upper; sheaths auriculate at apex, with long, rigid, retrorse hairs. Panicle 15-40 cm, very wide and lax, nodding, green or sometimes purplish; branches 2 at a node, longer than the spikelets, each with 1-9 spikelets, the lowest pair with a ciliate scale at the base; pedicels 5-40 mm; spikelets 20-40 × 4-6 mm, lax, pendent, linear-oblong, with 4-12 florets. Lower glume 6-8 mm, subulate, the upper 9-11 mm, lanceolate, mucronate or very shortly awned. Lemma 10-13 mm, lanceolate, with an obscure marginal angle, hairy on the margins and veins; awn 4-7 mm, straight. Palea distinctly shorter than lemma. Anthers 2·5-4 mm. 2n = 14, 28, 42.{\i  Woods, hedges and shady roadsides. W., C. & S. Europe, extending eastwards to Gotland and E. Romania}. Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (?B, W) ?Sa Si Su Tu [Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. B. benekenii} (Lange) Trimen, {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 10}: 333 (1872). Caespitose; stems 50-120 cm, erect, minutely hairy. Leaves 10-25 cm × 5-12 mm, flat, sparsely hairy especially on the margins; sheaths densely and shortly hairy, the upper sometimes glabrous. Panicle 12-20 × 10-15 cm, nodding above; branches 2-5 at a node, slender, each with 1-5 spikelets, the lowest pair with a glabrous or rarely pubescent scale at the base; spikelets 15-30 cm, lanceolate-acuminate, with 3-6 florets. Glumes scabrid, the lower 7-8 mm, linear-lanceolate, the upper 9-11 mm, oblong-lanceolate. Lemma 11-14 mm, narrowly lanceolate, with appressed hairs; awn 5-8 mm, straight, erect. Palea distinctly shorter than lemma. Anthers c. 3 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Woods and hedges. Much of Europe, but absent from most of the northeast, much of the extreme west and many of the islands.} Al Au Be
\par

\par
184}
\par