{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 with a lax panicle, spikelets 15-25 × 10-15 mm and an inflated, rhombic lemma which is unawned or with an awn not more than 1 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. CERATOCHLOA (Beauv.) Griseb. Short-lived perennials. Spikelets ovate or ovate-lanceolate, strongly compressed. Lower glume 3- to 5-veined, the upper 5- to 7-veined. Lemma and glumes strongly keeled on the back. Awn usually much shorter than the lemma, often absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. B. willdenowii} Kunth,{\i  Révis. Gram.} 134 (1829) ({\i B. catharticus} Vahl). Laxly caespitose; stems (15-)20-100(-150) cm, erect or ascending. Leaves 10-20(-50) cm × 3-12 mm, glabrous or thinly hairy; upper sheaths glabrous, the lower shortly hairy. Panicle 5-30 cm, lax, with patent or nodding branches, often longer than the spikelets; spikelets 20-40 × 5-10 mm, lanceolate to ovate, very strongly compressed, glabrous or scabrid, with 6-12 closely imbricate florets. Glumes acuminate, unequal, sharply keeled on the back. Lemma 14-18 × 5-7 mm, broadly lanceolate, keeled on the back, rather corneous; awn usually absent or up to 1 mm and weak. Palea about half as long as lemma. Anthers up to 4 mm, shorter in cleistogamous florets. 2n = 42.{\i  Occasionally cultivated for fodder and locally naturalized in S. Europe; casual elsewhere.} [Az Ga Lu Rs (C, W, E).]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. B. carinatus} Hooker & Arnott,{\i  Bot. Beech. Voy.} 403 (1840). Stems 30-80 cm, erect, glabrous. Leaves 20-30 cm × 5-10 mm, flat, acuminate; sheaths glabrous but puberulent near the mouth. Panicle 15-30 cm, with long, patent or nodding branches; spikelets 25-30 mm, linear-lanceolate, with 5-9 lax florets. Glumes lanceolate, acute. Lemma 15-17 mm, lanceolate, scabrid on the back; awn 4-10 mm, almost terminal. Palea slightly shorter than lemma. Anthers c. 5 mm, shorter in cleistogamous florets. 2n = 56. {\i Naturalized in parts of N.W. Europe.} [Br Ho.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe          {\b Brachypodieae}     C.O. Harz
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Bromeae} but leaf-sheaths open or closed; silica-bodies variable; inflorescence spike-like; spikelets subsessile, terete, with the side of the lemma next to the rhachis; lemma with 5-7 veins and entire apex, rounded on the back; lodicules ciliate; ovary with the outermost layer of nucellus cells becoming thick-walled in fruit; chromosomes small; basic number 5, 7, 9.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 45.          Brachypodium}     Beauv. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.M. Smith. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials or annuals, rarely woody below, with often extensively branched rhizomes. Inflorescence a raceme of distichous, alternate, shortly pedicellate spikelets, inserted with the back of the lemmas to the rhachis. Spikelets 1(-3) at each node, usually with numerous florets. Glumes unequal, shorter than the lowest floret. Glumes and lemmas acuminate, mucronate or with a straight or weakly flexuous apical awn. Palea equalling or a little shorter than the lemma, emarginate or truncate, the keels ciliate or scabrid. Ovary hairy at apex. Grain narrowly elliptical to oblanceolate; hilum linear.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: A. St-Yves, {\i Candollea }{\b 5}: 427-493 (1934). T. Tateoka, {\i Bol. Soc. Argent. Bot.}{\b  12}: 44-56 (1968).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Annual; anthers not more than 1 mm; spikelets laterally
\par
  compressed; stems usually less than 25 cm .............................. {\b 5. distachyon}
\par
1 Perennial; anthers at least 2·5 mm, spikelets terete or
\par
  subterete; stems usually more than 25 cm
\par
2 Awn equalling or exceeding lemma; plant caespitose or 
\par
  very shortly rhizomatous .......................................................... {\b 1. sylvaticum}
\par
2 Awn not more than half as long as lemma, sometimes 
\par
  absent; plant with obvious creeping rhizomes
\par
3 Leaves flat or somewhat convolute even when dry,
\par
  usually flaccid; veins unequally spaced, some more 
\par
  prominent than others; rhizomes sparingly branched ................. {\b 2. pinnatum}
\par
3 Leaves usually convolute and appearing setaceous at 
\par
  least when dry, tough; veins evenly spaced, equally 
\par
  prominent; rhizomes much-branched
\par
4 Leaves up to 10 cm, patent, obviously distichous,
\par
  glaucous, tightly convolute; raceme short, of 1-7 
\par
  crowded spikelets, each up to 30 mm ............................................ {\b 3. retusum}
\par
4 Leaves 10-40 cm, flat or convolute, not patent, not
\par
  distichous; raceme long, of 5-12 spikelets, each up to
\par
  80 mm .................................................................................... {\b 4. phoenicoides}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. BRACHYPODIUM (incl.{\i  Brevipodium} A. & D. Löve, {\i Leptorachis} Nevski). Perennials. Leaves flat or convolute, flaccid or rigid. Raceme usually elongate and nodding or drooping. Spikelets terete or subterete, rarely fewer than 5. Glumes and lemmas chartaceous. Anthers at least 2·5 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. sylvaticum} (Hudson) Beauv.,{\i  Agrost. }101, 155 (1812). Caespitose; stems erect or ascending, hairy at and sometimes near the nodes. Leaves 10-35 × 6-12 mm, usually flaccid and drooping, rough, with scattered hairs above; veins pale, prominent beneath; ligule 1-5 mm, obtuse. Raceme 7-20 cm, with (3-)8-12 rather distant spikelets. Spikelets terete, linear, hairy or glabrous, somewhat patent especially before maturity. Glumes acute, the lower 6-9 mm, the upper 8-11 mm, shortly aristate. Lemma lanceolate; awn 7-14 mm, straight or weakly flexuous. Anthers 3·5-5·5 mm. 2n = 18, 28, 42+2B, 56.{\i  Woods and other shady places. Europe, northwards to} 64°{\i  N. in Norway}. All except Fa Is Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sylvaticum}: Stems 50-100 cm. Leaves flat, bright or yellowish-green, the sheaths usually with patent or deflexed hairs. Raceme nodding. Spikelets 17-25(-30) mm, with 6-15 florets. Lemma 7-12 mm, hairy.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b glaucovirens} Murb.,{\i  Beitr. Fl. Südbosn.} 22 (1891): Stems up to 200 cm. Leaves often convolute, glaucous and rigid, the sheaths glabrous. Raceme erect. Spikelets up to 55 mm, with 14-22 florets. Lemma 10-11 mm, glaucous, usually glabrous. 2n = 16.{\i  Mediterranean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. pinnatum} (L.) Beauv.,{\i  Agrost}. 101, 155 (1812). Rhizomatous, sometimes subcaespitose; stems 40-120 cm, erect, pubescent at the nodes. Leaves 10-40 cm × 3-6(-8) mm, flat or somewhat convolute, sparsely hairy on the upper surface, scabrid beneath; ligule c. 2 mm, truncate. Raceme 7-20 cm, erect, with up to 15 spikelets. Spikelets terete, linear, somewhat patent especially before maturity, with 8-24 florets. Lower glume 3-6 mm, the upper 5-8 mm. Lemma oblong-lanceolate; awn erect. Anthers 3·5-5·5 mm. 2n = 14, 16, 28.{\i  Dry grassland and woods; usually calcicole. Europe, northwards to} 62° 30' {\i in N.W. Russia.} All except Az Bl Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pinnatum}: Leaves green. Spikelets 18-40 mm, usually straight. Lemma 7-11 mm, usually with some short hairs; awn 1-6 mm. 2n = 28. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b rupestre} (Host) Schübler & Martens,{\i  Fl. Wurtemberg} 48 (1834) ({\i B. rupestre} (Host) Roemer & Schultes): Leaves somewhat glaucous. Spikelets 30-50 mm, usually falcate. Lemma 9-11 mm, glabrous; awn not more than 3 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  W., C. & S. Europe}.
\par

\par
189}
\par