{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 4 Lower glume 2-3 mm, the upper 3-4 mm; leaves grass-
\par
  green; stems very robust, up to 10(-12) mm in diameter;
\par
  panicle rather dense, the branches suberect to patent .................... {\b 3. maxima}
\par
4 Lower glume 1-2 mm, the upper 1·5-3 mm; leaves greyish-
\par
  green; stems 5-7 mm in diameter; panicle lax, the 
\par
  branches patent to pendent
\par
5 Panicle-branches densely aculeolate; leaves scabrid above, 
\par
  smooth beneath; lower glume 1-1·5 mm, the upper 1·5-2 mm . {\b 2. arundinacea}
\par
5 Panicle-branches sparsely aculeolate or smooth; leaves 
\par
  smooth above, scabridulous beneath; lower glume 1·5-2 mm,
\par
  the upper 2-3 mm ............................................................................ {\b 1. triflora}
\par
1 Spikelets 8-30(-40) mm, with 6-16 florets, oblong to 
\par
  linear in outline; keels of palea winged in the upper part
\par
6 Spikelets persisting after anthesis; plants sterile;
\par
  anthers indehiscent, with imperfect pollen .......................... {\b 11}. × {\b pedicellata}
\par
6 Spikelets disarticulating in fruit; plants fertile;
\par
  anthers dehiscent, with good pollen
\par
7 Lemma with 3-5 distinct acute teeth at apex; palea 
\par
  deeply 2-fid at apex, with aristate teeth, distinctly 
\par
  exceeding lemma; leaves abruptly contracted at apex;
\par
  anthers 0·6-1·1 mm ...................................................................... {\b 7. declinata}
\par
7 Lemma without distinct acute teeth at apex; palea 
\par
  rounded at apex and 2-denticulate, or shallowly 2-fid 
\par
  with teeth not or only slightly exceeding the lemma;
\par
  leaves acuminate; anthers 0·7-2·5(-3) mm
\par
8 Lemma 5-7·5 mm; panicle ± secund, with 1-2(-3) branches
\par
  at central panicle-nodes; longer branches with 1-4, the
\par
  shorter with 1(-2) spikelets
\par
9 Lemma 5·5-7·5 mm, acute or subacute, strongly veined; spikelets
\par
  of shorter branches and lateral spikelets of longer branches 
\par
  with distinct pedicels; anthers 1·5-2·5(-3) mm ............................... {\b 8. fluitans}
\par
9 Lemma 5-6 mm, rounded-truncate, weakly veined; spikelets
\par
  of shorter branches and lateral spikelets of longer 
\par
  branches subsessile; anthers 1·1-1·6 mm ......................................... {\b 9. spicata}
\par
8 Lemma 3-4·5 mm; panicle not secund, with 3-5 branches 
\par
  at central panicle-nodes; longer branches with 5-16,
\par
  the shorter with 1-6 spikelets
\par
10 Veins of the lemma equal; lemma 3·5-4·5 mm, scabri-
\par
   dulous; spikelets 10-20 mm; palea shorter than to as 
\par
   long as the lemma; plant dark- to bluish-green ............................. {\b 10. plicata}
\par
10 Veins of the lemma very unequal, 3 longer and very 
\par
   prominent, 4 shorter and indistinct; lemma 3-3·5 mm,
\par
   smooth; spikelets 8-14 mm; palea as long as or longer
\par
   than the lemma; plant pale green ............................................... {\b 6. nemoralis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. HYDROPOA Dumort. Stock long, thick. Stems robust, erect. Leaf-sheaths terete. Panicle wide, much-branched, with many spikelets. Spikelets 4-10 mm, moderately compressed before anthesis. Palea unwinged on the keels. Stamens 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. triflora} (Korsh.) Komarov, {\i Fl. URSS}{\b  2}: 758 (1934). Stems 80-140 cm × 5-7 mm. Leaves 5-10(-12) mm wide, smooth above, scabrid beneath, with two violet-brown spots at the base beneath; cross-veins indistinct in upper leaves; sheaths smooth. Panicle 20-30 cm, lax; branches patent to pendent, scabridulous to smooth. Spikelets tinged with violet. Glumes obtuse or subacute, the lower 1·5-2 mm, the upper 2-3 mm. Lemma 2·6-3·2 mm, 7-veined. Palea 2·5-3 mm, with two short, obtuse teeth at apex. Anthers (0·8-)0·9-1·2(-1·4) mm.{\i  C. Ural.} Rs (C). ({\i N. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The closely related species{\b  G. grandis} S. Watson in A. Gray,{\i  Man. Bot. }ed. 6, 667 (1890), from North America, with filiform, smooth panicle-branches, acute glumes, lemma 2-2·5 mm and anthers 0·8 mm, is perhaps becoming naturalized in Norway. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. G. arundinacea} Kunth, {\i Révis. Gram.} {\b 1}: 118 (1929). Stems (50-)80-140(-200) cm × 5-7 mm. Leaves 5-10(-12) mm wide, greyish-green, scabrid above, smooth beneath, with two dark violet spots at the base beneath, strongly cross-veined; sheaths smooth to scabridulous. Panicle 15-50 cm, very lax; main axis smooth; branches filiform, scabrid, patent to pendent. Spikelets tinged with violet and bronze. Glumes subacute, the lower 1-1·5 mm, the upper 1·5-2 mm. Lemma 3 mm, subacute, very narrowly hyaline at apex, 5- to 7-veined. Palea 2·5-2·8 mm, narrowed upwards, with two very short obtuse teeth at apex. Anthers (1-)1·2-1·4(-1·6) mm. {\i S.E. Europe, from Bulgaria to the lower Volga, and extending northwards to} c. 51°{\i  N. in S. Russia. }Bu ?Hu Rm Rs (W, ?C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. G. maxima} (Hartman) Holmberg,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1919}: 97 (1919) ({\i G. aquatica} (L.) Wahlenb., non (L.) J. & C. Presl). Stock with numerous long shoots. Stems (60-)80-200(-250) cm × up to 10(-12) mm. Leaves 30-60 cm × 8-18 mm, grass-green, smooth above, scabrid beneath, with two pale brown triangular spots at the base beneath; upper leaves indistinctly cross-veined; sheaths scabridulous. Panicle 10-40 cm, rather dense, with 4-10 branches at central panicle-nodes; main axis scabrid; branches relatively thick, suberect to patent, scabrid. Spikelets green or tinged with yellow or violet. Glumes subacute, the lower 2-3 mm, the upper 3-4 mm. Lemma 3-4 mm, obtuse. Palea 3-4 mm, obtuse. Anthers (1-)1·2-1·8(-2) mm. 2n = 60. {\i Most of Europe but absent from the extreme north and most of the south-west.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da *Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. STRIATAE Church. Stock long, relatively thick. Stems slender, erect. Leaf-sheaths somewhat compressed. Panicle wide, diffuse, with many spikelets. Spikelets 2-10 mm, moderately compressed before anthesis. Palea unwinged on the keels. Stamens 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. G. lithuanica} (Gorski) Gorski,{\i  Icon. Pot. Char. Cyper. Gram. Lithuan.} t. 20 (1849) ({\i G. remota} Fries). Stock creeping. Stems 50-150 cm × 4-5 mm. Leaves (4-)5-9 mm wide, green, scabrid, flaccid; sheaths open above. Panicle 15-30 cm, very diffuse, much-branched; main axis scabrid; branches filiform, scabrid, almost pendent. Spikelets often tinged with violet. Glumes obtuse, the lower 1·5 mm, the upper 2-2·5 mm. Lemma 3-4 mm, oblong-lanceolate, soft, subacute, hyaline at the top only, scabrid. Palea 3-3·8 mm, narrowly elliptical, with two short teeth at apex. Anthers 0·5-0·8 mm.{\i  Usually in wet woods. N.E. Europe, extending westwards to Norway and southwards to} c. 53°{\i  N. in C. Russia.} Fe No Po Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. G. striata} (Lam.) A.S. Hitchc.,{\i  Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington}{\b  41}: 157 (1928) ({\i G. nervata} (Willd.) Trin.). Stems (20-)30-90 (-100) cm. Leaves 2-6 mm wide, acuminate, more or less in 2 rows, grass-green, flaccid, scabridulous; sheaths closed to the top; ligule closed in front when young. Panicle 5-20 cm, lax, the main axis scabrid; branches 2-3 at central panicle-nodes, slender, scabrid, suberect, later divergent. Spikelets (2-)3-4 mm. Glumes obtuse, tinged with violet, the lower 0·4-0·9 mm, the upper 0·7-1·3 mm. Lemma 1·4-2 mm, elliptical, obtuse, prominently 7-veined. Palea 1·3-2 mm, obovate, subobtuse. Anthers 0·4-0·6 mm.{\i  Naturalized locally in various parts of Europe.} [Au Ga He Rs (W) Su.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The above description refers to subsp. {\b stricta} (Scribner) Hultén, {\i Lunds Univ. Årsskr.} nov. ser.,{\b  38}: 232 (1942), to which all European plants most probably belong. The plants of the typical subspecies have taller stems, wider leaves, more diffuse panicles, the leaf-sheaths not closed to the top, and ligule open in front.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A related North American species,{\b  G. canadensis} (Michx) Trin., Mém. Acad. Sci. Pétersb; ser. 6,{\b  1}: 366 (1830), naturalized
\par

\par
180}
\par