{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. E. bungeanus} (Trin.) Melderis, {\i loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i Triticum bungeanum} Trin., {\i Agropyron geniculatum} (Trin.) C. Koch, {\i Elytrigia geniculata} (Trin.) Nevski). Stems 30-70 cm. Leaves narrow, usually convolute, shortly hairy on the upper surface, glabrous beneath; sheaths usually ciliate. Spike 6·5-15 cm, slender, lax; rhachis glabrous or sparsely spinose-ciliate on the main angles. Spikelets 11-17 mm, with 3-5 florets; rhachilla glabrous. Glumes lanceolate, glabrous, 3- to 6-veined, subacute; the lower usually 5-7 mm, 2-3 mm shorter than the lower floret, 3- to 5-veined. Anthers 5-6 mm.{\i  Rocks and stony slopes. S. Ural; Krym; one station on the middle Volga.} Rs (C, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b scythicus} (Nevski) Melderis, {\i loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i Agropyron scythicum} Nevski): Glaucous-green. Leaves 2·5-4 mm wide (when flattened), convolute or flat with convolute margins. Spikelets 12-17 mm. Glumes 6-10 × 1·8-2 mm. Lemma 9-10 mm, subacute at the apex, unawned. •{\i  Mountains of Krym}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pruiniferus} (Nevski) Melderis, {\i loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i Agropyron pruiniferum} Nevski): Glaucous and pruinose. Stems sometimes strigose below the nodes. Leaves 2-2·5 mm wide (when flattened), convolute. Spikelets 11-14 mm. Glumes 5-7 × up to 1·5 mm, usually with wide hyaline margins. Lemma 8-8·5 mm, acuminate, unawned.{\i  S. Ural; middle Volga}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp. {\i bungeanus} occurs in Siberia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 13-16}). {\b E. elongatus} group. Leaves flat or convolute. Rhachis of spike with internodes nearly flat on the side facing the spikelets, usually spinose-ciliate on the main angles. Glumes indurate-coriaceous, obtuse or truncate. Lemma obtuse, unawned.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems slender; upper leaves convolute, the lower flat,
\par
  1-2 mm wide, sparsely ciliate, minutely hairy beneath;
\par
  glumes usually 3- to 5-veined
\par
2 Spikelets slightly compressed; lower sheaths usually 
\par
  ciliate; glumes truncate or emarginate ......................................... {\b 13. nodosus}
\par
2 Spikelets strongly compressed; lower sheaths not 
\par
  ciliate; glumes truncate and apiculate ................................. {\b 14. flaccidifolius}
\par
1 Stems robust; leaves flat or convolute, usually 3-5 mm
\par
  wide, usually scabrid on the margin, glabrous beneath;
\par
  glumes usually 5- to 9-veined
\par
3 Lower glume nearly as long as lower floret, 5- to
\par
  7-veined, obtuse; lemma sometimes sparsely hairy;
\par
  stems usually strigulose below the nodes ................................ {\b 15. curvifolius}
\par
3 Lower glume not more than ¾ as long as lower floret, 5- to
\par
   9(-11)-veined, ± truncate; lemma glabrous; stems glabrous ..... {\b 16. elongatus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. E. nodosus} (Nevski) Melderis,{\i  loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i Agropyron nodosum} Nevski). Leaves 1-2 mm wide, glaucous-green, convolute, with rather fine veins, densely covered with delicate spinules or very short hairs on the upper surface, sparsely ciliate, usually glabrous beneath; lower sheaths often ciliate. Spikelets with few florets, rhachilla densely strigulose. Glumes unequal, glabrous. Lemma glabrous.{\i  Rocks and stony slopes. Krym; Corse. }Co Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus to Lebanon}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nodosus}: Stems 30-80 cm, often conspicuously swollen at base. Lower sheaths minutely hairy on the surface, ciliate. Spikes 4-11 cm, lax. Spikelets 10-12 mm, with 3-5 florets. Glumes 5- to 6-veined, often 1 the length of the lower floret, the lower 4-6 mm, the upper 5-7 mm. Lemma 7·5-8·5 mm. Anthers c. 4·5 mm. 2n = 28. •{\i  S. Krym}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b corsicus} (Hackel) Melderis, {\i op. cit. }377 (1978) ({\i Agropyron caespitosum} var. {\i corsicum} Hackel): Stems 50-80 cm, not conspicuously swollen at base. Lower sheaths glabrous on the surface, but ciliate. Spikes 10-15 cm, lax. Spikelets 10-11 mm, with 3 florets. Glumes usually 5-veined, about 2/3 as long as the lower floret, the lower 6-7 mm, the upper 7-8 mm. Lemma 9-9·5 mm. Anthers c. 5 mm. 2n = 28. •{\i  Corse} ({\i Sant' Angelo, N. of Corte.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. E. flaccidifolius} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Melderis,{\i  loc. cit. }(1978) ({\i Agropyron elongatum }var.{\i  flaccidifolium} Boiss. & Heldr.). Stems 35-65 cm. Lower leaves 1-2 mm wide, flat, soft, finely veined, densely and shortly hairy on the upper surface, sparsely ciliate, minutely hairy beneath; lower sheaths strigulose. Spikes 7-15 cm, lax. Spikelets 10-11 mm, conspicuously compressed, with 6-9 florets. Glumes usually 4-6 mm, usually 5-veined. Lemma usually 6 mm, emarginate, with a short mucro in the sinus. Palea ciliolate on keels near the apex. Anthers c. 4 mm.{\i  Coastal marshes. Mediterranean region, westwards to Sicilia.} Al Cr Gr Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. E. curvifolius} (Lange) Melderis,{\i  loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i Agropyron curvifolium }Lange). Stems 60-100 cm, robust, usually strigulose below the nodes. Leaves up to 3 mm wide (when flattened), glaucous-green, usually convolute, rigid, sometimes recurved, prominently and closely veined, scabrid and shortly hairy on the veins above, scabrid on the margins, smooth beneath, subulate-pungent. Spikes 13-15 cm, erect, lax. Spikelets 10-15 mm, with 5-7 florets, strongly compressed laterally; rhachilla strigulose. Glumes 6-8 mm, nearly as long as the lower floret, usually 5-veined. Lemma 7-8 mm, glabrous, or sparsely hairy. Palea ciliolate on keels. Anthers 4 mm.{\i  Gypsaceous, saline or calcareous soils. • S.C. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. E. elongatus} (Host) Runemark,{\i  Hereditas}{\b  70}: 156 (1972) ({\i Triticum elongatum} Host, {\i Agropyron elongatum} (Host) Beauv.). Stems robust, glabrous. Leaves 2·5-5 mm wide (when flattened), flat or convolute, coriaceous, prominently and closely veined, with sparse spinules, sometimes also with short setae. Spikes erect, lax. Spikelets strongly compressed laterally; rhachilla strigulose. Glumes often hyaline and emarginate at the apex, the lower 2/3-3/4 as long as the lower floret. Lemma glabrous. {\i S. & S.E. Europe}. Bl Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Several variants have been described by various authors as separate species or as subordinate taxa; only the following seem to merit subspecific status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b elongatus}: Stems 50-80 cm. Lower sheaths glabrous on the margins. Spikes 10-25 cm; lower internodes usually as long as the spikelets. Spikelets usually 10-17 mm, with 7-8 florets. Glumes 7-10 mm, 5-9(-11)-veined. Lemma 9-10 mm. Palea with cilia less than 0·1 mm on keels in the upper part. Anthers 4-4·5 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Maritime sands and salt-marshes. Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ponticus} (Podp.) Melderis,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 76}: 377 (1978) ({\i Triticum ponticum} Podp.): Stems 50-100 cm. Lower sheaths usually ciliate. Spikes 10-35 cm; lower internodes usually much longer than the spikelets. Spikelets usually 17-25 mm, with 8-13 florets. Glumes 9-11 mm, usually 5- to 7-veined. Lemma 10-13 mm, glabrous, sometimes minutely hairy along the margins. Palea with cilia 0·1-0·3 mm on the whole length of keels. 2n = 70 (56).{\i  Dry or saline habitats. S.E. Europe.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ELYTRIGIA (Desv.) Melderis. Rhizomatous. Spikes dense or lax, erect; rhachis tough, spinose-ciliate on the main angles. Spikelets solitary on the rhachis, usually with 5-10 florets, often falling entire at maturity. Glumes usually glabrous on the veins, acute or with a short mucro or awn, or obtuse or obliquely truncate to truncate. Callus glabrous.
\par

\par
195}
\par