{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3 Keels of the palea spinose-ciliate at least in the 
\par
  upper half; spikes not robust; spikelets in groups of 
\par
  2-3 at each node of the rhachis
\par
4 Basal part of glumes narrowly lanceolate, the lower 
\par
  glume with its basal part enfolding that of the upper;
\par
  lemma 10-15 mm .......................................................................... {\b 3. karelinii}
\par
4 Basal part of glumes linear, the lower glume with its 
\par
  basal part not enfolding that of the upper; lemma 4-9 mm
\par
5 Plant with long, creeping rhizomes, not forming tufts;
\par
  leaves usually flat, with thin, distant veins ............................... {\b 6. multicaulis}
\par
5 Plant with shortly creeping rhizomes, forming small 
\par
  tufts connected by a rhizome; leaves flat or convolute,
\par
  with prominent, approximate veins
\par
6 Lemma glabrous on the back, with an awn 1-2 mm; glumes scabrid 
\par
  on the margins and on the mid-vein towards the apex ............. {\b 4. akmolensis}
\par
6 Lemma more or less hairy on the back, with an awn 
\par
  0·5-1 mm; glumes usually hairy .................................................. {\b 5. paboanus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. arenarius} (L.) Hochst.,{\i  Flora }({\i Regensb.}){\b  31}: 118 (1848) ({\i Elymus arenarius} L.). Glaucous perennial with long, creeping rhizomes. Stems usually 50-150 cm, robust, glabrous. Leaves 8-15 mm wide, flat, with convolute margins, densely and minutely scabrid or hairy on veins above, glabrous beneath. Spikes 15-35 cm × 10-25 mm, dense; rhachis glabrous except for spinose-ciliate main angles. Spikelets 20-32 mm, with 3-4(-5) florets, in pairs at each node of the rhachis. Glumes 15-25 × 2·2-3·2 mm, narrowly lanceolate, tapering to an acuminate-subulate point, with 3-4 distinct veins, keeled, glabrous or shortly hairy, especially on the keel. Lemma 12-25 mm, 5- to 7-veined, densely hairy, with short, soft hairs. Palea sparsely ciliate on keels near the apex. Anthers 7-8 mm. 2n = 56.{\i  Maritime sands and sandy shores of large lakes. N. & W. Europe, from the Arctic to N. W. Spain; an occasional casual elsewhere.} Be Br Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb Hs Ho Is No Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A sterile hybrid between {\b 1} and {\i Elymus farctus} occurs in the Baltic region.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  L. mollis} (Trin.) Hara,{\i  Bot. Mag.} ({\i Tokyo}){\b  52}: 232 (1938) ({\i Elymus mollis} Trin.), from North America and N.E. Asia, was planted in Iceland to stabilize sand-dunes but is now very rare or extinct. It is like {\b 1} but has the upper part of the stem and the rhachis densely pubescent; it has 2n = 28.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. racemosus} (Lam.) Tzvelev,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 20}: 429 (1960) ({\i Elymus giganteus} Vahl). Perennial with long, creeping rhizomes. Stems 50-100 cm, up to 10 mm in diameter in the basal part. Leaves up to 15 mm wide, scabrid on the veins above and on the margins, glabrous beneath. Spikes 15-35 cm × 10-20 mm, gradually tapering towards the apex. Spikelets 15-20 mm, with 4-6 florets, compressed, in groups of 3-6. Glumes 15-25 mm, linear-lanceolate, acuminate-subulate above, glabrous. Lemma 10-14 mm, 7-veined, acute, softly hairy in the lower part, glabrous towards the apex. Anthers c. 5 mm.{\i  Dry, sandy soils. S.E. Europe.} Bu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems nearly always shortly hairy below the spikes;
\par
  spikes very dense, with spikelets in groups of 3-5(-6);
\par
  glumes 1-veined ............................................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b racemosus}
\par
1 Stems nearly always glabrous below the spikes; spikes 
\par
  rather lax, with spikelets in groups of 3
\par
2 Glumes 2- to 3-veined; keels of the palea glabrous or 
\par
  with a few cilia in the upper part .................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b sabulosus}
\par
2 Glumes 1-veined; keels of the palea with numerous cilia
\par
  in the upper part ................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b klokovii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b racemosus}: Stems nearly always shortly hairy below spikes. Spikes dense, with spikelets in groups of 3-5(-6) at each node of the rhachis. Glumes 1-veined. Keels of the palea glabrous or with a few cilia in the upper part. 2n = 28.{\i  S.E. Russia.} ({\i Caucasus to C. Asia.})
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sabulosus} (Bieb.) Tzvelev,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc. }({\i Leningrad}){\b  8}: 65 (1971) ({\i Elymus sabulosus} Bieb.,{\i  Leymus sabulosus} (Bieb.) Tzvelev): Stems nearly always glabrous below the spikes. Spikes rather lax, with spikelets in groups of 3 at each node of the rhachis. Glumes 2- to 3-veined. Keels of the palea glabrous or with a few cilia in the upper part. 2n = 28.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b klokoni} Tzvelev,{\i  loc. cit.} (1971): Stems glabrous below the spikes. Spikes rather lax, with spikelets usually in groups of 3 at each node of the rhachis. Glumes 1-veined. Keels of the palea with numerous cilia in the upper part.{\i  S.E. part of U.S.S.R}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. karelinii} (Turcz.) Tzvelev,{\i  op. cit.}{\b  9}: 59 (1972) ({\i Aneurolepidium angustum }(Trin.) Nevski pro parte,{\i  A. karelinii} (Turcz.) Nevski, quoad nom.). Perennial with shortly creeping rhizomes, forming small tufts. Stems 50-100 cm, scabrid below the spikes otherwise glabrous. Leaves up to 6 mm wide, flat, with convolute margins, scabrid above, glabrous beneath. Spikes 10-20 cm × 5-10 mm, linear, fairly dense; rhachis with appressed, rigid, short hairs. Spikelets 12-15 mm, with 2-3 florets, in groups of 2-3. Glumes 10-15 mm, narrowly lanceolate below, the lower with its basal part enfolding that of the upper, acuminate-subulate above, obscurely 2- to 3-veined, scabrid on the back, spinose-ciliate on margins. Lemma 10-15 mm, with short appressed hairs, tapering into a short awn-like point. Keels of the palea spinose-ciliate in the upper part. 2n = 56.{\i  Saline meadows and river-gravels. S. Ural and adjacent lowlands}. Rs (C, E). ({\i Siberia, C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. akmolinensis} (Drobov) Tzvelev,{\i  Not. Syst. }({\i Leningrad}){\b  20}: 430 (1960) ({\i Aneurolepidium akmolinense }(Drobov) Nevski). Perennial with shortly creeping rhizomes, forming small tufts. Stems 45-80 cm. Leaves up to 5 mm wide, flat or convolute with prominent approximate veins, scabrid above and on the margins, glabrous beneath. Spikes 6-10 cm × 5-7 mm, linear dense; rhachis hairy or spinose-ciliate only on main angles. Spikelets 8-13 mm, pruinose, with 3-5 florets, usually in pairs at each node of the rhachis. Glumes 7-10 mm, linear-subulate obscurely 1-veined, scabrid on margins and on the mid-vein towards the apex. Lemma 6-8·5 mm, glabrous, tapering into an awn up to 1·2 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Saline soils. S.E. Russia.} Rs (E). ({\i Temperate Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. paboanus} (Claus) Pilger, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  74}: 7 (1947) ({\i Aneurolepidium paboanum} (Claus) Nevski). Perennial with shortly creeping rhizomes, forming small tufts. Stems 45-90 cm. Leaves 3-5 mm wide, flat or with convolute margins, with prominent approximate veins, scabrid above, glabrous beneath. Spikes 8-15 cm × 5-10 mm, dense, narrowing towards the apex; rhachis with appressed hairs. Spikelets 7-12 mm, with 4-6 florets, usually in pairs at each node of the rhachis. Glumes 7-9 mm linear-subulate, usually hairy, without veins or obscurely 1-veined. Lemma 6-8·5 mm, broadly lanceolate, abruptly tapering into an awn 0·5-1 mm, more or less densely white-hairy, tinged with purple at the base. Palea usually longer than the lemma.{\i  Saline meadows and river-gravels. S.E. part of U.S.S.R.} Rs (E). ({\i Siberia, C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. multicaulis} (Kar. & Kir.) Tzvelev, {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 20}: 430 (1960) ({\i Aneurolepidium multicaule} (Kar. & Kir.) Nevski). Perennial with long, creeping rhizomes. Stems 50-70 cm. Leaves 3-8 mm wide, flat, sometimes with convolute margins, with thin, distant veins, scabrid above, glabrous, sometimes scabrid beneath. Spikes 5-12 cm × 6-12 mm; rhachis spinose-ciliate on main angles. Spikelets 8-13 mm, with 3-6 florets, often tinged with
\par

\par
191}
\par