{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i gravelly steppes. S.E. Ukraine} ({\i N. & W. shores of Azovskoe More}). Rs (W, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. dasyanthum} Ledeb.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Dorpat.} 3 (1820). Rhizomatous perennial. Stems 40-75 cm. Leaves up to 4 mm wide, convolute, prominently veined and minutely hairy on the upper surface, glabrous beneath; sheaths usually glabrous; ligule up to 1·5 mm. Spikes 6-15 cm × 7-18 mm, linear, lax, with distinct gaps between spikelets; rhachis more or less shortly hairy. Spikelets 7-12 mm, more or less pectinate, divergent from the rhachis at a wide angle. Glumes 5-8 mm, narrowly lanceolate-subulate, with a short mucro, glabrous or ciliate on the keel. Lemma 7-8 mm, densely villous, with long white hairs, rarely glabrous, unawned. Palea usually glabrous on the keels, rarely with 1-3 cilia on each keel. Anthers 5 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Sandy ground. • C. & S. Ukraine.} Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. tanaiticum} Nevski, {\i Acta Univ. As. Med.} ser. 8b (Bot.),{\b  17}: 56 (1934). Rhizomatous perennial. Stems 30-80 cm, glabrous. Leaves usually 2-5 mm wide, flat, with convolute margins, rarely convolute, minutely hairy on the upper surface, glabrous beneath; sheaths glabrous, rarely the lower hairy; ligule up to 5 mm. Spikes usually 5-16 cm × 5-7 mm, linear, fairly lax; rhachis glabrous or shortly hairy. Spikelets 7-12 mm, ascending, more or less imbricate. Glumes 3-7 mm, narrowly lanceolate-subulate, acuminate, glabrous, rarely ciliate on the keel. Lemma 6-8 mm, with long white hairs, sometimes nearly glabrous, acute, unawned. Palea with 1-10 cilia on each keel. Anthers 4·5-5 mm.{\i  Sandy river-banks. • E. Ukraine and S.E. Russia} ({\i basins of Don and Donets rivers}). Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Probably of hybrid origin involving {\b 2} and {\b 4}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. fragile} (Roth) P. Candargy, {\i Arch. Biol. Vég.} ({\i Athènes}) {\b 1}: 58 (1901). Caespitose perennial. Stems 30-80 cm. Leaves convolute or flat. Spikes 5-15 cm × 5-12 mm, linear, fairly dense. Spikelets ascending, imbricate. Glumes 5-7 mm, lanceolate, more or less abruptly tapering above, acuminate or shortly awned with an awn up to 1·5 mm, glabrous or scabridulous, rarely with a few cilia on the keel towards the apex. Lemma 6-8·5 mm, acute or with an awn not more than 1 mm. Palea with 12-40 cilia on each keel. Anthers 3·5-4 mm. 2n = 28 (14).{\i  Dry sandy ground. S.E. part of U.S.S.R.} Rs (E). ({\i Caucasus and C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Represented in Europe by subsp.{\b  sibiricum} (Willd.) Melderis,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 384 (1978) ({\i Triticum sibiricum} Willd.).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. desertorum} (Fischer ex Link) Schultes in Schultes & Schultes fil.,{\i  Mantissa}{\b  2}: 412 (1824). Caespitose perennial. Stems 25-50 cm, glabrous or scabridulous below the spike. Leaves 2-3 mm wide, convolute, rigid, scabridulous on the upper surface, glabrous beneath; sheaths of the lower leaves with long patent hairs or glabrous. Spikes 2·5-7·5 cm × 5-9 mm, linear, more or less cylindrical. Spikelets ascending, imbricate. Glumes 3-4 mm, lanceolate, more or less abruptly tapering above, with an awn up to 3 mm, glabrous. Lemma 5-6 mm, glabrous, with an awn 1-3 mm. Palea with 10-20 cilia on each keel. Anthers 4 mm. 2n = 28 (29, 32).{\i  Steppes and saline soils. S.E. Russia, Krym.} Rs (C, K, E). ({\i Caucasus, C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. cristatum} (L.) Gaertner,{\i  Novi Comment. Acad. Sci. Petrop.}{\b  14}({\b 1}): 540 (1770) ({\i Eremopyrum cristatum} (L.) Willk.). Caespitose perennial. Stems 25-75 cm. Leaves 1·5-5 mm wide convolute or flat with convolute margins, rarely conduplicate usually more or less hairy on the upper surface, glabrous beneath. Spikes usually 1·5-5 cm × 10-23 mm, pectinate, dense. Spikelets 8-15 mm, divergent from the rhachis at a wide angle. Glumes 3-5 mm, ovate-lanceolate, abruptly tapering into a short awn 2-3 mm. Lemma 5-7 mm, shortly awned. Palea with more than 10 cilia on each keel.{\i  Steppes, sandy soils, stony slopes and other dry habitats. S., C. & E. Europe.} Au Bu Cz ?Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    A polymorphic species varying much in indumentum of floral and vegetative parts, presence or absence of swollen basal internodes of the stem, density of spike, size of spikes and spikelets, and shape and structure of the cauline leaves and those of the non-flowering shoots.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Basal internodes not conspicuously swollen .............. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b pectinatum}
\par
1 Basal internodes conspicuously swollen
\par
2 Leaves of non-flowering shoots flat, fairly soft,
\par
  shortly pubescent on both surfaces, not pungent .......... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b sabulosum}
\par
2 Leaves of non-flowering shoots convolute or flat with 
\par
  convolute margins, rigid, not shortly pubescent on both
\par
  surfaces, pungent
\par
3 Plant pruinose; leaf-sheaths glabrous and not ciliate;
\par
  spikelets usually with 5-7 florets; lemma with an awn 
\par
  c. 4 mm ............................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b brandzae}
\par
3 Plant green or greenish-glaucous, not pruinose; sheaths
\par
  of the lower leaves more or less sparsely long-hairy 
\par
  and ciliate; spikelets usually with 3-5 florets; lemma
\par
  with an awn up to 3 mm
\par
4 Stems often hairy below the spikes and nodes; leaves
\par
  convolute or conduplicate, densely and shortly hairy,
\par
  not prominently veined on the upper surface, with 
\par
  scattered short spinules and short rigid bristles 
\par
  beneath ............................................................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b ponticum}
\par
4 Stems glabrous; leaves thick, flat, with convolute 
\par
  margins, prominently veined, with scattered short 
\par
  spinules on veins, not densely and shortly hairy on the
\par
  upper surface, usually glabrous beneath .................. ({\b e}) subsp. {\b sclerophyllum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pectinatum} (Bieb.) Tzvelev,{\i  Sched. Herb. Fl. URSS}{\b  18}: 25 (1970) ({\i A. pectiniforme} Roemer & Schultes): Stems usually softly hairy below the spike, not swollen at the base; non-flowering shoots short. Leaves usually scabridulous or more or less hairy above, glabrous beneath; sheaths densely hairy or glabrous. Spikes oblong-ovate, conspicuously narrowed towards the apex, with distinct gaps between the spikelets; rhachis scabridulous or shortly hairy. Glumes scabridulous or ciliate on the keel and more or less hairy on the sides. Lemma glabrous or sparsely long-hairy. Anthers 4-5 mm. 2n = 14, 28 (42).{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sabulosum} Lavrenko,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. Kieff}{\b  12-13}: 148 (1931): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but basal internodes swollen; leaves sometimes glabrous above; rhachis and lemma usually glabrous. •{\i  S. & E. Ukraine, S.E. Russia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b brandzae} (Pantu & Solac.) Melderis,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 384 (1978) ({\i Agropyron brandzae} Pantu & Solac.): Stems swollen at the base. Leaves inrolled, setaceous, rigid, pungent at the apex, glabrous. Spikes narrowed towards the apex, fairly lax, slightly pectinate, with distinct gaps between the spikelets. Spikelets with 5-7 florets. Glumes scabrid on the keel, otherwise glabrous. Lemma 6-6·5 mm, glabrous, with an awn 4-6 mm. •{\i  E. Bulgaria, E. Romania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b ponticum} (Nevski) Tzvelev, {\i Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  9}: 58 (1972) ({\i Agropyron ponticum} Nevski): Stems swollen at the base, often pubescent below the nodes. Leaves convolute or conduplicate, rigid, more or less pungent at the apex, densely and shortly hairy above. Spikes narrowed towards the apex, fairly dense, with distinct gaps between the spikelets. Spikelets usually with 3 florets. Glumes usually glabrous. Lemma 7 mm, glabrous or more or less hairy, with an awn 2-3 mm. •{\i  Krym.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b sclerophyllum} Novopokr. ex Tzvelev, {\i op. cit.} 58 (1972) ({\i A. pinifolium} Nevski): Stems swollen at the base. Leaves short,
\par

\par
199}
\par