{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. E pycnanthus} (Godron) Melderis, {\i op. cit.} 378 (1978) ({\i Triticum pycnanthum} Godron, {\i Agropyron litorale} Dumort., nom. illeg., {\i A. pycnanthum} (Godron) Godron & Gren., {\i A. pungens} auct., non (Pers.) Roemer & Schultes). Stems 10-120 cm, rigid. Leaves up to 35 cm × 2-6 mm, flat or convolute, glaucous-green, rigid, with prominent, crowded, flattened, scabrid veins on the upper surface, glabrous beneath, pungent; lower sheaths ciliate. Spikes 4-20 cm. Spikelets 10-20 mm, with 3-10 florets; rhachilla strigulose. Glumes 8-10 mm, lanceolate-oblong, coriaceous, prominently 4- to 7-veined, asymmetrically keeled, scabridulous on the keel, acute. Lemma 7-11 mm, keeled above, subobtuse, unawned, mucronate or with an awn up to 10 mm. Palea spinose-ciliate on keels. Anthers 5-7 mm. 2n = 42.{\i  Maritime sands and shingle. • Coasts of W. & S. Europe}. Al Au Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho It Ju Lu ?Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  E. pycnanthus} ×{\b  repens} ({\i Agropyron} × {\i oliveri} Druce, {\i A. campestre} auct., non Godron & Gren.) is like{\i  E. repens }but always has a dense spike, the veins on the upper surface of leaves are more prominent and flattened, with short spinules or sparse long hairs, the margins of the leaf-sheaths are usually glabrous, sometimes shortly ciliate, the glumes asymmetrically keeled, acute, and the lemma acute or obtuse with an excurrent mid-vein. It occurs commonly on the west coast of Europe and as an occasional casual in the Baltic region and C. Russia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. E. repens} (L.) Gould,{\i  Madroño}{\b  9}: 127 (1947) ({\i Triticum repens }L.,{\i  Agropyron repens} (L.) Beauv.,{\i  Elytrigia repens} (L.) Nevski). Stems 30-120 cm. Leaves 3-10 mm wide, usually flat. Spikes usually 5-15 cm, dense or lax. Spikelets 8-17 mm, usually with 5-7 florets; rhachilla strigulose. Glumes 5-15 mm, lanceolate, usually 5- to 7-veined, acute to subobtuse, mucronate or shortly awned, with a hyaline margin widest near the apex. Lemma 6-11 mm, keeled distally, glabrous, unawned or subulate.{\i  Almost throughout Europe, but doubtfully native in parts of the north.} All except Az Cr Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable. The correlation between the characters is poor and most of the variants do not show any ecological or geographical differentiation. At least 5 subspecies may, however, be recognized in Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spikelets strongly compressed; lemma emarginate, with 
\par
  midvein prolonged into a short, thick, obtuse point,
\par
  not projecting beyond the apex; palea minutely spinose-
\par
  ciliate on keels in the upper part ............................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b elongatiformis}
\par
1 Spikelets slightly compressed; lemma usually acute,
\par
  mucronate; palea spinose-ciliate throughout most of the
\par
  length of the keels
\par
2 Stems geniculate at the base; leaves with prominent,
\par
  crowded veins; glumes usually 3-veined .......................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b arenosus}
\par
2 Stems erect; leaves with rather fine, distant veins;
\par
  glumes 5- to 9-veined
\par
3 Plant dull green; leaves flat, soft; spikes usually 
\par
  dense; glumes 5- to 7-veined; lemma mucronate or with 
\par
  an awn up to 8 mm ............................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b repens}
\par
3 Plant glaucous-green or glaucous; leaves ± convolute,
\par
  rigid; spikes lax
\par
4 Rhizomes long-creeping; stems sometimes rooting at the
\par
  lower nodes; leaves sometimes hairy; glumes 6- to 9-veined;
\par
  lemma usually subobtuse or acuminate-subulate .... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b pseudocaesius}
\par
4 Rhizomes short; stems not rooting at the lower nodes;
\par
  leaves scabrid above; glumes 5- to 6-veined; lemma with
\par
  an awn 8-15 mm ............................................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b calcareus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b repens}: Leaves often with sparse long hairs on the upper surface; lower sheaths sparsely or densely hairy. Spikes sometimes with a hairy rhachis. Glumes 7-12 mm. Lemma 8-11 mm. Anthers 5-5·5 mm. 2n = 42 (28, 56). {\i Waste places and as a persistent weed of cultivated land. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pseudocaesius} (Pacz.) Melderis,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 379 (1978) ({\i Agropyron repens }var. {\i pseudocaesium} Pacz.): Leaves usually scabrid on the upper surface. Glumes 10-13 mm, nearly as long as the lower floret, often with mucro up to 0·2 mm. Lemma 9·5-13 mm, usually emarginate, with a mucro up to 0·2 mm in the sinus. Anthers 6-7 mm. 2n = 42. {\i Steppes and saline soils. S. Ukraine and S.E. Russia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b arenosus} (Petif) Melderis,{\i  loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i T. repens} var.{\i  arenosum} Petif,{\i  Elytrigia repens} var.{\i  maritima} Hyl.): Plants glaucous-green, forming small, dense tufts. Leaves narrow, convolute, usually glabrous on both surfaces. Spikes c. 5 cm, with small spikelets with 2-6 florets. Glumes 5-6 mm, often 3-veined. Lemma 6-7 mm, subobtuse or acuminate-subulate. Anthers c. 4 mm. {\i Maritime sands. Coasts of N.W. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b elongatiformis} (Drobov) Melderis,{\i  loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i Agropyron elongatiforme} Drobov): Leaves with prominent veins; sheaths sometimes ciliate. Spikelets 9-15 mm, often divergent from the rhachis in their upper part. Glumes 4-8 mm. Lemma 6-10 mm. Anthers c. 4 mm. 2n = 42.{\i  Grassland and disturbed ground. S. & E. Ukraine, S.E. Russia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b calcareus} (Cernjavski) Melderis,{\i  op. cit.} 380 (1978) ({\i Agropyron calcareum} Cernjavski): Leaves with rather conspicuous veins. Glumes 7-8 mm, more or less abruptly tapering into a short awn 3-4 mm. Lemma c. 10 mm, with an awn 8-15 mm. Anthers 4·5-5 mm. {\i Dolomitic rocks. • S. Makedonija} ( {\i Mt Petrinja}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b E. repens} ×{\b  hispidus} ({\i Agropyron} × {\i mucronatum} Opiz) occurs frequently in C. & E. Europe. It is like{\i  E. hispidus} but the leaves are softer, with the veins rather prominent and crowded in the basal part, becoming thinner and less crowded distally. The glumes are rather prominently veined, with a wide hyaline margin and are abruptly narrowed at the mucronate apex. 2n = 42.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  E. repens} × {\b Hordeum secalinum} has been recorded, though rarely, from meadows and disturbed ground in England, Denmark and S. France. It is morphologically intermediate between the parents and is usually male-sterile. It has 2n = 49.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. E. pungens} (Pers.) Melderis,{\i  loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i Triticum pungens} Pers.,{\i  Agropyron pungens} (Pers.) Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Elytrigia pungens }(Pers.) Tutin). Stems slender. Leaves flat or convolute, with prominent, somewhat distant, scabrid veins on the upper surface, glabrous beneath, pungent. Spikes erect, rather lax. Spikelets laterally compressed, usually with 5-7 florets; rhachilla densely strigulose. Glumes 6·5-9·6 mm, keeled, prominently veined, subobtuse to acute, often mucronate. Lemma obtuse, with a short mucro.{\i  Dry places. • S.W. Europe, extending to N.W. France.} Bl Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    The name {\i Triticum pungens} Pers. has been misapplied to {\b 17} (which differs from{\i  E. pungens} mainly in having leaves with prominent, crowded, flattened veins on the upper surface) and to{\i  E. pycnanthus} ×{\i  repens}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems, rhachis and spikelets densely and shortly hairy . ({\b c}) subsp. {\b fontqueri}
\par
1 Stems, rhachis and spikelets glabrous
\par
2 Leaves usually convolute, scabrid on the upper surface, the 
\par
  lower sometimes also with sparse long hairs on the veins, 
\par
  glabrous beneath; sheaths not ciliate; glumes subobtuse . ({\b a}) subsp. {\b pungens}
\par
2 Leaves usually flat, scabrid on both surfaces, without
\par
  sparse long hairs; sheaths sometimes ciliate; glumes 
\par
  usually acute ................................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b campestris}
\par

\par
196}
\par