{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 convolute, or flat with convolute margins, rigid, glaucous-green, prominently veined, densely and minutely hairy on the upper surface, glabrous beneath. Spikes erect or slightly curved; rhachis readily breaking just above each spikelet, glabrous on the surface and main angles. Spikelets glabrous, usually appressed to the rhachis, laterally compressed; rhachilla densely strigulose. Glumes asymmetrically keeled, unawned. Lemma keeled towards the apex, unawned.{\i  Maritime sands; rarely on maritime rocks. Coasts of Europe, northwards to S. Norway and eastwards to Estonia and Krym.} All except Au Az Cz He Hu Is Rs (N, C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A polyploid complex, ranging from diploid to octoploid, the members of which have been variously treated as species or subspecies. Since the correlation between chromosome number and morphology is imperfect, subspecific rank seems the most appropriate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant with long-creeping rhizomes; palea spinose-
\par
  ciliate nearly throughout the length of the keels
\par
2 Spikes erect, with 8-12(-15) spikelets, usually longer
\par
  than the leaves; rhachis not very fragile; anthers
\par
  10-12 mm ............................................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b farctus}
\par
2 Spikes usually slightly curved, with 4-8(-12) spikelets,
\par
  often shorter or slightly longer than the leaves;
\par
  rhachis very fragile; anthers 6-8 mm .................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b boreali-atlanticus}
\par
1 Plant caespitose; rhizomes very short or absent; palea
\par
  spinose-ciliate only in upper half of keels
\par
3 Rhizomes short; spikes 10-40 cm, lax; spikelets shorter
\par
  than the internodes in the lower part of the rhachis;
\par
  ligule up to 2·5 mm .................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b bessarabicus}
\par
3 Rhizomes absent; spikes 2-10 cm; spikelets longer than
\par
  the internodes in the lower part of the rhachis; ligule
\par
  not more than 0·5 mm .................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b rechingeri}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b farctus}: Rhizomes long-creeping. Stems usually 50-80 cm, rather thick. Leaves up to 5 mm wide, convolute, rarely flat with convolute margins; sheaths sometimes densely and shortly hairy; ligule not more than 1 mm. Spikes 15-35 cm. Spikelets 10-25 mm, usually with 5-9 florets. Glumes 10-18 mm, narrowly lanceolate or oblong, 6- to 12-veined, obtuse. Lemma 10-18 mm, obtuse. Palea spinose-ciliate throughout the length of the keels. Anthers 10-12 mm. 2n = 42, 56.{\i  S. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b boreali-atlanticus} (Simonet & Guinochet) Melderis,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 383 (1978) ({\i Agropyron junceum} subsp. {\i boreali-atlanticum} Simonet & Guinochet,{\i  A. junceiforme} (Á. & D. Löve) Á. & D. Löve,{\i  Elytrigia juncea} subsp.{\i  boreoatlantica} Hyl.): Rhizomes long-creeping. Stems 20-60 cm, rather fragile. Leaves 2-6 mm wide, flat or often convolute; ligule not more than 1 mm. Spikes 4-20 cm, erect, or slightly curved. Spikelets 15-25 mm, with 3-8 florets. Glumes 9-15 mm, prominently 7- to 11-veined, narrowly oblong, obtuse. Lemma 11-18 mm, obtuse or emarginate, with a very short mucro in the sinus. Palea spinose-ciliate throughout the length of the keels. Anthers 6-8 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  N. & W. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b bessarabicus} (Savul. & Rayss) Melderis, {\i loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i Agropyron bessarabicum} Savul. & Rayss,{\i  Elytrigia juncea} subsp. {\i bessarabicum} (Savul. & Rayss) Tzvelev): Rhizomes few, shortly creeping, forming tufts. Stems 30-80 cm. Leaves 2-5 mm wide, flat or with convolute margins; ligule up to 2·5 mm. Spikes 14-40 cm. Spikelets usually 18-25 mm, the lower shorter than the internodes of the rhachis, with 2-3 florets. Glumes 15-20 mm, narrowly oblong, 7- to 9-veined, obtuse. Lemma usually 13-17 mm, obtuse. Palea spinose-ciliate on keels in the upper half. Anthers 4·5-6 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Black Sea coast, from Bulgaria to Krym}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b rechingeri} (Runemark) Melderis,{\i  loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i Agropyron rechingeri} Runemark, {\i Elymus rechingeri} (Runemark) Runemark): Caespitose. Stems 15-45 cm, usually conspicuously swollen at the base. Leaves 1-1·5 mm wide (when flattened), convolute; lower sheaths rarely shortly hairy; ligule not more than 0·5 mm. Spikes 2-10 cm, erect or slightly curved. Spikelets 9-16 mm, with 2-6 florets. Glumes 5-12 mm, narrowly lanceolate to narrowly oblong, 4- to 5-veined, mucronulate or obtuse. Lemma 7-12 mm, lanceolate, usually with a very short mucro. Palea spinose-ciliate in upper half of keels. Anthers 4·5-5·5 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Maritime rocks. Aegean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\i  E. farctus} subsp.{\i  farctus} × {\i E. pycnanthus} and ×{\i  E. repens} are widespread in the Mediterranean region; subsp. boreali-atlanticus × E. pycnanthus (2n = 35) and subsp.{\i  boreali-atlanticus }× {\i E. repens} (2n = 35, 49) occur commonly on the west coast of Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\i  E. farctus} subsp.{\i  boreali-atlanticus} × {\i Leymus arenarius} occurs occasionally on maritime sands in the Baltic region. It is morphologically intermediate between the parents and is sterile.{\i  E. repens} × {\i Leymus arenarius} has also been recorded from maritime sands in arctic Russia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 49.     Agropyron}      Gaertner
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A. Melderis. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Leaves flat or more or less convolute; ligule short. Inflorescence a spike; rhachis tough. Spikelets solitary at each node of the rhachis, pectinate or imbricate, with 3-10 florets, strongly compressed laterally; rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes and beneath the florets. Glumes narrowly lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, with a wide scarious margin, prominently keeled, with 1-2 inconspicuous lateral veins. Lemma membranous, 5-veined, keeled, with or without a short awn. Palea as long as or slightly shorter than the lemma, 2-dentate at the apex, 2-keeled, coarsely ciliate on keels.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plants with long-creeping rhizomes; glumes lanceolate-
\par
  subulate, gradually tapering to a subulate apex;
\par
  palea with not more than 10 cilia on each keel
\par
2 Spikes 5-7 mm wide, linear; spikelets imbricate,
\par
  ascending ................................................................................... {\b 3. tanaiticum}
\par
2 Spikes 7-18 mm wide, broadly linear; spikelets ± 
\par
  pectinate, divergent from the rhachis at a wide angle
\par
3 Spikes dense; lower internodes of the rhachis 2-5 mm;
\par
  lemma acute or with an awn up to 2 mm ............................... {\b 1. cimmericum}
\par
3 Spikes lax; lower internodes of the rhachis 3-10 mm;
\par
  lemma unawned ....................................................................... {\b 2. dasyanthum} 
\par
1 Plant without creeping rhizomes; glumes lanceolate or
\par
  ovate-lanceolate, more or less abruptly tapering above,
\par
  acuminate or shortly awned; palea with at least 
\par
  10 cilia on each keel
\par
4 Spikes 1·5-7 cm × 8-23 mm, ovate, oblong or broadly
\par
  linear spikelets pectinate, divergent from the rhachis
\par
  at a wide angle ............................................................................. {\b 6. cristatum}
\par
4 Spikes 2·5-15 cm × 5-12 mm, linear; spikelets imbricate,
\par
  ascending
\par
5 Spikes 5-15 cm; glumes acuminate or with an awn not
\par
  more than 1·5 mm; lemma 6-8·5 mm, acute or with an awn
\par
  not more than 1 mm ......................................................................... {\b 4. fragile}
\par
5 Spikes 2·5-7·5 cm; glumes with an awn up to 3 mm; lemma
\par
  5-6 mm, with an awn 1-3 mm .................................................. {\b 5. desertorum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. cimmericum} Nevski, {\i Acta Univ. As. Med.} ser. 8b (Bot.), {\b 17}: 56 (1934). Rhizomatous perennial. Stems 25-50 cm. Leaves 2-4 mm wide, convolute, minutely hairy on the upper surface, glabrous beneath; sheaths usually glabrous; ligule c. 1 mm. Spikes 6-11 cm × 8-15 mm, linear, dense; rhachis more or less shortly hairy. Spikelets 7-9 mm, pectinate, divergent from the rhachis at a wide angle. Glumes 3·5-6 mm, narrowly lanceolate-subulate, usually glabrous, with an awn 1-2 mm. Lemma 6-7 mm, with long white hairs, acute or with an awn 0·5-2 mm. Palea with 1-10 cilia on each keel. Anthers 3·5-4 mm.{\i  Sandy and}
\par

\par
198}
\par