{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. tauricus} Steven,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  4}: 253 (1832). Like {\b 1} but perianth-segments white, with green veins; capsule broadly conical, subacute; seeds grey, with black spots and brownish streaks.{\i  Rocks and screes. • Mountains of Krym. }Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 10.          Simethis}           Kunth
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, more or less scapose perennial herbs with short, non-bulbous stock and fleshy roots. Leaves linear, with sheathing, scarious, fibrous base, usually all basal but sometimes 1-2 on lower part of stem. Flowers in a terminal panicle. Pedicels not articulated. Perianth-segments free, patent, 5- to 7-veined, white above, purplish beneath. Stamens and style straight; filaments villous, not dilated at the base; anthers dorsifixed, introrse. Fruit a loculicidal capsule; seeds 3-6.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. planifolia} (L.) Gren. in Gren. & Godron, {\i Fl. Fr.}{\b  3}: 222 (1855) ({\i S. bicolor} (Desf.) Kunth,{\i  Anthericum planifolium} L.). Stem 12-40 cm, erect, slender, flexuous. Leaves 15-60 cm × 2·5-7 mm, exceeding the stem. Inflorescence lax, with several erecto-patent branches, each with 3-7 flowers. Perianth-segments 9-11 mm, narrowly elliptical. Capsule c. 5 mm, depressed-globose. Seeds 4 mm, ovoid, black, with whitish strophiole. 2n = 48.{\i  Heaths, rocky ground and open Pinus-woods. S.W. Europe, extending northwards to S.W. Ireland and eastwards to W. Italy.} Co Ga Hb Hs It Lu Sa [†Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 11.       Aphyllanthes}           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, scapose perennial herbs with short, non-bulbous stock and fibrous roots. Leaves reduced to scarious sheaths. Flowers blue (rarely white), solitary or in compact clusters of 2-3, subtended by subterminal bracts and appearing terminal. Perianth segments free, 1-veined, the lower part erect, the upper more or less patent. Filaments glabrous, not dilated at base; anthers dorsifixed, introrse. Fruit a loculicidal capsule; seeds 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. monspeliensis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 294 (1753). Stems 20-50 cm, numerous, densely caespitose, slender, tough, somewhat glaucous. Leaf-sheaths 3-8 cm, reddish-brown. Involucre 8-10 mm, scarious, reddish-brown, consisting of 1-3 free, cuspidate bracts, and around each flower 5 obtuse bracteoles, connate at the base. Perianth-segments 15-20 mm, oblanceolate, the basal half concealed by the involucre. Seeds ovoid, black, rugulose. 2n = 32. {\i Dry places. S.W. Europe.} Bl Ga Hs It Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 12.        Hemerocallis}          L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, rhizomatous, more or less scapose perennial herbs with tuberous roots. Leaves mainly basal, distichous, linear. Stem erect, sometimes with a few small leaves. Inflorescence terminal, consisting of 2 subequal, cymose branches. Flowers yellow or reddish. Perianth infundibuliform, the tube shorter than the recurved lobes; veins numerous. Stamens and style curved upwards; filaments inserted on perianth-tube; anthers dorsifixed, introrse. Fruit a loculicidal capsule; seeds rather few.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: L. H. Bailey,{\i  Gentes Herb.}{\b  2}: 143-156 (1930).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Flowers bright yellow, fragrant; margins of perianth-lobes
\par
  plane ................................................................................... {\b 1. lilioasphodelus}
\par
Flowers dull orange, not fragrant; margins of inner 
\par
  perianth-lobes undulate ...................................................................... {\b 2. fulva}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. lilioasphodelus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 324 (1753) ({\i H. flava }L.). Stem 50-100 cm, leafless. Leaves 40-80 cm × 6-17 mm, acute, keeled. Inflorescence with 6-12 fragrant flowers. Perianth 60-100 mm, bright yellow, the tube 15-25 mm, the outer segments c. 15 mm wide, the inner c. 25 mm wide, all with plane margins and parallel veins without anastomoses. Capsule 3-4 × 2 cm, ellipsoid. Seeds 6 mm, ovoid, shining black.{\i  Rocky mountain woods and riversides. • Foothills of S.E. Alps and adjoining lowlands; long cultivated for ornament and widely naturalized elsewhere by rivers and in wet meadows.} It Ju [Au Cz Ga Ge Hu Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    The only native European representative of a genus otherwise confined to E. Asia. Despite its frequent naturalization elsewhere its native status in N.E. Italy and Slovenija seems fairly certain. As the species is self-sterile and spreads extensively by clonal growth capsules are rarely found.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. fulva} (L.) L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 462 (1762). Like {\b 1} but more robust; leaves up to 30 mm wide; flowers not fragrant; perianth with yellow tube and dull orange lobes, the outer c. 20 mm wide, the inner c. 30 mm wide with undulate margins; veins, especially of inner lobes, with numerous anastomoses; capsule never formed. {\i Cultivated for ornament} ({\i sometimes as a variant flore pleno}) {\i and widely naturalized, mainly in C. Europe, in damp meadows, on river-banks, and in open, rocky habitats.} [Au Cz Ga Ge He Hu It ?Ju Rm Rs (C, W).] ({\i China}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    It seems probable that all plants naturalized in Europe are sterile triploids with 2n = 33.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 13.       Phormium}    J.R.& G. Forster
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, rhizomatous perennial herbs. Leaves large, mostly basal, ensiform, distichous, equitant, very coriaceous and fibrous. Stem erect, with a few small cauline leaves, grading into bracts. Flowers brownish-red and yellow, in a large, terminal panicle, the primary branches racemose in arrangement, but the flowers on each branch cymose. Perianth with a short tube and erect lobes; veins numerous, inconspicuous. Anthers dorsifixed, introrse. Fruit a loculicidal capsule; seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. tenax} J. R. & G. Forster, {\i Char. Gen. Pl.} 24 (1775). Rhizome stout, short. Leaves up to 250 × 12 cm, suberect, the basal part keeled on outer and canaliculate on inner surface; midrib, margins and base often reddish. Stem, including panicle, up to 400 cm. Flowers erect; pedicels 1-4 cm. Perianth 3-5 cm; outer lobes dark brownish-red, the inner yellow, somewhat recurved at apex. Stamens exceeding perianth; filaments red. Ovary acuminate. Capsule 7-9 × 2 cm, fusiform, trigonous, often curved, dark brown. Seeds 9 × 4 mm, compressed, elliptical, black.{\i  Planted for ornament and shelter in Atlantic coastal districts, and locally naturalized.} [Az Br Hb.] ({\i New Zealand, Norfolk Island}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b P. colensoi} Hooker fil.,{\i  Rev. Hort.} ({\i Paris}) ser. 3, {\b 2}: 6 (1848), is also locally naturalized on maritime rocks in S.W. England (Isles of Scilly). It is like {\b 1}, but with leaves not more than 150 × 7 cm, stem not more than 225 cm, outer perianth-segments yellow, and capsule 10-17 cm, twisted. It is native to New Zealand.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 14.          Aloe}         L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs, or scapose perennial herbs. Leaves ovate to linear-acuminate, coriaceous, more or less succulent, spinose-dentate, usually aggregated into dense rosettes. Inflorescence of 1 or more axillary (often subterminal), bracteate racemes or panicles; flowers red, orange or yellow, pendent or deflexed at full anthesis.
\par

\par
19}
\par