{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 19 Lemma strigose on the back, sometimes shortly hairy
\par
   towards the apex .......................................................................... {\b 6. uralensis} 
\par
19 Lemma densely and shortly hairy in the lower part,
\par
   ± scabrid towards the apex ....................................................... {\b 8. macrourus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ELYMUS. Caespitose perennials. Spikes lax to dense; rhachis tough, spinose-ciliate on the main angles. Spikelets usually in groups of 2-3, usually with 3-5 florets. Glumes usually 2- to 4-veined, scabrid on veins, gradually tapering into an awn. Callus shortly hairy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. sibiricus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 83 (1753) ({\i Clinelymus sibiricus} (L.) Nevski). Stems 45-80 cm. Leaves 5-10 mm wide, flat, scabridulous on the upper surface, usually glabrous beneath; sheaths usually strigose or hairy. Spikes 7-20 cm, lax, drooping. Spikelets 10-12 mm (excluding awns), in pairs in the middle part of the rhachis, solitary in the basal and terminal parts. Glumes 4-5 mm, linear-subulate or narrowly lanceolate, 3-veined, gradually tapering into an awn 1-5 mm. Lemma c. 8 mm, strigulose, with an awn 15-20 mm. Palea spinose-ciliate on keels. Anthers c. 1 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Dry meadows and scrub. Casual in E. & E.C. Europe and locally naturalized in E. Russia}. [Rs (C).] ({\i Temperate Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. GOULARDIA (Husnot) Tzvelev. Caespitose. Spikes dense or lax, erect to drooping; rhachis tough, spinose-ciliate on the main angles. Spikelets solitary on the rhachis, usually with 3-5 florets. Glumes 3- to 9-veined, scabrid on the veins, acute or acuminate or with a mucro or a short awn. Callus shortly hairy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. panormitanus} (Parl.) Tzvelev,{\i  Sched. Herb. Fl. URSS}{\b  18}: 27 (1970) ({\i Agropyron panormitanum} Parl.). Stems 80-100 cm. Leaves 5-10 mm wide, flat, scabrid and often sparsely long-hairy on the upper surface, glabrous beneath; sheaths glabrous. Spikes 10-20 cm, rather lax. Spikelets 15-20 mm (excluding awns). Glumes 15-20 mm, exceeding the lower floret, 7- to 9-veined, gradually tapering into a short mucro. Lemma 12-15 mm, scabridulous towards the apex, with an awn 20-30 mm. Palea shortly ciliate on keels. Anthers c. 5 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Mountain woods. Mediterranean region and S.E. Europe.} ?Cr Gr Hs It Ju Rm Rs (K) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A variant with 4- to 6-veined glumes and awns of the lemma 4-8 mm occurs in S.W. Spain (Prov. Cádiz).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. E. trachycaulus} (Link) Gould ex Shinners,{\i  Rhodora }{\b 56}: 28 (1954) ({\i Roegneria pauciflora} (Schweinitz) Hyl.). Stems 50-100 cm. Leaves 2-4 mm wide, flat or with convolute margins, scabrid on the upper surface, glabrous beneath; sheaths usually glabrous. Spikes 9-20 cm, dense, usually erect, not secund; rhachilla glabrous. Spikelets 9-17 mm. Glumes 7-14 mm, nearly as long as the lower floret, lanceolate, sometimes with a tooth near the apex, 4- to 7-veined, acute or tapering into an awn up to 2 mm. Lemma 7-12 mm, glabrous below, strigulose towards the apex, acuminate or with an awn up to 1·5 mm. Palea shortly ciliate on keels. Anthers 1-1·5 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Widely cultivated for fodder in the U.S.S.R. and locally naturalized.} [Rs (B, C, W, E).] ({\i North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The plant here described is subsp.{\b  novae-angliae} (Scribner) Tzvelev,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc}. ({\i Leningrad}){\b  10}: 23 (1973). Subsp.{\b  trachycaulus}, which has laxer spikes with usually strigulose rhachilla, is a frequent casual in N. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. E. mutabilis} (Drobov) Tzvelev in Grubov,{\i  Pl. As. Centr.}{\b  4}: 217 (1968) ({\i Agropyron mutabile} Drobov, {\i Roegneria mutabilis} (Drobov) Hyl.). Stems 70-120 cm, glabrous, rarely shortly hairy at the nodes. Leaves 8-12 mm wide, flat, scabrid, sometimes sparsely long-hairy on the upper surface, glabrous beneath; sheaths glabrous or the lower more or less shortly hairy. Spikes 6-15 cm, dense, erect, sometimes secund. Spikelets 6-15 mm; rhachilla hairy. Glumes 7-10 mm, 4- to 5-veined, very scabrid on the veins and strigulose between them, sometimes with a tooth near the apex, gradually tapering into a mucro or an awn up to 2 mm. Lemma 9-12 mm, strigulose, rarely nearly glabrous, with an awn 2-4 mm. Palea spinose-ciliate on keels. Anthers 2-2·5 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Woods and scrub. Arctic Fennoscandia, N. & E. Russia.} Fe No Rs (N, C, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. E. caninus} (L.) L.,{\i  Fl. Suec.} ed. 2, 39 (1755) ({\i Agropyron caninum} (L.) Beauv., {\i Roegneria canina} (L.) Nevski,{\i  R. behmii} Melderis). Stems 30-110 cm, usually shortly hairy at and below the nodes. Leaves 4-10 mm wide, flat, finely veined, scabrid and usually sparsely long-hairy on the upper surface, glabrous beneath; sheaths glabrous or the lower shortly hairy. Spikes 5-20 cm, slender, usually nodding. Spikelets usually 10-15 mm; rhachilla hairy. Glumes 6-10 mm, 3- to 5-veined, scabrid on the veins, with a hyaline margin 0·2-0·4 mm wide which is widened below the apex, more or less gradually tapering into an awn up to 4 mm. Lemma 9-11 mm, glabrous below, often with minute scattered hairs towards the apex, with a flexuous awn 7-18 mm. Palea spinose-ciliate on keels. Anthers 2·5-3 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Woods; rarely in more exposed situations. Almost throughout Europe}. All except Az Bl Cr Fa Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A variable species, especially in the appearance of spike, presence of hairs on leaves and sheaths, number of florets in spikelet, size and shape of glumes and in length of awns on lemma. Shortly awned and unawned variants occur in very restricted areas of N., W. & C. Europe, and probably have originated through mutation from local populations. They have been described as species or varieties or forms, but are not well enough defined to merit subspecific rank. In addition, the hybrids between these variants and the typical variant prove to be highly fertile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Hybrids between {\b 5} and {\b 4} and between {\b 5} and {\b 9}({\b b}) are rather frequent in Scandinavia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. E. uralensis} (Nevski) Tzvelev, {\i Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 8}: 63 (1971). Stems c. 100 cm, shortly-hairy at or below the nodes. Leaves flat, with convolute margins. Spikes 8·5-17 cm, Spikelets c. 15 mm (excluding awns); rhachilla with short, appressed hairs. Glumes 8-10 mm, sometimes with a tooth at the apex, usually 5-veined, gradually tapering into an awn 3-7 mm. Lemma 8-11 mm, with an erect or slightly flexuous awn 8-18 mm. Palea shortly ciliate on keels. Anthers 2·5 mm. {\i Open woods and scrub; usually calcicole. E. Russia.} Rs (N, C, E)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b uralensis} ({\i Roegneria uralensis} (Nevski) Nevski): At least the lower leaves and sheaths shortly hairy. Spikes dense, erect, secund. Glumes often shortly hairy on the veins. Lemma strigose on the back, with short hairs towards the apex.{\i  S. Ural} ({\i S.W. of Magnitogorsk}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b viridiglumis} (Nevski) Tzvelev, {\i Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc}. ({\i Leningrad}){\b  8}: 63 (1971) ({\i Roegneria viridiglumis} Nevski, {\i R. taigae} Nevski): Leaves sparsely hairy above, glabrous beneath, the sheaths glabrous or the lowest shortly hairy. Spikes rather lax, slightly nodding, not secund. Glumes scabridulous or scabrid on the veins. Lemma sparsely strigose all over.{\i  Scattered localities in E. Russia, from} c. 53° 30' {\i to} 68°{\i  N}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. E. fibrosus} (Schrenk) Tzvelev, {\i Sched. Herb. Fl. URSS}{\b  18}: 29 (1970) ({\i Roegneria fibrosa} (Schrenk) Nevski). Stems usually 40-70 cm. Leaves 3-7 mm wide, flat, glabrous on both surfaces
\par

\par
193}
\par