{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 purple, in groups of 2-3 at each node of the rhachis. Glumes 4-8 mm, subulate, 1-veined, scabrid on the vein and on margins. Lemma 4-6 mm, broadly lanceolate, glabrous, shining, with an awn 2-3 mm.{\i  Saline meadows. W. Kazakhstan and Volga delta}. Rs (E). ({\i Siberia, C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. L. ramosus} (Trin.) Tzvelev, {\i loc. cit.} (1960) ({\i Aneurolepidium ramosum} (Trin.) Nevski). Perennial with long, creeping rhizomes. Stems 20-40 cm, branched at the base, fasciculate. Leaves 2-6 mm wide, convolute or flat, scabrid above and on margins, smooth beneath. Spikes 3·5-8 cm × 4-9 mm, linear, fairly lax; rhachis spinulose-ciliate on the main angles. Spikelets 10-13 mm, usually with 5-7 florets, solitary at each node of the rhachis. Glumes 5-8 mm, unequal, linear-subulate, without veins or obscurely 1-veined, the lower often rudimentary. Lemma 6-8 mm, glabrous, unawned or with an awn up to 2 mm.{\i  Steppes, disturbed ground and saline soils. E. Ukraine, S.E. Russia.} Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 48.         Elymus}        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Roegneria} Koch,{\i  Elytrigia }Desv.,
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\i  Clinelymus} (Griseb.) Nevski)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A. Melderis. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Caespitose or rhizomatous perennials. Leaves flat or more or less convolute; ligule short. Inflorescence a spike; rhachis usually tough. Spikelets solitary or in groups of 2-3 at each node, nearly sessile, usually imbricate, with 2-11 florets; rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes and beneath each floret or sometimes spikelets falling entire at maturity. Glumes 1- to 11-veined, unawned or with a short awn. Lemma lanceolate, 5-veined. Palea 2-keeled.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Hybrids occur between many of the species and are usually intermediate between the parents and male-sterile. Only the commonest and most widespread are mentioned in the following account.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  E. canadensis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 83 (1753), {\b E. smithii} (Rydb.) Gould, {\i Madroño}{\b  9}: 127 (1947), {\b E. subsecundus} (Link) Á. & D. Löve, {\i Taxon}{\b  13}: 201 (1964) ({\i Triticum subsecundum} Link), {\b E. villosus} Muhl. ex Willd., {\i Enum. Pl. Horti Berol.} 131 (1809) and{\b  E. virginicus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 84 (1753), all native of North America, and{\b  E. dahuricus} Turcz. ex Griseb. in Ledeb., {\i Fl. Ross}.{\b  4}: 331 (1852) ({\i Clinelymus dahuricus} (Turcz. ex Griseb.) Nevski), widespread in temperate Asia, have been recorded, mainly from N. Europe, but do not at present seem to be naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: S.A. Nevski,{\i  Acta Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS} ({\i Ser}. 1){\b  2}: 43-56, 75-85 (1936). P.F.A. Ascherson & K.O.P.P. Graebner, {\i Synopsis der mitteleuropäischen Flora}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 640-667. Leipzig. 1901. Y. Cauderon, {\i Étude cytogénétique des} Agropyrum{\i  français et de leurs Hybrides avec les Blés.} Paris. 1958.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spikelets in pairs in the middle part of the spike;
\par
  glumes 4-5 mm ............................................................................. {\b 1. sibiricus}
\par
1 Spikelets solitary at each node of the rhachis; glumes 
\par
  usually more than 5 mm
\par
2 Plant with long rhizomes, not forming dense tufts
\par
3 Rhachis fragile, disarticulating at maturity, glabrous
\par
  on the main angles ......................................................................... {\b 22. farctus}
\par
3 Rhachis tough, not disarticulating at maturity, spinose-
\par
  ciliate on the main angles
\par
4 Glumes acute, mucronate or shortly awned
\par
5 Leaves usually tightly convolute, with prominent, closely 
\par
  crowded, flattened veins bearing rigid spinules on the 
\par
  upper surface; lower sheaths ciliate; rhachis glabrous ........... {\b 17. pycnanthus}
\par
5 Leaves usually flat, with fine or prominent, not 
\par
  closely crowded, rounded, often sparsely long-hairy 
\par
  veins on the upper surface; lower sheaths usually not
\par
  ciliate; rhachis sometimes shortly hairy ......................................... {\b 18. repens}
\par
4 Glumes muticous but sometimes subacute
\par
6 Glumes usually oblong, obtuse to obliquely truncate,
\par
  indurate-coriaceous; leaves with conspicuously indurate
\par
  margins; sheaths ciliate ............................................................... {\b 20. hispidus}
\par
6 Glumes usually lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate,
\par
  subacute, coriaceous; leaves without conspicuously 
\par
  indurate margins; sheaths usually not ciliate
\par
7 Leaves flat, with convolute margins, prominently veined;
\par
  glumes 6·5-9·6 mm, 4- to 7-veined ............................................. {\b 19. pungens}
\par
7 Leaves usually convolute, not prominently veined;
\par
  glumes 4-6 mm, 3- to 5-veined ................................................... {\b 21. lolioides} 
\par
2 Plant caespitose, without rhizomes
\par
8 Glumes smooth, only the mid-vein sometimes with a few 
\par
  spinules towards the apex; anthers 4-7 mm; leaves 
\par
  usually convolute
\par
9 Internodes of the rhachis on the side facing spikelets
\par
  nearly flat; glumes obtuse or obliquely truncate to 
\par
  truncate, sometimes slightly emarginate or apiculate
\par
10 Rhachis tough, usually spinose-ciliate on the main 
\par
   angles ..................................................................... ({\b 13-16}). {\b elongatus} group
\par
10 Rhachis fragile, glabrous on the main angles ............................. {\b 22. farctus}
\par
9  Internodes of the rhachis on the side facing spikelets
\par
   concave; glumes subacute to acuminate
\par
11 Lemma with an awn 8-25 mm, divergent at nearly a right
\par
   angle at maturity; glumes subacute to acuminate;
\par
   sheaths usually not ciliate ................................................ {\b 10. reflexiaristatus}
\par
11 Lemma unawned; glumes subacute; sheaths usually ciliate
\par
12 Lower glume usually 7-9 mm, 1-2 mm shorter than the 
\par
   lower floret, 5- to 7-veined; rhachis densely spinose-
\par
   ciliate on the main angles ........................................................ {\b 11. stipifolius}
\par
12 Lower glume usually 5-7 mm, 2-3 mm shorter than the 
\par
   lower floret, 3- to 5-veined; rhachis glabrous or 
\par
   sparsely spinose-ciliate on the main angles ........................... {\b 12. bungeanus}
\par
8  Glumes more or less scabrid on the veins; anthers 
\par
   usually 1-3·5 mm; leaves usually flat
\par
13 Glumes nearly as long as or longer than the lower 
\par
   floret with a narrow hyaline margin, not widened below
\par
   the apex, with crowded, nearly parallel veins
\par
14 Glumes 14-20 mm, usually exceeding the lower floret, widest
\par
   in the lower half, 7- to 9-veined; anthers c. 5 mm ............... {\b 2. panormitanus}
\par
14 Glumes less than 14 mm, usually slightly shorter than
\par
   the lower floret,widest in the middle, 4- to 7-veined;
\par
   anthers less than 2·5 mm
\par
15 Glumes thin, membranous, 4- to 5-veined, very scabrid
\par
   on and between the veins; lemma strigose; awn 2-4 mm;
\par
   anthers 2-2·5 mm ........................................................................ {\b 4. mutabilis}
\par
15 Glumes thick, firm, 4- to 7-veined, scabrid on the 
\par
   veins, glabrous between them; lemma glabrous below 
\par
   scabrid towards the apex; awn not more than 1·5 mm;
\par
   anthers 1-1·5 mm ................................................................... {\b 3. trachycaulus}
\par
13 Glumes distinctly shorter than the lower floret, with
\par
   veins not crowded
\par
16 Glumes widest above the middle, asymmetrical near the
\par
   apex, usually abruptly tapering into a short awn.
\par
   with a hyaline margin 0·7-1 mm wide ....................................... {\b 9. alaskanus}
\par
16 Glumes widest below the middle, nearly symmetrical at
\par
   the apex, more or less gradually or abruptly tapering 
\par
   into a short awn or unawned, with a hyaline margin 
\par
   0·2-0·4 mm wide
\par
17 Lemma with scattered short spinules only in the upper 
\par
   part and mainly on the veins
\par
18 Nodes usually hairy; glumes 6-10 mm, 3- to 5-veined ± 
\par
   abruptly tapering into a short awn; lemma usually long-awned ... {\b 5. caninus}
\par
18 Nodes glabrous; glumes 5-7 mm, usually 3-veined, acute;
\par
   lemma unawned, acuminate ......................................................... {\b 7. fibrosus}
\par
17 Lemma strigose or shortly hairy
\par

\par
192}
\par