{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 3. B. retusum} (Pers.) Beauv.,{\i  Agrost.} 101, 155 (1812) ({\i B. ramosum} Roemer & Schultes). Occasionally woody at base; rhizomes partly or wholly above ground, extensively branched; stems 15-50 cm, erect or geniculately ascending, slender, glabrous. Leaves up to 10 cm × 2-4 mm, often less, with prominent, equally spaced veins, flat, tough, becoming convolute when dry, acute, the cauline patent, distichous; ligule c. 1 mm. Raceme 4-9 cm, dense, stiffly erect, with 1-5(-7) spikelets. Spikelets (12-)20-30 mm, linear, overlapping considerably, glabrous, glaucous, with (6-)10-15 florets. Glumes acute, the lower 4-5 mm, the upper 6-7 mm. Lemma 7-8 mm, ovate-lanceolate, abruptly narrowed to the apex; awn 2-4 mm, straight, sometimes absent on lower lemmas. Anthers 3·5-5 mm. 2n = 18. {\i Dry, rocky places. Mediterranean region and S.W. Europe.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. B. phoenicoides} (L.) Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 740 (1817). Rhizomes branched; stems (40-)50-80(-100) cm, erect. Leaves 10-40 cm × 3-5 mm, flat, more or less flaccid, or convolute and somewhat rigid, appearing 1-1·5 mm wide, some veins more prominent than others; ligule 1-1·5 mm. Raceme 15-20(-30) cm, narrow, erect, of 6-9(-13) somewhat remote spikelets. Spikelets (20-)30-60(-80) mm, linear, often falcate. Lower glume 4-6 mm, the upper 5-7·5 mm, mucronate or very shortly awned. Lemma 8-10 mm, ovate-lanceolate, abruptly narrowed to the apex, mucronate or very shortly awned. Awns, when present, 1-2·5 mm. Anthers 4-6 mm. 2n = 28. {\i Dry, usually open habitats. Mediterranean region and S.W. Europe.} Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. TRACHYNIA (Link) Nyman ({\i Trachynia }Link). Annuals. Leaves flat, usually flaccid. Raceme short, stiffly erect, of 1-2(-6) spikelets. Spikelets laterally compressed. Glumes and lemmas coriaceous. Anthers not more than 1 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. B. distachyon} (L.) Beauv., {\i Agrost.} 101, 155 (1812) ({\i Trachynia distachya} (L.) Link). Stems 2-15(-45) cm, geniculately ascending or stiffly erect, glabrous. Leaves 1-12 cm × 3-4 mm, glaucous, hairy; ligule c. 1 mm or vestigial. Raceme 2-4 cm. Spikelets 20-30 mm, oblong-lanceolate, dull green or glaucous, glabrous or hairy, diverging from the raceme-axis, with 6-16(-30) florets. Lower glume 5-6 mm, the upper 7-8 mm, acute, prominently veined. Lemma 8-10 mm, lanceolate, prominently veined; awn 7-15 mm, straight. 2n = 10, 28, ?30. {\i Dry, usually open habitats. S. Europe; an occasional casual elsewhere.} Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe      {\b Triticeae}        Dumort.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves linear, flat or convolute; silica-bodies oblong to elliptical; 2-celled micro-hairs absent; ligule membranous. Inflorescence a spike or spike-like raceme. Spikelets all hermaphrodite, or some male or sterile, solitary or in groups of 2-6, sessile or subsessile on alternate sides of the rhachis; florets 1-many. Glumes coriaceous, strongly veined, half as long to almost as long as the spikelet, inserted laterally. Lemma chartaceous to coriaceous, unawned or awned from the apex, keeled or rounded on the back. Palea 2-keeled. Lodicules 2, entire or more or less toothed, ciliate. Stamens 3. Ovary hairy at apex; styles 2, short. Grain with a linear hilum as long as the grain. Starch-grains simple. Chromosomes large; basic number 7.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 46.        Festucopsis}            (C. E. Hubbard) Melderis
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Brachypodium} Sect. {\i Festucopsis} C. E. Hubbard)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A. Melderis. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Caespitose perennials with intravaginal non-flowering shoots. Leaves tightly inrolled, rarely conduplicate; leaf-sheaths of the non-flowering shoots closed; ligule very short. Inflorescence spike-like. Spikelets cylindrical, slightly compressed laterally, erect, with 5-8 florets, smooth and glabrous. Glumes subequal, somewhat asymmetrical, coriaceous, with a narrow membranous margin, shorter than the lower floret, the lower 1- to 3-veined, the upper 3- to 6-veined. Lemmas closely imbricate, coriaceous, usually 5-veined, awned or unawned. Palea 2-keeled, stiffly ciliolate on the keels in the upper part. Ovary hairy at the top.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: C. E. Hubbard,{\i  Hook. Ic.} ser. 5, {\b 3}: t. 3280 (1935). F. Markgraf,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  74}: 268-270 (1948).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Stems not more than 40 cm; basal leaf-sheaths disinteg-
\par
  rating into ± parallel fibres; glumes unawned; lower 
\par
  lemmas with an awn up to 4·5 mm, the upper unawned ............ {\b 1. serpentini} 
\par
Stems more than 40 cm; basal leaf-sheaths disintegrating
\par
  into a mass of reticulate fibres; glumes usually shortly
\par
  awned; all lemmas with an awn more than 4·5 mm ......................... {\b 2. sancta}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. serpentini} (C. E. Hubbard) Melderis, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 317 (1978) ({\i Brachypodium serpentini} C. E. Hubbard). Stems up to 40 cm. Leaves up to 12 cm × 0·5 mm, filiform-setaceous, inrolled or conduplicate, minutely puberulent on the inside, smooth and glabrous on the outside; leaf-sheaths disintegrating into more or less parallel fibres. Spikes 4·5-6·5 cm, with 6-14 spikelets. Spikelets 1·6-2·4 cm, whitish-green. Glumes elliptic-oblong, acute, the lower 7-9 mm, 3-veined, the upper 8-10 mm, 3- to 5-veined. Lower lemmas 9-12 mm, 5- to 6-veined, with an awn 2·5-4·5 mm, the upper usually unawned. Palea shorter than the lemma. Anthers 3-3·5 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Serpentine rocks. • S.E. Albania.} Al.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. F. sancta} (Janka) Melderis, {\i op. cit.} 319 (1978) ({\i Festuca sancta} Janka, {\i Brachypodium sanctum} (Janka) Janka, {\i Agropyron sanctum }(Janka) Hackel). Stems 45-110 cm. Leaves 7-30 cm × 2-3 mm usually inrolled, minutely scabridulous on the inside, smooth and glabrous on the outside; leaf-sheaths disintegrating into a mass of reticulate fibres. Spikes 7-9 cm, with 5-8 spikelets. Spikelets 1-1·2(-1·5) cm, green. Glumes lanceolate, usually with an awn up to 1·5 mm, the lower 6-7 mm, 1- to 3-veined, the upper 8-9 mm, 3- to 5-veined. Lemmas 9-10 mm, 5-veined, with an awn 4·5-9 mm. Palea nearly as long as or slightly longer than the lemma. Anthers 4 mm.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • Mountains of N. Greece and S.W. Bulgaria.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 47.        Leymus}       Hochst.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A. Melderis. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizomatous perennials. Leaves flat or convolute, glaucous, scabrid, rarely shortly hairy on veins above, glabrous beneath; ligule short. Inflorescence a spike; rhachis tough. Spikelets subsessile, usually imbricate, with 3-5(-7) florets; rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes and beneath each floret. Glumes narrowly lanceolate to linear-subulate, covering the sides of the lower florets, 1- to 5-veined, glabrous or hairy, not or shortly awned. Lemma lanceolate, 5- to 7-veined, not or shortly awned. Palea nearly as long as the lemma, 2-keeled.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Glumes 2·2-3·2 mm wide, with 3-5 distinct veins; spike-
\par
  lets in pairs at each node of the rhachis ....................................... {\b 1. arenarius} 
\par
1 Glumes not more than 2 mm wide, with 1-3 obscure veins
\par
2 Spikelets solitary at each node of the rhachis .............................. {\b 7. ramosus}
\par
2 Spikelets in groups of 2-4(-7) at each node of the rhachis 
\par
3 Keels of the palea glabrous, or aculeolate only near 
\par
  the apex; spike robust; spikelets usually in groups of 
\par
  3-4(-6) at each node of the rhachis ............................................ {\b 2. racemosus}
\par

\par
190}
\par