{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pungens}: Stems 40-50 cm. Leaves c. 2·5 mm wide lower sheaths minutely hairy, not ciliate. Spikes c. 8·5 cm. Spikelets 14-18 mm. Glumes oblong, coriaceous, slightly scabrid on the keel near the apex. Lemma 8·5-10 mm, subobtuse, with a very short mucro. Palea with rather long, spinose cilia on keels. Anthers 4 mm.{\i  N. & C. Spain, N. Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b campestris} (Godron & Gren.) Melderis, {\i loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i Agropyron campestre} Godron & Gren.): Stems 50-100 cm. Leaves up to 10 mm wide; sheaths sometimes ciliate. Spikes 15-25 cm. Spikelets 13-17 mm, with 5-9 florets. Glumes lanceolate or elliptical, acute or subacute, with a very short mucro. Palea spinose-ciliate on keels. Anthers 4-4·5 mm. 2n = 56. {\i From N.W. France to Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b fontqueri} Melderis,{\i  loc. cit. }(1978): Stems 40-65 cm. Leaves up to 5 mm wide; sheaths pubescent, nearly always ciliate. Spikes 7-15 cm. Spikelets 10-13 mm, with 4-7 florets. Glumes oblong, usually shortly pubescent on and between the veins, acute or subobtuse. Lemma 9·5-11 mm, minutely pubescent or sometimes with few short hairs on the surface, especially near the apex. Palea sometimes with rather long cilia on keels. Anthers 3-3·5 mm.{\i  S. & S.E. Spain, Islas Baleares, }?{\i E.C. Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. E. hispidus} (Opiz) Melderis, {\i loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i Agropyron hispidum} Opiz, {\i A. intermedium} (Host) Beauv., non {\i Elymus intermedius} Bieb.): Stems 40-115 cm. Leaves 2-7 mm wide, flat or more or less convolute, glaucous-green, scabrid and with sparse long hairs on the upper surface, glabrous beneath; sheaths usually ciliate. Spikes erect, rather dense to lax. Spikelets laterally compressed, usually with 4-5 florets, usually glabrous; rhachilla shortly strigulose. Glumes slightly unequal, oblong or lanceolate-oblong, keeled, somewhat scabrid on the keel near the apex, obtuse or obliquely truncate to truncate. Lemma keeled towards the apex, subobtuse. Palea spinose-ciliate on keels.{\i  Dry, usually sandy or stony ground. Europe, northwards to C. France and to} c. 56° {\i N. in C. Russia.} Al Au Bu ?Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Extremely variable in characters of leaf, spike and spikelet. Several species and a large number of minor taxa have been described within this complex, of which at least 5 seem to be worth subspecific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spikes linear; spikelets with 1-3 florets, very closely
\par
  appressed to and partly embedded in the rhachis ........... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b pouzolzii}
\par
1 Spikes broadly linear; spikelets with 4-many florets,
\par
  not very closely appressed to the rhachis
\par
2 Leaves densely and shortly hairy on the upper surface . ({\b d}) subsp. {\b varnensis}
\par
2 Leaves scabrid, sometimes with sparse long hairs on the
\par
  upper surface
\par
3 Leaves scabrid on the upper surface; spikes 20-30 cm, 
\par
  lax; spikelets usually 15-20 mm, conspicuously shorter
\par
  than the internodes in the lower part of the rhachis .......... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b graecus}
\par
3 Leaves scabrid and with sparse long hairs on the upper 
\par
  surface; spikes 10-25 cm, rather dense; spikelets 
\par
  usually 10-15 mm, nearly as long as the internodes in 
\par
  the lower part of the rhachis
\par
4 Spikelets glabrous ............................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b hispidus}
\par
4 Spikelets hairy ............................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b barbulatus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b hispidus}: Stems 60-100 cm. Leaves with prominent veins and conspicuously indurate margins, scabrid and usually also with sparse long hairs on the upper surface, glabrous beneath. Spikes 10-20 cm, fairly dense. Spikelets usually 10-15 mm, glabrous. Glumes 5-8 × 2-3 mm. Lemma 8-11 mm, sometimes mucronate or shortly awned. Anthers 5-6·5 mm. 2n = 42 (28, 43).{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b barbulatus} (Schur) Melderis,{\i  op. cit.} 381 (1978) ({\i Agropyron barbulatum} Schur, {\i A. intermedium} subsp. {\i trichophorum} (Link) Ascherson & Graebner): Stems 60-100 cm. Leaves long-hairy and scabrid on the upper surface, scabrid and sometimes hairy beneath; lower sheaths sometimes hairy on the surface. Spikes 10-25 cm; rhachis more or less hairy. Spikelets 9-18 mm, hairy. Glumes 5-8·5 × 2-2·5 mm. Lemma 8-11 mm, sometimes with an awn 1-10 mm, glabrous on the back below, rarely villous. Anthers up to 8 mm. 2n = 42 (28). {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b graecus} Melderis,{\i  loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i Agropyron litorale} auct. graec. pro parte, non Dumort.): Stems 80-100 cm. Leaves with close, prominent, often flattened scabrid veins on the upper surface. Spikes 20-30 cm, lax. Spikelets 15-20 mm, conspicuously shorter than the internodes in the lower part of the rhachis. Glumes 6·5-8·5 mm, lanceolate-oblong, obliquely truncate or obtuse, abruptly contracted into an apiculum. Lemma 9-12 mm. Anthers c. 7·5 mm. •{\i  S.E. Greece} ({\i Attiki})
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp {\b varnensis} (Velen.) Melderis, {\i op. cit.} 382 (1978) ({\i Triticum varnense} Velen.,{\i  Agropyron varnense} (Velen.) Hayek): Stems 60-100 cm. Leaves rigid, rather prominently veined, densely and minutely hairy on the veins of the upper surface. Spikes up to 30 cm, lax. Spikelets 15-20 mm, shorter than the internodes in the lower part of the rhachis. Glumes 7-10 mm, 5- to 7-veined, firm, obtuse. Lemma 9-11 mm, obtuse or with a very short mucro. {\i Maritime sands. • E. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b pouzolzii} (Godron) Melderis,{\i  loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i Triticum pouzolzii} Godron,{\i  T. rottboellioides} (Mandon ex Husnot) Duval-Jouve ex Ascherson & Graebner): Stems 40-115 cm. Leaves with prominent scabridulous veins on the upper surface. Spikes 6-14 cm, linear, lax. Spikelets 8-10 mm, with 1-3 florets, distant, closely appressed to and partly embedded in the rhachis. Glumes 5-7 mm, usually 4- to 5-veined, strongly keeled, glabrous, obtuse, with a very short mucro. Lemma c. 6 mm, subobtuse.{\i  Field-margins. • S. & W. France}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    A striking variant, var.{\i  epiroticus} Melderis, with spikes 23-26 cm, rhachis of the spike densely and minutely hairy, glumes 8·5-11 mm, gradually tapering into a short awn, with a dense indumentum of short, appressed hairs on and between the veins, has been found in N.W. Greece. It might be given a higher status if more complete material were available for investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. E. lolioides} (Kar. & Kir.) Melderis,{\i  loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i Triticum lolioides} Kar. & Kir., {\i Agropyron lolioides} (Kar. & Kir.) P. Candargy). Stems 30-70 cm. Leaves convolute or rarely flat, 5-6 mm wide, with convolute margins, prominently but rather finely veined, densely and shortly hairy, often also with sparse long hairs on veins of the upper surface, glabrous beneath; sheaths glabrous. Spikes 7-15 cm, rather lax Spikelets 10-15 mm, usually with 5-7 florets, glabrous; rhachilla strigulose. Glumes 4-6 mm, 2/3-3/4 as long as the lower floret, elliptical, 3- to 5-veined, obtuse, with conspicuous scarious-hyaline margins. Lemma 7-8·5 mm, subobtuse, often with a very short mucro. Palea spinose-ciliate on keels. Anthers c. 3·5 mm. 2n = ?58.{\i  Dry places. C. & S. Russia}. Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. JUNCEAE (Prat) Melderis. Rhizomatous or caespitose. Spikes usually lax, erect or somewhat curved, rhachis fragile disarticulating at maturity, glabrous on the main angles. Spikelets solitary on the rhachis, with 2-9 florets. Glumes 5-18 mm keeled, lanceolate to narrowly oblong, glabrous on the veins obtuse to truncate, 4- to 12-veined. Callus glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. E. farctus} (Viv.) Runemark ex Melderis,{\i  loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i Triticum junceum} L., non{\i  Elymus junceus} Fischer, {\i T. farctum} Viv., {\i Agropyron junceum} (L.) Beauv.). Stems rigid. Leaves
\par

\par
197}
\par