{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 or scabridulous on the upper; sheaths glabrous or the lower shortly hairy. Spikes 6-15 cm, narrow, lax, drooping, usually purplish; rhachis spinose-ciliate on the main angles. Spikelets 10-13 mm, with 2-3 florets; rhachilla hairy. Glumes 5-7 mm, 3-veined, acuminate. Lemma 9-11 mm, glabrous below, scabridulous towards the apex, acuminate-subulate. Palea ciliate on keels. Anthers c. 2 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Meadows, scrub and river-gravels. N. Finland and N. & C. Russia, southwards to} c. 51° 30' {\i N.} Fe Rs (N, C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. E. macrourus} (Turcz.) Tzvelev,{\i  op. cit.} 30 (1970). Stems 25-100 cm. Leaves 3-7 mm wide, flat; sheaths glabrous. Spikes narrow, erect; rhachis spinose-ciliate on the main angles. Spikelets pale green or purplish; rhachilla villous. Glumes 1/2-2/3 as long as the lower floret, elliptic-lanceolate, scabrid on the veins, with a narrow hyaline margin, unawned or with an awn up to 1 mm. Lemma c. 10 mm, densely hairy below, sparsely strigose or nearly glabrous towards the apex, acute or with an awn up to 1·5 mm. Palea densely and shortly ciliate on keels.{\i  River-sands and gravels. E. part of arctic and subarctic Russia.} Rs (N). ({\i Siberia to Canada.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b macrourus} ({\i Roegneria macroura} (Turcz.) Nevski): Laxly caespitose. Leaves scabridulous above, smooth beneath. Spikes usually 15-30 cm, with distinctly spaced spikelets especially in the lower part of the rhachis. Spikelets c. 20 mm, with 5-7 florets. Glumes usually 7-10 mm, acute. Anthers 2 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Near Vorkuta}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b turuchanensis} (Reverdatto) Tzvelev,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 8}: 63 (1971) ({\i Roegneria turuchanensis }(Reverdatto) Nevski): Densely caespitose. Leaves shortly hairy at least above. Spikes 5-10 cm, fairly dense, with approximate spikelets. Spikelets usually 10-15 mm, with 3-5 florets. Glumes 4-6 mm more or less obtuse, finely toothed at apex. Anthers 1·5 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. E. alaskanus} (Scribner & Merrill) Á. Löve, {\i Taxon}{\b  19}: 299 (1970) ({\i E. kronokensis} (Komarov) Tzelev). Stems usually 45-60 cm, shortly hairy at the nodes. Leaves flat; sheaths glabrous or the lower long-hairy. Spikes 4-8 cm, erect, usually dense, pale green or purplish, pruinose. Spikelets usually 10-12 mm; rhachilla densely strigulose. Glumes 5-10 mm, with a wide hyaline margin, wider and asymmetrical near the apex, usually abruptly narrowed into a short awn, usually scabridulous on the veins. Lemma 7-9 mm, usually glabrous below, scabridulous towards the apex, with an awn 2-4 mm. Palea shortly ciliate on keels. Anthers 1·6-2 mm.{\i  River-banks, rocks and stony slopes. Iceland, N & W. Fennoscandia, N. Russia.} Fe Is No Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A polymorphic circumpolar species with several subspecies, 3 of which occur in Europe. The typical subspecies occurs in N.E. Asia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves 1·5-2·5 mm wide, shortly hairy on the upper surface; 
\par
  spikes 2-4 mm wide, fairly lax; glumes 4-7 × 1·5-2 mm .. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b borealis}
\par
1 Leaves 3-4 mm wide, scabrid, often sparsely long-hairy 
\par
  on the veins of the upper surface; spikes usually 
\par
  4-6 mm wide dense; glumes 5-10 × 2-2·5 mm
\par
2 Glumes 5-8 mm, obovate to oblong-obovate, abruptly 
\par
  narrowed at the apex into an awn not more than 1 mm and
\par
  with a hyaline margin 0·7-1 mm wide ........................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b scandicus}
\par
2 Glumes 7-10 mm, oblong lanceolate, gradually narrowed 
\par
  at the apex into an awn up to 2 mm and with a hyaline
\par
  margin 0·5-0·8 mm wide ............................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b subalpinus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b borealis} (Turcz.) Melderis,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 374 (1978) ({\i Triticum boreale} Turcz., non{\i  Elymus borealis} Scribner,{\i  Roegneria borealis} (Turcz.) Nevski): Stems 20-60 cm, slender. Spikelets 9-10 mm, usually with 2, rarely 3 florets. Glumes 4-7 mm,3- to 5-veined, scabridulous on the veins. Lemma 7-8 mm, glabrous below, scabridulous towards the apex. 2n = 28.{\i  N.E. Russia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b scandicus} (Nevski) Melderis,{\i  op. cit.} 375 (1978) ({\i Roegneria scandica} Nevski): Stems 30-45 cm, slender. Spikelets 10-12 mm, with 2-4 florets. Glumes 5-8 mm usually 5-veined, scabridulous on the veins, rarely shortly hairy. Lemma 8-9 mm, glabrous below, scabridulous towards the apex, rarely shortly hairy. 2n = 28. •{\i  Iceland, N. Fennoscandia, N. Russia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b subalpinus} (Neuman) Melderis, {\i loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i Triticum violaceum} forma {\i subalpinum} Neuman): Stems 40-65 cm, fairly robust. Spikelets 12-15 mm, with 3-5 florets. Glumes 7-10 mm, 5-veined, scabridulus on veins. Lemma 8-10 mm, glabrous below, scabridulous towards the apex. •{\i  Mountains of S. & C. Fennoscandia.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. CAESPITOSAE (Rouy) Melderis. Caespitose. Spikes rather lax, erect; rhachis tough, spinose-ciliate or nearly glabrous on the main angles. Spikelets solitary on the rhachis, usually with 3-5 florets. Glumes 5-8 mm, lanceolate or narrowly lanceolate, 5-to 9(-11)-veined, usually glabrous on the veins, acuminate to subacute or obtuse to truncate. Callus glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. E. reflexiaristatus} (Nevski) Melderis,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 375 (1978) ({\i Agrophyron reflexiaristatum} Nevski). Glaucous-green. Stems slender. Leaves usually convolute, densely and minutely hairy on the upper surface, glabrous beneath; sheaths usually not ciliate. Spikes 7·5-15 cm (excluding awns), narrow. Spikelets nearly as long as the internodes of the rhachis; rhachilla glabrous. Glumes usually 6-9 mm, slightly shorter than the lower floret, glabrous, 5- to 7-veined. Lemma 7-10 mm, glabrous, with awn 8-25 mm, divergent at nearly a right angle.{\i  Rocks and stony slopes; calcicole. Ural and adjacent lowlands; Krym}. Rs (N, C, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b reflexiaristatus}: Stems 45-80 cm. Leaves up to 4 mm wide (when flattened), convolute. Rhachis nearly glabrous on the main angles. Spikelets usually 14-20 mm, with 5 florets. Glumes narrowly lanceolate or lanceolate, subacute. Awn strongly scabrid. Anthers 5·5-6 mm.{\i  Ural and adjacent lowlands}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b strigosus} (Bieb.) Melderis,{\i  op. cit.} 376 (1978) ({\i Bromus strigosus} Bieb.,{\i  Agropyron strigosum} (Bieb.) Boiss. non{\i  Elymus strigosus} Rydb.): Stems 50-60 cm. Leaves up to 3 mm wide (when flattened), convolute, rarely nearly flat. Rhachis slightly spinose-ciliate on the main angles. Spikelets usually 11-13 mm, with 4-5 florets. Glumes narrowly lanceolate, acuminate. Awn scabridulous. Anthers c. 5 mm. 2n = 14 (28). •{\i  Mountains of Krym}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. E. stipifolius} (Czern. ex Nevski) Melderis,{\i  loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i Agropyron stipifolium} Czern. ex Nevski). Stems 40-90 cm. Leaves 2-3 mm wide (when flattened), convolute or flat with convolute margins, rather rigid, pungent, scabridulous on the upper surface, smooth beneath, scabrid on the indurate margins; at least the lower sheaths glabrous or shortly hairy, ciliate. Spikes 7-15 cm, slender, lax; rhachis rather densely spinose-ciliate on the main angles. Spikelets 12-17 mm, usually with 4-5 florets; rhachilla glabrous. Glumes 7-11 × 2-2·2 mm, lanceolate, glabrous, 5- to 6-veined, subacute, the lower 7-9 mm, 1-2 mm shorter than the lower floret. Lemma 10-11 mm, glabrous, unawned. Palea shortly ciliate on keels in the upper part. Anthers 5-6 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Steppes and rocky slopes. S. & E. Ukraine and adjacent regions of S. Russia.} Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par
194}
\par