{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Filaments of stamens linear, glabrous; anthers yellow. Fruitlets 2·5-4 mm, with a more or less elongated, horizontal ventral beak.{\i  Naturalized in various parts of Europe.} [Cz Ga Ge He It Rm Rs (C).] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. rigida} Pursh,{\i  Fl. Amer. Sept.}{\b  2}: 397 (1814). Monoecious. Aerial leaves linear to elliptical or ovate, sometimes with 2 short basal lobes. Flowers in racemes; bracts connate towards the base; female flowers subsessile or shortly pedicellate; fruiting peduncle usually bent below the infructescence. Petals 8-14 mm, white. Filaments of male flowers dilated, pubescent. Fruitlets 3-4 mm, with a long, oblique subventral beak.{\i  Naturalized in S.W. England}. [Br.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   {\b 2.            Baldellia}             Parl.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves aerial, elliptical to lanceolate or linear-lanceolate. Flowers hermaphrodite, in 1-3 whorls in umbels or racemes, or long-pedunculate in leaf-axils. Stamens 6. Carpels numerous, spirally arranged in a globose head, free, each with 1 ovule; styles apical. Fruitlets achenial, longitudinally 5-ribbed (3 dorsal ribs and 2 closely approximated ventral ribs), with a short, apical beak.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, tapered to the 
\par
  apex and base, gradually decurrent into the petiole ............. {\b 1. ranunculoides} 
\par
Leaves elliptical, rounded at the apex, ± abruptly contracted
\par
  at the base into the petiole ............................................................. {\b 2. alpestris}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. ranunculoides} (L.) Parl.,{\i  Nuovi Gen. Sp. Monocot. }58 (1854) ({\i Echinodorus ranunculoides} (L.) Engelm., {\i Alisma ranunculoides} L.). Stem short or with elongated, decumbent branches rooting at the nodes and bearing rosettes of leaves with axillary flowers. Leaves up to 10 × 1·5 cm or sometimes larger, lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, tapered to the base and apex, gradually decurrent into the petiole. Petals 7-10 mm, white or pale pink. Fruitlets 2-3·5 mm, obliquely and narrowly obovoid, sometimes pubescent. 2n = 16, 30.{\i  S., W. & C. Europe, northwards to S. Norway and eastwards to Lithuania and W. Greece.} Az Be Br Co Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu No Po Rs (B) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. alpestris} (Cosson) Vasc., {\i Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2, {\b 44}: 82 (1970). Like small variants of {\b 1} but leaves not more than 3·5 × 1 cm, elliptical, rounded at the apex, cuneate to rounded and more or less abruptly contracted at the base into the petiole; petals 3-4 mm. •{\i  Mountains of N.W. Spain and N. & C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   {\b 3.        Luronium}      Rafin.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   ({\i Elisma} Buchenau)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stems elongated, rising in the water or creeping and rooting at the nodes. Submerged leaves (if present) basal, linear; floating or aerial leaves elliptical to ovate. Flowers hermaphrodite, long-pedunculate in the axils of the floating or aerial leaves. Stamens 6. Carpels 6-15 in an irregular whorl, free, each with 1 ovule; styles apical. Fruitlets achenial, longitudinally many-ribbed, with a short apical beak.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. natans} (L.) Rafin., {\i Autikon Bot.} 63 (1840) ({\i Elisma natans} (L.) Buchenau,{\i  Alisma natans} L.). Floating or aerial leaves up to 4 × 1·5 cm, rounded to cuneate at the base, rounded at the apex. Petals 7-10 mm, white, with a yellow spot at the base. Fruitlets 2·5 mm, ellipsoid-oblong, with 12-15 close ribs. 2n = 42. •{\i  W. & C. Europe, northwards to S. Norway and extending south-eastwards to Moldavia and Bulgaria.} Be Br Bu †Cz Da Ga Ge Ho Hs It Ju No Po †Rm Rs (?B, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b  4.               Alisma}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves aerial, floating or submerged. Flowers hermaphrodite, in panicles or occasionally (in small plants) in racemes or umbels. Stamens 6. Carpels numerous (11-28) in a single whorl, free, each with 1 ovule; styles subventral. Fruitlets achenial, laterally compressed, obovate to elliptical, with a short ventral beak.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: I.Bjorkqvist,{\i  Op. Bot.} ({\i Lund}) {\b 17}: 1-128 (1967); {\b 19}: 1-138 (1968).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Styles equalling or longer than the ovaries, ± erect;
\par
  anthers elliptical; at least some leaves aerial or 
\par
  floating, petiolate, ± acuminate
\par
2 Leaves ovate or elliptic-ovate to lanceolate, usually 
\par
  subcordate or truncate at the base but sometimes cuneate;
\par
  styles stigmatose in the upper 1/8-1/5; fruitlets with 
\par
  thickish opaque lateral pericarp ...................................... {\b 1. plantago-aquatica}
\par
2 Leaves lanceolate to elliptical, cuneate at the base;
\par
  styles stigmatose in the upper 1/2-2/3; fruitlets with 
\par
  thin translucent lateral pericarp ............................................... {\b 2. lanceolatum}
\par
1 Styles shorter than the ovaries, recurved; anthers sub-
\par
  orbicular; leaves all submerged or aerial, elliptical
\par
  to narrowly oblong-elliptical, not acuminate
\par
3 Inflorescence overtopping the leaves; fruitlets with
\par
  thickish opaque lateral pericarp ................................................ {\b 3. gramineum}
\par
3 Inflorescence not overtopping the leaves; fruitlets 
\par
  with thin lateral pericarp ........................................................ {\b 4. wahlenbergii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. plantago-aquatica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 342 (1753). Leaves up to 30 × 12 cm but usually smaller, usually aerial, ovate or elliptic-ovate to lanceolate, mostly subcordate or truncate at the base but sometimes cuneate, more or less rounded but ultimately acuminate at the apex. Petals 3·5-6·5 mm, white or purplish-white. Anthers elliptical. Styles equalling or longer than the ovaries, filiform, more or less erect, stigmatose in the upper 1/8-1/5 of their length. Fruitlets 2-3 mm; lateral pericarp thickish, opaque. 2n = 14.{\i  Most of Europe.} All except Az Bl Fa Is Sb.
\par
  The hybrid 1 × 2 (2n = 21) is reported from Sweden.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. lanceolatum} With.,{\i  Arr. Brit. Pl.} ed. 3, {\b 2}: 362 (1796). Leaves up to 27 × 7·5 cm but usually much smaller, aerial, lanceolate to elliptical, cuneate at the base, more or less rounded but ultimately acuminate at the apex. Petals 4·5-6·5 mm, purplish-pink. Anthers elliptical. Styles equalling or longer than the ovaries, filiform, more or less erect, stigmatose in the upper 1/2-2/3 of their length. Fruitlets 2-3 mm; lateral pericarp thin, translucent. 2n = 26 (27, 28).{\i  Most of Europe, but rare in much of the north}. All except Fa Is No Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. gramineum} Lej., {\i Fl. Spa}{\b  1}: 175 (1811) ({\i A. loeselii} Gorski, {\i A. plantago-aquatica} subsp. {\i graminifolium} (Ehrh. ex Steudel) Hegi). Leaves submerged or aerial, linear or with an expanded blade; blade up to 4·5 cm wide, elliptical to narrowly oblong-elliptical, gradually attenuated at the base into the petiole; submerged leaves 0·2-1·3 cm wide. Inflorescence overtopping the leaves. Petals 2·5-3·5 mm, white or purplish-white. Anthers suborbicular. Styles shorter than the ovaries, recurved, stigmatose in the upper ¼-½ of their length. Fruitlets 2-2·75 mm; lateral pericarp thickish, opaque. 2n = 14. {\i C. & E. Europe, northwards to the Leningrad region, and extending to France, England and Denmark.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) †Su Tu.
\par

\par
2}
\par