{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 the nodes. Leaves up to 20 mm wide, glabrous to sparsely pubescent. Spike (5-)10-16 cm (excluding awns), dense, more or less square in cross section or compressed. Rhachis subglabrous to sparsely hairy at the nodes and margin, tough. Spikelets with 4-5 florets. Glumes 25-35(-40) mm, lanceolate, membranous, with a prominent, veined keel, hairy or subglabrous. Fertile lemma awnless, or with a stout awn up to 15 cm. Endosperm flinty. 2n = 28.{\i  Cultivated in N. Spain and Islas Baleares; occasional elsewhere as a weed or minor crop}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The specific epithet derives from a confusion between the 'Galicia' of Spain and the 'Galicia' of E.C. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. T. spelta} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 86 (1753). Stems 80-120 cm, thin-walled, hollow, glabrous at the nodes. Leaves 13-20 mm wide glabrous to sparsely pubescent. Spike 10-15 cm (excluding awns), slender, lax, laterally compressed, with 1-4 vestigial basal spikelets. Rhachis glabrous to sparsely hairy at the nodes and margin, brittle, disarticulating readily below the spikelet at maturity. Spikelets with (2-)3-5 florets. Glumes (5-)7-10 mm, truncate, with a prominent, veined, dentate keel and a second, smaller dentate crest. Fertile lemma with a stout divergent awn up to 10 cm. 2n = 42.{\i  Cultivated as a cereal }({\i spelt wheat}){\i  in C. & N.W. Europe, mainly in hill-country}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. T. aestivum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 85 (1753) ({\i T. sativum }Lam.). Stems 40-150 cm, thin-walled and hollow, rarely partially filled with pith, glabrous at the nodes. Leaves 6-16 mm wide, scabrid pubescent when young. Spike 4-18 cm (excluding awns), lax to dense, more or less 4-angled in section. Rhachis glabrous, tough the upper internodes 4-8 mm. Spikelets with 3-6(-9) florets. Glumes c. 10 mm, truncate, with a single crested keel prominent at the apex only, indistinct below, sometimes pubescent towards the apex. Fertile lemma awnless, or with an awn up to 16 cm. Endosperm mealy to flinty. 2n = 42. {\i Cultivated as a cereal} ({\i bread wheat}) {\i throughout Europe except the extreme north}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. T. compactum} Host,{\i  Gram. Austr.}{\b  4}: 4 (1809). Stems up to 140 cm, thin-walled, hollow, glabrous at the nodes. Leaves 7-15 mm wide, scabrid to sometimes sparsely pubescent. Spike 4-5(-6) cm, strongly compressed, with more or less patent spikelets, terete. Rhachis hairy at the nodes and margin, tough, the upper internodes (0·5)1-3 mm. Spikelets with 2-5(-6) florets. Glumes 8-9 mm, truncate, with a crested keel, prominent in the upper half, rounded below. Fertile lemma awnless, or with awns up to 9 cm. Endosperm mealy.{\i  Cultivated as a cereal} ({\i club wheat}){\i  in parts of S. & S.C. Europe, but mainly as a minor constituent of crops consisting mainly of}{\b  4}{\i  or} {\b 8}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 54.      Dasypyrum}          (Cosson & Durieu) T. Durand 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Haynaldia} Schur)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.J. Humphries. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a compressed, dense, distichous spike. Rhachis bearded at the margin, disarticulating readily at the nodes below the spikelet at maturity. Spikelets of 2-4 florets, arranged singly at the nodes of the rhachis upper floret sterile, long-pedicellate. Glumes equal, truncate with membranous margin and with two prominent, coriaceous, ciliate keels, abruptly tapered into a long, scabrid awn. Lemma broadly ovate, strongly keeled, long-awned when fertile, or acuminate; awn scabrid and sometimes ciliate towards the base of the dorsal edge. Palea narrowly lanceolate, membranous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Annual, without rhizome ................................................................ {\b 1. villosum}
\par
Perennial, with creeping rhizome ............................................. {\b 2. hordeaceum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. villosum} (L.) P. Candargy, {\i Arch. Biol. Vég.} ({\i Athènes}) {\b 1}: 35, 62 (1901) ({\i Secale villosum} L., {\i Triticum villosum }(L.) Bieb., {\i Haynaldia villosa} (L.) Schur). Annual. Stems 20-100 cm, glabrous. Leaves 1-5 mm wide, smooth, scabrid or hirsute on the veins and margin; ligule membranous, truncate. Spike 4-12 × 0·6-2 cm (including awns). Spikelets 0·7-2·2 cm (excluding awns). Glumes 3·5-7·5 mm, attenuate towards the base; awns 1·4-3·5(-5·4) cm. Lemma 6-14 mm; awn 0·7-6 cm. Palea up to 14 mm. Anthers 5-7 mm. 2n = 14. {\i Dry grassland; calcicole. Mediterranean region and S.E. Europe. }Al Bl Bu Co Cr *Ga Gr It Ju Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. D. hordeaceum} (Cosson & Durieu) P. Candargy, {\i loc. cit. }(1901) ({\i Triticum hordeaceum} Cosson & Durieu). Like {\b 1} but perennial with shortly creeping rhizome; awns of the glumes and lemmas not exceeding 1·5 cm.{\i  Mountain rocks. S. Greece }({\i Taïyetos}). Gr. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 55.       Secale}       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By S.A. Heathcote. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals, biennials or perennials. Leaves flat or involute; ligule short, truncate. Inflorescence usually a simple, laterally compressed, dense, distichous spike. Spikelets solitary at each node of the rhachis, sessile, with 2, rarely 3, hermaphrodite florets. Glumes linear-subulate, 1-veined, keeled, scabrid. Lemma lanceolate, 5-veined, keeled, with rigid, pectinate cilia on the keel, with a long, straight, scabrid awn. Palea hyaline, membranous, 2-keeled.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: R. I. Roshevitz,{\i  Acta Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS} (Ser. 1){\b  6}: 105-163 (1947).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Glumes with awn at least twice as long as remainder of glume . {\b 1. sylvestre}
\par
1 Glumes with awn short or absent
\par
2 Rhachis fragile, disarticulating below the spikelets at
\par
  maturity; spike 4-11 cm; perennial ............................................ {\b 2. montanum}
\par
2 Rhachis tough, not disarticulating at maturity; spike
\par
  5-15 cm; annual ............................................................................... {\b 3. cereale}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. sylvestre} Host, {\i Gram. Austr.}{\b  4}: 7 (1809). Annual. Stems 20-50 cm, usually pubescent below the spike. Leaves 2-3 mm wide, flat or involute, glabrous or sparsely and shortly hairy. Spike usually 4-8 cm (excluding awns), usually wider in the upper part. Rhachis very fragile, densely bearded at the nodes and margin. Glumes 8-12 mm, scabrid or shortly pubescent on the keel and in the upper part towards the apex, tapering into a scabrid awn 1·5-3(-5) cm. Lemma c. 10 mm; awn 4-8 cm.{\i  Sandy soils. S.E. & E.C. Europe, extending northwards to} c. 53° {\i N. in E.C. Russia.} Bu Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. montanum} Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 145 (1827). Caespitose, greyish-green perennial. Stems up to 100 cm, usually glabrous below the spike. Leaves usually 2-8 mm wide, flat or involute, glabrous or scabridulous. Spike 4-8(-11) cm (excluding awns), linear; rhachis very fragile, bearded at the nodes and margin. Glumes 8-10 mm, densely scabrid on the keel, acuminate or shortly awned. Lemma 8-13 mm; awn 0·2-2·5 cm.{\i  Dry, stony or rocky mountain-sides. S. Europe.} Al Bu Gr Hs It Ju Rm Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. cereale} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 84 (1753). Caespitose annual. Stems up to 150 cm, glabrous or pubescent below the spike. Leaves 5-10 mm wide, flat, usually scabridulous on the upper surface. Spike 5-15 cm (excluding awns), linear; rhachis tough, glabrous or sparsely bearded at the nodes and margin. Glumes 6-15 mm, densely scabrid on the keel, awnless or shortly awned. Lemma
\par

\par
203}
\par