{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 7-15 mm; awn usually 2-5·5 cm.{\i  Cultivated as a cereal} ({\i rye}) {\i throughout most of Europe, but principally in the north-east.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 56.     Psathyrostachys}    Nevski
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.J. Humphries. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial with short, creeping rhizomes. Leaves flat, with convolute margins. Inflorescence a compressed, oblong spike, disarticulating readily between the groups of spikelets at maturity. Spikelets 2-3 together, arranged distichously on the rhachis. Florets 2-3, rarely 1. Glumes subulate, equal, densely hairy to scabrid, obscurely 1-veined. Lemma 5- to 7-veined, elliptical, acute, mucronate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. juncea} (Fischer) Nevski in Komarov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  2}: 714 (1934). Stems (20-)30-70(-80) cm, erect, decumbent at base. Leaves 2-10 cm × 1-4 mm, linear-acuminate; old sheaths forming dense, fibrous tufts at the base of the plant. Spike (3-)5-11 cm; rhachis-segments 3·5 mm, ciliate at the margins. Spikelets 7-8 mm. Glumes 6-7 mm. Lemma 7-8 mm, tapering into an awn up to 2 mm long. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry places. E.C. & S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (C, E). ({\i S.W. & C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 57.         Hordeum}            L.  
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.J. Humphries. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Leaves usually flat. Inflorescence a compressed, linear to oblong spike. Spikelets 3 at each node, dispersed together at maturity, the triplets arranged in 2 longitudinal rows, the fertile florets in 2, 4 or 6 longitudinal rows, each triplet with a central hermaphrodite spikelet and 2 lateral hermaphrodite, male or sterile spikelets. Florets 1, rarely 2. Glumes linear-subulate to lanceolate and awned, free to the base. Lemma 5-veined, ovate. Palea narrowly ovate, keeled. Rhachilla usually prolonged in central spikelets.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: S. A. Nevski, {\i Acta Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS} (Ser. 1) {\b 5}: 64-256 (1941). G. Covas,{\i  Madroño}{\b  10}: 1-21 (1949). N. L. Bor in C. C. Townsend & E. Guest,{\i  Flora of Iraq}{\b  9}: 244-257. Baghdad. 1968.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Most of the annual species described below occur as casuals outside their native or established range. Several other species from America and Asia have also been recorded as casuals in Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem swollen at the base ............................................................ {\b 7. bulbosum}
\par
1 Stem not swollen at the base
\par
2 Annual
\par
3 Rhachis tough, not disarticulating at maturity
\par
4 Spikes with 4-6 longitudinal rows of fertile spikelets ................... {\b 3. vulgare}
\par
4 Spikes with 2 rows of fertile spikelets ........................................ {\b 2. distichon}
\par
3 Rhachis fragile, disarticulating at maturity
\par
5 Awn of fertile lemma 4-14 cm, stout ..................................... {\b 1. spontaneum}
\par
5 Awn of fertile lemma not more than 3 cm, slender
\par
6 Glumes of central spikelet long-ciliate ....................................... {\b 4. murinum}
\par
6 Glumes of central spikelet scabrid or smooth, not ciliate
\par
7 Glumes of lateral spikelets dissimilar, the outer subulate
\par
  or awn-like, the inner lanceolate or winged below; lower
\par
  leaf-sheaths glabrous or with hairs not more than 0·25 mm ........ {\b 5. marinum}
\par
7 Glumes of lateral spikelets similar, subulate or rarely
\par
  linear-lanceolate; lower leaf-sheaths with hairs at 
\par
  least 0·5 mm .................................................................................... {\b 6. hystrix} 
\par
2 Perennial
\par
8 Glumes 3-8 cm, patent at maturity, lemma of lateral 
\par
  spikelets awn-like ........................................................................ {\b 11. jubatum}
\par
8 Glumes 0·4-2 cm, erect or slightly patent at maturity;
\par
  lemma of lateral spikelets linear-lanceolate
\par
9 Lemma glabrous
\par
10 Spike 5-15 cm; spikelets 8-15 mm (excluding awns) ............. {\b 7. bulbosum} 
\par
10 Spike 2-5 cm; spikelets 4-7 mm (excluding awns) ............... {\b 10. secalinum} 
\par
9  Lemma densely scabrid-puberulent
\par
11 Awn of central lemma 0·6-1·5 (-2·5) cm ................................... {\b 8. bogdanii}
\par
11 Awn of central lemma 0·1-0·5 cm .................................. {\b 9. brevisubulatum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. HORDEUM. Annuals. Spikes linear to broadly oblong. Lateral spikelets vestigial, male, or hermaphrodite and fertile. Glumes narrowly linear-lanceolate, erect to widely divergent. Fertile lemma with a long stout awn.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. spontaneum} C. Koch,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  21}: 430 (1848). Stems up to 70 cm, erect. Leaves 5-16 cm × 4-8 mm, glabrous or scabrid and sometimes sparsely hairy. Spike 4-9 cm (excluding awns), laterally compressed. Rhachis densely hairy at the margin, disarticulating readily at maturity. Lateral spikelets sterile, male or vestigial. Awn of lemma of central floret up to 14 mm.{\i  Dry places. Kriti.} Cr. ({\i S.W. & S.C. Asia, N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. distichon} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 85 (1753). Stems up to 90 cm, erect. Leaves 5-24(-30) cm × 4-15 mm, glabrous to scabrid. ,Spike 6-12 cm (excluding awns), compressed, with 2 rows of fertile spikelets. Rhachis tough, hairy at the margin. Awn of lemma of central spikelet up to 15 cm; lemma of lateral spikelets truncate, sometimes mucronate, slender. 2n = 14.{\i  Cultivated as a cereal} ({\i two-rowed barley}){\i  in most of Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Cultivars with short, pyramidal spikes 4-6 cm and divaricate awns are called{\b  H. zeocriton} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 85 (1753).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. vulgare} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 84 (1753) ({\i H. polystichon} Haller fil.). Like {\b 2} but stems up to 130 cm; spike 4-12 cm, oblong, square or hexagonal in cross section, with 4 or 6 rows of fertile spikelets; all lemmas with stout awns up to 18 cm. 2n = 14.{\i  Cultivated as a cereal} ({\i six-rowed barley}) {\i in most of Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. TRICHOSTACHYS Dumort. Annuals. Spikes linear to oblong. Lateral spikelets vestigial or male. Outer glume of lateral spikelets setaceous or subulate, the inner narrowly lanceolate or winged. Glumes of central spikelet narrowly lanceolate to setaceous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. H. murinum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 85 (1753). Stems 5-50 cm, erect or ascending. Leaves 2-8 mm wide, glabrous or sparsely pubescent; sheaths somewhat inflated above. Spike 2-7(-12) cm, oblong, strongly compressed. Rhachis sparsely ciliate at the nodes and margin, disarticulating readily at maturity. Glumes of central spikelet and inner glume of lateral spikelets lanceolate, ciliate; outer glumes of lateral spikelets subulate.{\i  Disturbed ground and dry grassland. Much of Europe, but absent from most of the U.S.S.R. and not native in Fennoscandia.} Al Au Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sz Si Tu [Da Hb No Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Anthers of central spikelet 0·2-0·5 mm; prolongation of
\par
  rhachilla of lateral spikelets stout, orange-brown ............ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b glaucum} 
\par
1 Anthers of central spikelet 0·7-1·4 mm; prolongation of
\par
  rhachilla of lateral spikelets slender, green
\par
2 Central spikelet sessile or with a pedicel not more than 
\par
  0·6 mm; lateral spikelets not longer than the central ....... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b murinum} 
\par
2 Central spikelet with pedicel (0·7-)0·9-1·8 mm; lateral
\par
  spikelets longer than the central ..................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b leporinum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b murinum}: Leaves not glaucous. Palea of central spikelet 1-1·4 times as long as palea of lateral spikelets. 2n = 28 .{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par
204}
\par