{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 5 Glumes of terminal spikelet long-awned, those of the 
\par
  lateral spikelets dentate or shortly awned ...................................... {\b 5. comosa}
\par
5 Glumes of all spikelets long-awned
\par
6 Awns of lemma about as long as those of glumes, glumes
\par
  with (3-)4-5 long awns ............................................................... {\b 9. geniculata}
\par
6 Awns of lemma distinctly shorter than those of glumes,
\par
  or lemma merely toothed; lower glumes with 1-3 long awns
\par
7 Glumes usually with 1 long awn; lower glume with all 
\par
  veins narrow and ± equal in width ............................................ {\b 6. uniaristata}
\par
7 Glumes with 2-3 long awns; lower glume with some narrow
\par
  and some wide veins
\par
8 Upper 1-2 spikelets sterile; spike abruptly contracted 
\par
  above the fertile spikelets ............................................................ {\b 10. neglecta}
\par
8 All spikelets fertile; spike gradually tapering upwards
\par
9 Awns of glumes of terminal spikelet distinctly longer 
\par
  than those of lateral spikelets; spikes with (3-)4-6 spikelets ..... {\b 7. triuncialis}
\par
9 Awns of glumes of terminal and lateral spikelets equal;
\par
  spikes with 2-3(-4) spikelets ........................................................... {\b 8. lorentii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. speltoides} Tausch, {\i Flora }({\i Regensb.}) {\b 20}: 108 (1837) ({\i A. bicornis} auct., non (Forskål) Jaub. & Spach, {\i Triticum speltoides} (Tausch) Godron). Stems numerous, up to 60 cm. Leaves sparsely hairy; upper sheaths glabrous, the lower sparsely hairy, not inflated. Spike 8-11 × 0·3 cm (excluding awns) cylindrical, without vestigial basal spikelets; rhachis not disarticulating at maturity. Spikelets usually 9-12. Glumes 6-7 mm, truncate, with a short tooth. Lemma narrowed upwards, truncate, with a tooth or short awn at apex, the lower 2 of the terminal spikelet with an awn up to 12 cm. 2n = 14.{\i  S.E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Tu [Ga ?It].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. ventricosa} Tausch,{\i  loc. cit.} (1837). Stems numerous, 20-40 cm. Leaves glabrous or villous; upper sheaths glabrous but ciliate, the lower patent-villous, not or scarcely inflated. Spike 4-6(-12) × up to 0·5 cm (excluding awns), moniliform, with 0-2 vestigial basal spikelets; rhachis disarticulating at maturity. Spikelets 5-10, usually strongly ventricose. Glumes of lateral spikelets truncate, with 2 teeth, the outer long and narrow, sometimes forming an awn, the inner short and wide, obtuse; glumes of terminal spikelet usually 3-dentate. Lemmas usually with 1 awn. 2n = 28.{\i  W. Mediterranean region. }Bl Hs *It Sa [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. cylindrica} Host,{\i  Gram. Austr.}{\b  2}: 6 (1802) ({\i Triticum cylindricum} (Host) Cesati, Passer. & Gibelli). Stems numerous up to 40 cm. Leaves glabrous or sparsely hairy; lower sheaths sparsely hairy, the upper glabrous, slightly inflated. Spike 6-11 cm (excluding awns), more than 10 times as long as wide, cylindrical, with 1-2 vestigial basal spikelets; rhachis usually disarticulating at maturity. Fertile spikelets 4-6, closely appressed to the rhachis and as long as the internodes. Glumes of terminal spikelet with an awn distinctly shorter than the rest of the spike. Lower glume of lateral spikelets usually with a short awn. 2n = 28.{\i  S.E. & E.C. Europe northwards to S. Czechoslovakia; casual and locally naturalized elsewhere in S. & C. Europe}. Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E) Tu [Ga *It].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. dichasians} (Zhuk.) Humphries, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  78}: 236 (1979) ({\i A. caudata} subsp.{\i  dichasians} Zhuk.,{\i  A. caudata} L. pro parte,{\i  Triticum caudatum} (L.) Raspail, {\i T. dichasians} (Zhuk.) Bowden,{\i  T. markgrafii} W. Greuter). Like {\b 3} but leaves hairy; spike up to 7 cm (excluding awns); rhachis not disarticulating at maturity; glumes of terminal spikelet with an awn somewhat longer than the rest of the spike; lower glume of lateral spikelets with 1-2 acute teeth, rarely with a short awn. 2n =14. {\i S. part of Balkan peninsula and Aegean region.} Bu Cr Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. comosa} Sibth. & Sm., {\i Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 72 (1806) ({\i Triticum comosum} (Sibth. & Sm.) K. Richter). Stems usually several, up to 45 cm. Leaves glabrous or sparsely hairy; upper sheaths glabrous, the lower patent-villous, slightly inflated. Spike 2-7 × 0·2-0·4 cm (excluding awns), gradually narrowed upwards, with 1-2 vestigial basal spikelets; rhachis not disarticulating at maturity. Spikelets 3-4. Glumes of lateral spikelets 9-10 mm, scabrid or hispidulous, 2-dentate or sometimes with a short awn. Glumes of terminal spikelet with 1-3 long awns, the middle longer than the lateral. 2n = 14.{\i  S. & E. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b comosa}: Spikes very slender. Glumes not ventricose.{\i  S. & S.E. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b heldreichii} (Boiss.) Eig,{\i  Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih}.){\b  55}: 109 (1929) ({\i Triticum heldreichii} (Boiss.) K. Richter): Spikes relatively stout. Glumes distinctly ventricose.{\i  N.E. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. uniaristata} Vis.,{\i  Fl. Dalm.}{\b  3}: 345 (1852) ({\i A. peregrina} (Hackel) Maire & Weiller, {\i Triticum uniaristatum} (Vis.) K. Richter, {\i T. variabile} Markgraf). Stems numerous, up to 40 cm. Leaves glabrous or shortly hairy; sheaths glabrous or the lower patent-hairy. Spike 1·5-3·5 cm (excluding awns), usually with 3 vestigial basal spikelets; rhachis not disarticulating at maturity. Spikelets 2-7, all fertile, subglobose to almost linear. Lower glume of lowest spikelets 6-8 × 4-6 mm, awned or toothed, the awns variable in number and length, often patent at maturity; veins all narrow and of equal width. 2n = 28.{\i  E. Mediterranean region.} Al Cr Gr It Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. triuncialis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl} 1051 (1753) ({\i Triticum triunciale} (L.) Raspail). Glaucous; stems several, up to 45 cm. Leaves sparsely hairy or glabrous; upper sheaths glabrous, the lower often hairy, slightly inflated. Spike 3-6 × 0·5-0·9 cm (excluding awns), gradually narrowed upwards, with 1-2 vestigial basal spikelets; rhachis sometimes disarticulating at maturity. Spikelets (3-)4-6, all fertile. Glumes of the lowest spikelet 7-10 mm, appressed-hairy or scabrid, usually with 3 teeth 2-3 of which form awns; awns of the terminal spikelet 3-6 cm, distinctly longer than those of the lateral spikelets. 2n = 28.{\i  S. Europe.} Al Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  A. umbellulata} Zhuk.,{\i  Bull. Appl. Bot. Pl.-Breed.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 18}({\b 1}): 447 (1928), from S.W. Asia, has recently been reported from a roadside in E. Kriti. It has short spikes with 2 fertile spikelets, (2-)3(-4) basal rudimentary and 1-3 sterile upper spikelets; the lower glume of the fertile spikelets has 4-7 often divaricate awns.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. lorentii} Hochst.,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 28}: 25 (1845) ({\i A. biuncialis} Vis., {\i A. macrochaeta} R.J. Shuttlew. & Huet ex Duval-Jouve, {\i Triticum ovatum} var.{\i  macrochaetum} (R.J. Shuttlew. & Huet ex Duval-Jouve) Hayek). Stems numerous, 5-10(-30) cm. Leaves ciliate; sheaths sparsely hairy below, somewhat inflated above. Spike 2-3 cm (excluding awns), c. 5 times as long as wide, tapering markedly towards the apex, with 1(-2) vestigial basal spikelets; rhachis not disarticulating at maturity. Fertile spikelets 2-3(-4). Lower glumes of lower spikelet 8-9 × 5-6 mm; upper glume with (2-)3 awns, distinctly longer than the 1 or more awns of the lemma; awns of glumes of terminal spikelet as long as those of the lateral. 2n = 28. {\i S. Europe}. Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rm Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. geniculata} Roth, {\i Bot. Abh.} 45 (1787) ({\i A. ovata} L. pro parte, {\i Triticum ovatum} (L.) Gren. & Godron). Stems numerous, up to 30(-40) cm. Leaves hairy or glabrous; sheaths glabrous somewhat inflated. Spike 1-2 cm (excluding awns), about twice as long as wide, with 1(-2) vestigial basal spikelets; rhachis not
\par

\par
201}
\par