{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 aristulae 6-12 mm, usually with a short lateral seta on one side. 2n = 14.{\i  S. part of Mediterranean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. saxatilis} (Lojac.) Rocha Afonso,{\i  op. cit.} 359 (1978) ({\i A. barbata }var.{\i  saxatilis} Lojac.). Like {\b 4}({\i a}) but stems 7-25 cm, densely caespitose; leaves not more than 6 cm × 0·5-1·5 mm, scabridulous; ligule 0·3-1 mm; panicle not more than 10 cm, with spikelets 15-18 mm; glumes not more than 7-veined; lemma 9-10 mm, with aristulae 3-4 mm; awn 15-30 mm.{\i  Dry, open habitats on basalt. • Islands near Sicilia} ({\i Isole Lipari, Marettimo, Linosa}). Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. prostrata} Ladizinsky,{\i  Israel Jour. Bot. }{\b 20}: 297 (1971). Like {\b 4}({\b a}) but stems 15-50 cm, usually procumbent; basal leaves up to 6 cm × 1·5-4 mm, the cauline very short; ligule 0·5-1 mm; spikelets 12-15 mm; lemma 8-10 mm, with aristulae 2-4 mm; awn 20-30 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry, rocky places. S.E. Spain} ({\i prov. Murcia}.). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. strigosa} Schreber,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Lips. }52 (1771). Stems 35-100(-180) cm, glabrous. Leaves up to 25(-40) cm × 3-12 mm, scabridulous; ligule 2-5 mm. Panicle up to 25(-35) cm, more or less contracted. Spikelets 14-20(-22) mm, with (1-)2-3 florets. Glumes subequal, 7- to 9-veined. Lemma 13-16 mm, narrowly lanceolate, glabrous or hairy; aristulae 1-9 mm; awn 20-35 mm. Palea 4/5 as long as lemma. Rhachilla not disarticulating at maturity.{\i  Cultivated locally on a small scale, but occurring mainly as a weed among other cereal crops. N., W. & C. Europe.} [Au Az Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge ?Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rs (N, B, C) Su.]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Probably derived from {\b 3} in cultivation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b strigosa}: Spikelets up to 20(-22) mm. Lemma glabrous or more or less hairy; aristulae 5-9 mm, with a lateral seta up to 1 mm; awn inserted about the middle of the lemma. 2n = 14.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b agraria} (Brot.) Tab. Mor., {\i Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2,{\b  12}: 240 (1937): Spikelets not more than 16 mm. Lemma glabrous; aristulae 1-3 mm, with 1 or 2 shorter lateral setae; awn inserted in distal 1/3 of lemma.{\i  W. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. brevis} Roth,{\i  Bot. Abh.} 42 (1787). Stems 35-100(-130) cm, glabrous. Leaves up to 25(-35) cm × 2-8(-12) mm, scabridulous; ligule 1-3(-4) mm. Panicle up to 20 cm, somewhat contracted. Spikelets 10-12 mm, with 1-2 florets. Glumes subequal, 5- to 7-veined. Lemma 6-9 mm, lanceolate, more or less ventricose, glabrous except for some rigid hairs in the distal 1/3; apex with 2 triangular-acuminate teeth 0·5-1 mm, usually produced into aristulae 0·2-1 mm; awn 10-25 mm, deciduous in fruit. Palea ¾ as long as lemma. Rhachilla not disarticulating at maturity. 2n = 14.{\i  Cultivated locally in sandy fields in N.W. Europe and rarely naturalized.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. nuda} L.,{\i  Demonstr. Pl.} 3 (1753) ({\i A. sativa} subsp. {\i nuda} (L.) Rouy). Stems 45-90 cm, glabrous, with a waxy bloom. Leaves up to 20 cm × 3-7 mm, scabridulous; ligule 2-4 mm. Panicle up to 25 cm, rather contracted. Spikelets 20-30(-35) mm, with 2-4 florets. Glumes subequal, 7- to 9-veined. Lemma 15-20 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, glabrous; apex with 2 acuminate teeth 1-3(-4) mm; awn 15-20 mm, inserted about the middle of the lemma, not twisted below. Palea ½ as long as lemma. Rhachilla not disarticulating at maturity. 2n = 14.{\i  Cultivated on a small scale, mainly in C. Europe, and rarely naturalized.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. chinensis} (Fischer ex Roemer & Schultes) Metzger,{\i  Eur. Cereal.} 53 (1824), is cultivated in parts of W. & C. Europe. It is like {\b 9} but is larger, with spikelets 25-35(-45) mm, with 3-7 florets, the lowest of which is sometimes awned, the others unawned. The lemma is 18-25 mm and entire or 2-denticulate at the apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. fatua} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 80 (1753). Stems 30-100(-150) cm, glabrous. Leaves up to 45 cm × 5-15 mm, scabridulous, ciliolate at base; ligule 3-6 mm. Panicle up to 40 cm, the branches more or less patent. Spikelets 18-25 mm, with 2-3 florets. Glumes subequal, 7- to 9-veined. Lemma 14-20 mm, ovate-lanceolate, glabrous or hairy below; apex with teeth 0·2-0·5 mm; awn 25-40 mm. Palea 5/6 as long as lemma. Callus-scar ovate. Rhachilla disarticulating between the florets at maturity. Grain c. 15 × 4 mm, oblong. {\i Cultivated fields and waste ground. Most of Europe, but native only in the south.} All except ?Cr Fa ?Gr Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  A. septentrionalis} Malzev,{\i  Bull. Angew. Bot.}{\b  6}: 915 (1913), from N. & C. Russia, {\b A. cultiformis} (Malzev) Malzev et al., {\i Sorn. Rast. SSSR}{\b  1}: 208 (1934) ({\i A. fatua} subsp. {\i cultiformis} Malzev), from W. & C. Russia, and{\b  A. aemulans} Nevski, {\i Acta Univ. As. Med.} ser. 8b, (Bot.){\b  17}: 5 (1934), from E. Russia, closely resemble {\b 10}; the first is distinguished by the pubescent nodes, the second by the shorter and wider, subovoid to oblong grain, and the third by the rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes but not between the florets at maturity.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. sativa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 79 (1753). Stems 40-140(-200) cm, glabrous. Leaves up to 45 cm × 3-15(-20) mm, scabridulous; ligule 3-5 mm. Panicle up to 25(-40) cm, patent or contracted and unilateral. Spikelets 17-30 mm, with 2-3 florets. Glumes subequal, 7- to 9-veined. Lemma 12-25 mm; apex emarginate or with very short teeth; lowest lemma usually awned, the others unawned; awn 15-40 mm, usually almost straight. Palea 5/6 as long as lemma. Rhachilla not disarticulating at maturity but breaking immediately below each floret; segments 2·5-3 mm.{\i  Cultivated as a cereal} ({\i oats}){\i  in much of Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Many of the records of {\b 11} from the Mediterranean region refer to {\b 12}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spikelets 25-30 mm; lemma usually sparsely hairy ..... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b macrantha} 
\par
1 Spikelets 17-25 mm; lemma glabrous
\par
2 Lemma 15-20 mm ................................................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b sativa}
\par
2 Lemma 12-15 mm ......................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b praegravis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sativa} (incl. {\i A. orientalis} Schreber, {\i A. sativa} subsp. {\i orientalis} (Schreber) Werner, {\i A. nodipilosa} Malzev): Spikelets 17-20 mm. Lemma 15-20 mm, narrowly lanceolate, glabrous, usually unawned. Grain 8-9 mm. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b praegravis} (Krause) Tab. Mor.,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2, {\b 13}: 604 (1939) ({\i A. praegravis} (Krause) Roshev.): Spikelets 20-25 mm. Lemma 12-15 mm, ovate-lanceolate, glabrous. Grain 11-12 mm. {\i Mainly in the eastern part of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b macrantha} (Hackel) Rocha Afonso, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 359 (1978) ({\i A. fatua} subsp.{\i  macrantha} (Hackel) Malzev,{\i  A. sativa} var.{\i  macrantha} Hackel): Spikelets 25-30 mm. Lemma 20-25 mm, narrowly lanceolate, usually sparsely hairy. Grain c. 10 mm.{\i  S. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b A. volgensis} (Vavilov) Nevski, {\i Acta Univ. As. Med}. ser. 8b (Bot.),{\b  17}: 5 (1934), from C. Russia, is like {\b 11}({\b a}) but the rhachilla has segments c. 1·5 mm, which break at their base and fall attached to the upper floret.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. byzantina} C. Koch, {\i Linnaea }{\b 21}: 392 (1848). Stems 60-100(-180) cm, glabrous. Leaves up to 30 cm × 1·5-6(-12) mm,
\par
207}
\par