{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 dead; sheaths of basal leaves open only in the upper half; ligule c. 0·5 mm, truncate, ciliate. Panicle 6-15 cm; primary branches with 1-5 spikelets; pedicels subclavate. Spikelets (7-)9-12(-13) mm, with 2-3 fertile florets. Rhachilla disarticulating below each floret; segments 1·5-2·5 mm, with hairs 2·5-4 mm; callus-hairs 2-2·5 mm. Lower glume 7-9 mm, the upper 8-11 mm. Lemma 7-10 mm. Palea 6-9 mm. 2n = 14+0-2B, 28+0-2B.{\i  Rocky slopes; calcicole. Mountains of S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. planifolium} (Willk.) J. Holub,{\i  op. cit.}{\b  9}: 273 (1974) ({\i Avena montana} var.{\i  planifolia} Willk.). Like {\b 2} but plant more robust; leaves longer and more or less flaccid, mostly flat, (2-)34(-7) mm wide; branches of panicle more rigid; spikelets 11-14 mm, with 3-4 fertile florets; segments of rhachilla with hairs 3·5-5 mm; callus-hairs 2·5-3 mm. 2n = 28+0-2B.{\i  Rocky slopes and pastures. • C. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. H. parlatorei} (J. Woods) Pilger, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  45}: 7 (1938) ({\i Avena parlatorei} J. Woods). Rhizome sometimes shortly creeping and with short stolons. Stem 40-80(-100) cm. Leaves 20-40(-60) cm × 2-4 mm when flat, or 1-1·3 mm in diameter when convolute, persistent when dead; ligule 3-6 mm, oblong, acute, lacerate later, glabrous. Panicle (8-)10-13(-15) cm, rather lax, with 15-45 spikelets; main axis scabridulous; primary branches with 3-5(-8) spikelets. Spikelets (8-)10-11(-12) mm, with 2-3 fertile florets. Rhachilla disarticulating only above the glumes; segments 2-3 mm, with hairs 2-3 mm; callus-hairs 1·5-2 mm; pedicel of sterile floret 3-4 mm, glabrous. Lower glume 7-10 mm, the upper 9-12 mm. Lemma 7-10(-11 ) mm, 2-fid. Palea 7-9 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Rocky slopes and screes; calcicole. • S.W. & E. Alps.} Au Ga Ge It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The above description refers to diploid plants. Tetraploid plants (2n = 28), known only from one locality in N.W. Italy, have spikelets (12-)14-15(-16) mm; their status needs further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. H. setaceum} (Vill.) Henrard,{\i  Blumea}{\b  3}: 430 (1940) ({\i Avena setacea} Vill.). Non-flowering shoots intravaginal. Stems (15-)20-60(-70) cm, slender, glabrous, smooth. Basal leaves 10-40(-60) cm × 0·5-0·8 mm, setaceous, tough, puberulent above smooth beneath, soon deciduous; sheaths of basal leaves more or less equal in length, tough, stramineous to greyish, long-persistent; ligule 0·2-0·5 mm, truncate, ciliate, or reduced to a row of cilia. Panicle 4-10 cm, with 8-25 spikelets, dense; main axis smooth; primary branches with 2-5 spikelets; pedicels not clavate. Spikelets 8-12 mm, with 2-3 fertile florets; rhachilla disarticulating only above the glumes; segments 1·5-2 mm, with hairs 4-6 mm; callus-hairs 3-3·5 mm; pedicel of the sterile floret 3-4 mm, hairy. Lower glume 7-10 mm, the upper 10-12 mm. Lemma (7-)8-11 mm. Palea 7-8 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Rocky slopes; calcicole. • S.W. Alps and mountains of Provence.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. H. petzense} Melzer,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  114}: 308 (1968). Like {\b 5} but stems pubescent above; basal leaves 0·7-0·9 mm in diameter; ligule of cauline leaves up to 0·7 mm; panicle-axis densely scabrid, spikelets 12-15 mm; lower glume up to 12 mm, the upper up to 14(-15) mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Calcareous mountain rocks. • S.E. Alps} ({\i Karawanken}). Au Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. H. sempervirens} (Vill.) Pilger,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  45}: 7 (1938) ({\i Avena sempervirens} Vill.). Non-flowering shoots intravaginal. Stems (30-)40-100(-150) cm. Basal leaves 15-60 cm × 0·9-1·5 mm, rigid, convolute, or flat and 2-4 mm wide, glaucous, sometimes pruinose, scabridulous, soon deciduous when dead; sheaths of basal leaves tough, long-persistent; ligule 0·5-1·5 mm, truncate, ciliate. Panicle 8-20 cm, with 30-55 spikelets; primary branches scabrid, with 3-7(-10) spikelets. Spikelets 10-14 mm, with 2(-3) fertile florets, the upper unawned. Rhachilla disarticulating only above the glumes; segments 2·5-4 mm, with hairs 4-5 mm; callus-hairs 3-4 mm; pedicel of the sterile floret 4-6 mm, sparsely hairy to glabrous. Lower glume 7-10 mm, the upper 10-12 mm. Lemma(8-)9-12 mm. Palea 8-9 mm. 2n = 42+0-5B.{\i  Rocks and stony pastures; calcicole. • S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. H. convolutum} (C. Presl) Henrard,{\i  Blumea}{\b  3}: 430 (1940) ({\i Avena convoluta} C. Presl). Basal leaves 20-40 cm × (0·5-)0·7-1·5 mm, convolute, or more or less flat and 1·5-3 mm wide, glaucous, smooth beneath, more or less persistent when dead; sheaths tough, dilated to the base, ligule 0·3-0·6 mm, truncate, ciliate and hairy. Panicle with 15-50 spikelets; primary branches flexuous, with 5-12 spikelets; pedicels clavate. Rhachilla disarticulating below each floret; segments 3 mm; callus-hairs 2-3·5 mm. Lemma 9-11 mm. Palea 8-9 mm.{\i  Rocky slopes; calcicole. Mediterranean region from Sicilia eastwards.} Al Gr It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b convolutum}: stems (40-)50-80 cm. Convolute leaves (0·5-)0·7-1·2 mm in diameter. Panicle 8-13 cm. Spikelets 10-12 mm, with 2-3 fertile florets. Lower glume 9-10 mm, 1-veined, the upper 10-11 mm; rhachilla-segments with hairs 2·5-3 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b heldreichii} (Parl.) Gervais, {\i Denkschr. Schweiz. Naturf. Ges.}{\b  88}: 58 (1973): Stems 80-100 cm. Leaves 1-1·5 mm in diameter and convolute, or often more or less flat. Panicle 11-16 cm. Spikelets 12-17 mm, with 3-4 fertile florets. Lower glume 10-12 mm, usually 3-veined, the upper 12-14 mm; rhachilla-segments with hairs 3·5 mm.{\i  S. & S.E. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Further investigation of the taxonomy and distribution of these subspecies is needed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. H. sarracenorum} (Gand.) J. Holub,{\i  Preslia}{\b  31}: 50 (1959) ({\i Avena sarracenorum} Gand.). Stems 40-90 cm. Basal leaves 15-25 cm × 2-4 mm, erect, pungent, pubescent beneath, subglaucous above, persistent when dead; sheaths pale brownish, tough; ligule 0·2-0·5 mm, densely hairy. Panicle 6-10 cm, with 25-35 spikelets; pedicels clavate. Spikelets 10-14 mm, with 3-4 fertile florets. Rhachilla disarticulating below each floret; segments 3 mm, with hairs 4-5 mm; callus-hairs 3-4 mm. Lower glume 10 mm, the upper 11-12 mm. Lemma 9-12 mm, smooth, deeply 2-fid. Palea 9 mm. Grain hispid. 2n = 14, 28, 70.{\i  Dry, rocky slopes and wood-clearings. • S. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from S. Spain (Ronda) which resemble {\b 10} in their glabrous leaves, but are closer to {\b 9} in the colour of the sheaths, require further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. H. filifolium} (Lag.) Henrard,{\i  Blumea}{\b  3}: 430 (1940) ({\i Avena filifolia} Lag.). Non-flowering shoots intra- and extravaginal. Stems (40-)60-120 cm. Basal leaves 20-60 cm × 1-1·3 mm, convolute, erect, pungent, subglaucous and scabrid above, glabrous and smooth beneath, more or less persistent when dead; sheaths indurate, dilated to the base, persistently violet-brown, long-ciliate at the mouth, with a continuous subepidermal layer of sclerenchyma; ligule very short or nearly absent, densely hairy. Panicle 12-25 cm, with 15-40 spikelets; main axis scabridulous; primary branches with 2-5 spikelets. Spikelets 15-20 mm, with 2-3 fertile florets. Rhachilla disarticulating below each floret; segments 3·5 mm, with hairs 5-6 mm; callus-hairs 4·5-6 mm; pedicel of the sterile floret 4 mm, hairy. Lower glume 13-15 mm, the upper 15-20 mm. Lemma 13-15 mm, 2-fid, mucronate, shiny. Palea 10-11 mm. 2n = 70, 84+0-1B.{\i  Rocky slopes, dry pastures and wood-clearings. S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. H. murcicum} J. Holub,{\i  Preslia}{\b  49}: 218 (1977). Like {\b 10} but smaller and more slender; stems 40-60 cm; basal leaves 0·7-0·9 mm
\par

\par
209}
\par