{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr11\min23}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr11\min24}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1064}{\nofchars6065}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. T. caput-medusae}{\fs28  (L.) Nevski, }{\i\fs28 Acta Univ. As. Med.}{\fs28  ser. 8b, (Bot.)}{\b\fs28  17}{\fs28 : 38 (1934) (}{\i\fs28 Elymus caput-medusae}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Hordeum asperum}{\fs28  (Simonkai) Degen,}{\i\fs28  H. crinitum}{\fs28  (Schreber) Desf.,}{\i\fs28  Taeniatherum asperum}{\fs28  (Simonkai) Nevski, }{\i\fs28 T. crinitum}{\fs28  (Schreber) Nevski). Stems 5-55 cm, glabrous. Leaves 0\'b72-0\'b76 mm wide, glabrous to scabrid and sparsely hairy on the veins and margin. Spike 5-15 (-18) cm (including awns). Glumes 1\'b75-6 cm, erect or ascending from near the base. Lemma 4-12 mm; awn 5-12 cm. 2n = 14.}{\i\fs28  Dry fields and rocky places. S. Europe}{\fs28 . Al Bu Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 T. crinitum}{\fs28  (Schreber) Nevski in Komarov,}{\i\fs28  Fl. URSS}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 719 (1934), is a variant from Krym with the spike almost as long as the stem and with erect glumes. It does not seem to merit specific rank.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  Tribe      }{\b\fs28 Aveneae }{\fs28         Dumort.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Leaves linear; silica-bodies oblong or elliptical; 2-celled microhairs absent; ligule membranous. Inflorescence usually a panicle. Spikelets hermaphrodite, somewhat compressed laterally, with 1-many florets. Rhachilla disarticulating above or rarely below the glumes and between the florets. Glumes often longer than the florets, often shiny and with a silvery-hyaline margin. Lemma membranous or cartilaginous, often with a dorsal, often geniculate awn. Palea 2-keeled, rarely very short. Lodicules 2(-3), 2-dentate or entire. Stamens 3. Ovary hairy all over or glabrous; styles 2. Grain with linear or ovate hilum; starch-grains compound. Chromosomes large; basic number 7.
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28 
\par  }{\b\fs28 60.       Avena}{\fs28        L.
\par }{\fs24  By M.L. Rocha Afonso. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat (rarely convolute); ligule membranous. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets large, with (1-)2-5(-7) florets. Glumes lanceolate, acuminate, usually subequal, thinly chartaceous, with a shiny, scarious margin, and several veins. Lemma usually coriaceous, 2-dentate to 2-aristulate (rarely subentire), usually with a dorsal awn; awn usually with a thick, twisted lower part (}{\i\fs28 column}{\fs28 ) and a thinner, straight upper part (}{\i\fs28 seta}{\fs28 ), usually geniculate. Palea tough, shorter than the lemma, with hyaline margin and 2 ciliate keels.
\par 
\par Measurements of the lemma exclude the aristulae, if present.
\par 
\par   Hybrids sometimes occur in and around cultivated fields; these are not allowed for in the key.
\par 
\par   Literature: A. I. Malzev,}{\i\fs28  Bull. Appl. Bot. Pl.-Breed.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Leningrad}{\fs28 ), }{\i\fs28 Suppl.}{\b\fs28  38}{\fs28 : 1-522 (1930). A. Taborda de Morais, }{\i\fs28 Bol. Soc. Brot.}{\fs28  ser. 2, }{\b\fs28 11}{\fs28 : 49-72 (1936);}{\b\fs28 13}{\fs28 : 573-709 (1939).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Lower glume c. \'bd as long as upper
\par 2 Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes and between
\par   the florets at maturity; spikelets with 3-5 florets ............................. }{\b\fs28 1. clauda}{\fs28 
\par 2 Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes but not between 
\par   the florets at maturity; spikelets with 1-3 florets ........................... }{\b\fs28 2. eriantha}{\fs28 
\par 1 Glumes subequal
\par 3 Lemma 2-aristulate
\par 4 Rhachilla not disarticulating at maturity ....................................... }{\b\fs28 7. strigosa}{\fs28 
\par 4 Rhachilla disarticulating at maturity
\par 5 Glumes 30-45 mm, conspicuously longer than the florets;
\par   callus-scar linear ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. longiglumis}{\fs28 
\par 5 Glumes 12-30 mm, about equalling the florets; callus-scar
\par   oblong-ovate
\par 6 Glumes 20-30 mm; stems 30-100 cm, \'b1 erect ............................... }{\b\fs28 4. barbata}{\fs28 
\par 6 Glumes 12-18 mm; stems 7-30 cm, or longer and procumbent
\par 7 Glumes 15-18 mm; leaves 0\'b75-1\'b75 mm wide ................................ }{\b\fs28 5. saxatilis}{\fs28 
\par 7 Glumes 12-15 mm; leaves 2-4 mm wide ..................................... }{\b\fs28 6. prostrata}{\fs28 
\par 3 Lemma 2-dentate, 2-fid or 2-mucronulate
\par 8 Glumes conspicuously shorter than the florets .................................. }{\b\fs28 9. nuda}{\fs28 
\par 8 Glumes as long as or longer than the florets 
\par 9 Rhachilla disarticulating at maturity
\par 10 Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes and between
\par    the florets at maturity; spikelets 18-25 mm ..................................... }{\b\fs28 10. fatua}{\fs28 
\par 10 Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes but not 
\par    between the florets at maturity; spikelets 25-45 mm
\par 11 Awn arising c. 1/3 of the way from base to apex of lemma,
\par    the geniculation 3-8 mm below the apex of the glumes ............... }{\b\fs28 13. sterilis}{\fs28 
\par 11 Awn arising in the lower \'bc of lemma, the geniculation
\par    8-12 mm below the apex of the glumes ..................................... }{\b\fs28 14. murphyi}{\fs28  
\par 9  Rhachilla not disarticulating at maturity
\par 12 Spikelets 10-12 mm ....................................................................... }{\b\fs28 8. brevis}{\fs28 
\par 12 Spikelets 17-35 mm
\par 13 Awn (when present) with a distinct column; rhachilla-
\par    segments breaking at their apex and falling attached 
\par    to the lower floret ........................................................................... }{\b\fs28 11. sativa}{\fs28 
\par 13 Awn without a distinct column; rhachilla-segments 
\par    breaking at their base and falling attached to the 
\par    upper floret ............................................................................... }{\b\fs28 12. byzantina}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. A. clauda}{\fs28  Durieu in Duchartre,}{\i\fs28  Rev. Bot.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 360 (1845) (}{\i\fs28 A. pilosa}{\fs28  sensu Hayek, non Bieb.). Stems 20-70 cm, glabrous. Leaves up to 10 cm \'d7 1\'b75-5 mm, with sparse patent hairs; ligule 1\'b75-3 mm. Panicle up to 15 cm, subsecund. Spikelets 18-24 mm, with 3-5 florets. Lower glume c. \'bd as long as upper, 3- to 5-veined, the upper 5- to 7-veined. Lemma 12-14 mm, narrowly lanceolate, glabrous; aristulae 3-6 mm; awn 30-45 mm. Palea 3/5 as long as lemma. Callus-scar oblong-linear. Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes and between the florets at maturity.}{\i\fs28  Dry, rocky places. E. part of Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28  Bu Gr Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. A. eriantha}{\fs28  Durieu,}{\i\fs28  loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1845). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but spikelets 15-20 mm, with 1-3 florets; lemma shortly hirsute in the distal half and minutely verruculose proximally; rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes but not between the florets at maturity. }{\i\fs28 Dry, rocky places. Krym.}{\fs28  ?Gr Rs (K). (}{\i\fs28 N. Africa, W. Asia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. A. longiglumis}{\fs28  Durieu, }{\i\fs28 op. cit.}{\fs28  359 (1845). Stems 25-140 cm, glabrous. Leaves up to 40 cm \'d7 2-10 mm, sparsely hairy to scabridulous; ligule 2-6 mm. Panicle up to 30(-40) cm, secund. Spikelets 30-45 mm, with 2-3 florets. Glumes subequal, (7-)9- to 11-veined. Lemma 20-25 mm, narrowly lanceolate, villous in the proximal half; aristulae 10-15 mm, each with a small lateral seta; awn 50-70 mm. Palea 5/6 as long as lemma. Callus-scar linear. Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes and between the florets at maturity. 2n = 14. }{\i\fs28 Sandy or rocky places near the sea. S. Portugal, S.W. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs Lu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. A. barbata}{\fs28  Pott ex Link in Schrader,}{\i\fs28  Jour. f\'fcr die Bot.}{\b\fs28  1799}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 315 (1800). Stems 30-100 cm, glabrous. Leaves up to 30 cm, usually 3-8 mm wide, usually sparsely hairy or ciliate; ligule 2-5 mm. Panicle up to 30(-50) cm, subsecund. Spikelets 18-30 mm, with 2-3 florets. Glumes subequal, 5- to 7(-9)veined. Lemma 12-18 mm, narrowly lanceolate, villous up to the insertion of the awn; aristulae 3-12 mm; awn 30-60 mm. Palea 4/5 as long as lemma. Callus-scar oblong-ovate. Rhachilla disarticulating between the florets at maturity.}{\i\fs28  Dry, waste places, roadsides and cultivated ground. S. Europe.}{\fs28  Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [Au Az Ge].
\par 
\par    (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 barbata}{\fs28 : Lemma with aristulae 3-5 mm, without lateral setae. 2n = 14, 28.}{\i\fs28  Throughout most of the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par    (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 atherantha}{\fs28  (C. Presl) Rocha Afonso,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  76}{\fs28 : 358 (1978) (}{\i\fs28 A. atherantha}{\fs28  C. Presl): Lemma with
\par 
\par 206}
\par }