{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 scabridulous; ligule 3-7 mm. Panicle up to 25 cm, more or less patent. Spikelets 25-35 mm, with 3(-4) florets. Glumes subequal, 7- to 9-veined. Lemma 15-20 mm, narrowly lanceolate, glabrous except for a basal tuft of long hairs; apex with teeth 0·5-1·5 mm; awn 25-35 mm, without a distinct column, flexuous but never geniculate, the lowest 1(-2) lemmas awned, the others unawned. Palea 3/4 as long as lemma. Rhachilla not disarticulating at maturity, but breaking at the base of the segment below each floret.{\i  Cultivated as a cereal in S. Europe, mainly on dry or saline soils}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Derived from {\b 11} by selection under cultivation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. A. sterilis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 118 (1762). Stems 50-150 cm, glabrous. Leaves up to 60 cm × 4-13 mm, scabridulous, sometimes ciliate below. Panicle up to 40 cm, usually patent. Spikelets 25-45 mm. Glumes subequal, 7- to 11-veined. Lemma 18-33 mm, narrowly lanceolate, with rigid hairs in the proximal 2/3; apex with teeth 1-1·5 mm; awn 30-90 mm. Palea 4/5 as long as lemma. Callus-scar ovate to ovate-oblong. Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes but not between the florets.{\i  Dry, waste places and cultivated fields. S. Europe.} ?Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu *Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Az Be Br Cz Hu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sterilis}: Ligule 6-8 mm. Spikelets (32-)35-45 mm, with 3-5 florets, the 2(-3) lower usually awned. Glumes 9- to 11-veined. Lemma 25-33 mm; awn 60-90 mm, stout. 2n = 42.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ludoviciana} (Durieu) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 810 (1882) ({\i A. ludoviciana} Durieu): Ligule 3-4 mm. Spikelets 25-30(-32) mm, with 2-3 florets, the one or two lower awned. Glumes 7- to 9-veined. Lemma 18-25 mm; awn 30-60 mm, slender. 2n = 42.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. murphyi} Ladizinsky, {\i Israel Jour. Bot.}{\b  20}: 24 (1971). Like {\b 13}({\b a}) but ligule 2-4 mm; panicle not more than 25 cm; spikelets with 2-4 florets; lemma glabrous, with slightly divergent teeth; rhachilla-segments with a tuft of hairs below each lemma; callus-scar elliptical. 2n = 28. {\i Roadsides and waste places. S.W. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 61.       Helictotrichon}     Besser
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J. Holub. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Caespitose perennials. Leaves distinctly ribbed above, the basal without distinct bulliform cells above, or with several rows of small bulliform cells between the ribs; ligule of cauline leaves usually truncate-dentate; sheaths of basal leaves usually open to the base. Inflorescence a compound panicle. Spikelets usually numerous, erect or patent, slightly compressed laterally with 2-4 fertile and 1(-2) sterile florets; all fertile florets usually awned. Glumes lanceolate, unequal, membranous, acute, the lower 1-veined, the upper 3-veined. Lemma lanceolate, 5- to 7-veined, glabrous, slightly 2-dentate; awn geniculate, arising at about the middle of the lemma, more or less terete in lower part. Palea more or less 2-fid at apex, shortly ciliate on keels. Ovary densely hairy. Grain deeply sulcate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: C. Gervais,{\i  Denkschr. Schweiz. Naturf. Ges.}{\b  88}: 3-166 (1973). J. Holub in I. Klastersky, {\i Philip Maximilian Opiz und seine Bedeutung für die Pflanzentaxonomie,} 101-133. Praha, 1958. E. Paunero,{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  17}({\b 1}): 259-267 (1959). E. Potztal, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  75}: 321-332 (1951). A. St-Yves,{\i  Candollea}{\b  4}: 376 423 (1931).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ligules, at least of basal leaves, 3-8 mm, longer than 
\par
  wide, acute, not ciliate on the upper margin
\par
2 Basal leaves at least 1 mm wide; all ligules 3-6 mm,
\par
  oblong; panicle with 15-45 spikelets .......................................... {\b 4. parlatorei}
\par
2 Basal leaves not more than 0·7 mm wide, setaceous;
\par
  ligules of basal leaves 3-8 mm, lanceolate, of cauline
\par
  leaves 1-3 mm, truncate; panicle with 7-17 spikelets ............ {\b 13. desertorum} 
\par
1 Ligules 0·2-1·5 mm, wider than long, truncate, ciliate
\par
  on the upper margin
\par
3 Sheaths of inner basal leaves always dark violet-brown
\par
4 Lower glume 13-15 mm, the upper 15-20 mm; callus-hairs
\par
  4·5-6 mm; basal leaves at least 1 mm in diameter .................... {\b 10. filifolium}
\par
4 Lower glume c. 10 mm, the upper c. 12 mm; callus-hairs
\par
  3-3·5 mm; basal leaves not more than 0·9 mm in diameter ..... {\b 11. murcicum}
\par
3 Sheaths of inner basal leaves whitish or brownish,
\par
  sometimes suffused with violet when young
\par
5 Basal leaves 0·5-0·9 mm in diameter, never flat; callus-
\par
  hairs nearly ½ as long as lemma; panicle 4-9 cm
\par
6 Stem glabrous below the panicle; panicle-axis smooth;
\par
  spikelets 8-12 mm; awn 12-18 mm ............................................. {\b 5. setaceum}
\par
6 Stem pubescent below the panicle; panicle-axis scabrid;
\par
  spikelets 12-15 mm; awn 18-22 mm ............................................ {\b 6. petzense}
\par
5 Basal leaves 0·7-4 mm wide, sometimes ± flat; callus-
\par
  hairs 1/4-1/3 as long as lemma; panicle 6-25 cm
\par
7 Basal leaves without a conspicuous subepidermal layer
\par
  of sclerenchyma; non-flowering shoots extravaginal
\par
8 Sheaths of basal leaves open to the base; pedicels 
\par
  scarcely clavate; leaves glaucous above, dark green beneath ...... {\b 1. decorum}
\par
8 Sheaths of basal leaves open only in the upper half;
\par
  pedicels clavate; leaves greyish-green on both surfaces
\par
9 Leaves (1-)2(-4) mm wide, often convolute; spikelets 
\par
  with 2-3 fertile florets; anthers 3-4·5 mm .................................. {\b 2. sedenense}
\par
9 Leaves (2-)3-4(-7) mm wide, usually flat; spikelets
\par
  with 3-4 fertile florets; anthers c. 5 mm .................................. {\b 3. planifolium}
\par
7 Basal leaves with a continuous subepidermal layer of 
\par
  sclerenchyma; at least some non-flowering shoots intra-
\par
  vaginal
\par
10 Dead leaves Soón deciduous; rhachilla disarticulating
\par
   only above the glumes .......................................................... {\b 7. sempervirens}
\par
10 Dead leaves ± persistent; rhachilla disarticulating
\par
   below each floret
\par
11 Basal leaves pubescent beneath ......................................... {\b 9. sarracenorum}
\par
11 Basal leaves glabrous beneath, though sometimes ciliate
\par
12 Stem 1-3 mm in diameter; panicle 10-15 cm; hairs of 
\par
   rhachilla 2·5-3·5 mm; lemma 9-11 mm ................................ {\b 8. convolutum} 
\par
12 Stem 3-6 mm in diameter; panicle 12-25 cm; hairs of 
\par
   rhachilla 4·5-5 mm; lemma 10-13 mm ................................ {\b 12. cantabricum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. decorum} (Janka) Henrard,{\i  Blumea}{\b  3}: 430 (1940). Non-flowering shoots extravaginal, sometimes elongated. Stems 40-80(-100) cm. Basal leaves 20-50 cm × 2·5-4 mm when flat, or 1-1·4 mm in diameter when convolute, dull, glaucous and scabrid above, shiny, dark green and smooth beneath, without a continuous subepidermal layer of sclerenchyma long-persistent when dead; sheaths of basal leaves open to base; ligule c. 0·5 mm, truncate, ciliate. Panicle 10-15 cm, primary branches with 4-10 spikelets; pedicels not distinctly clavate. Spikelets (8-)10-14 mm, with 2-3 fertile florets. Rhachilla disarticulating below each floret; segments 2-3 mm, with hairs 2·5-3 mm; callus-hairs 2-2·5 mm. Lower glume 7-9 mm, the upper 9-11 mm. Lemma 7-10 mm. Palea 6-9 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • E. & S. Carpathians and mountains of Transilvania.} Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. sedenense} (DC.) J. Holub,{\i  Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}){\b  5}: 436 (1970) ({\i Avena montana} Vill.,{\i  A. sedenensis} DC.). Non-flowering shoots extravaginal. Stems (30-)40-80(-90) cm. Basal leaves 10-25 cm × (1-)2(-4) mm when flat, or 0·5-0·9 mm in diameter when convolute, greyish-green, without a continuous subepidermal layer of sclerenchyma, more or less persistent when
\par

\par
208}
\par