{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Perianth cylindrical; outer 3 segments free or variously connate; inner 3 free from each other but sometimes adnate to the outer. Stamens exserted or equalling perianth; anthers extrorse, basifixed. Fruit a loculicidal capsule; seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A large genus, almost exclusively African, of which many species and hybrids are cultivated for ornament in the Mediterranean region. In habit it shows strong affinities with the Agavaceae, but lacks the distinctive anatomical and cytological characters of that family.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Measurements of the inflorescence include the peduncle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In addition to the species described below a few others are reported as escapes and perhaps naturalized in single localities near the coast of S.E. France or N.E. Spain. These include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. spectabilis} Reynolds, {\i Jour. S. Afr. Bot.}{\b  3}: 129 (1937). Like {\b 9} but with yellow flowers and shorter racemes and bracts.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. maculata} All., {\i Auct. Syn. Stirp. Horti Taur.} 13 (1773) ({\i A. umbellata} DC.). Stem short, erect; leaves 25-30 × 8-12 cm, with white spots on upper surface; flowers in subcapitate racemes arranged in a dichotomous panicle; perianth c. 40 mm, orange to pink; stamens scarcely exserted.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A}. × {\b principis} (Haw.) Stearn, {\i Cactus Jour. }{\b 7}: 42 (1938) ({\i A. salm-dyckiana }Schultes & Schultes fil.; {\b 8} × {\b 9}). Like {\b 8} but usually with some spines on lower surface of leaf near apex, and with stamens exceeding perianth by 7-12 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A plant of this genus naturalized in S. Greece has been ascribed to {\b A. obscura} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict}. ed. 8, no. 6 (1768), but this name cannot with certainty be attached to any wild species or known hybrid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: G. W. Reynolds. {\i The Aloes of South Africa.} Johannesburg. 1950. {\i The Aloes of tropical Africa and Madagascar}. Mbabane. 1966.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stamens exceeding perianth by 20-25 mm at full anthesis ............... {\b 9. ferox}
\par
1 Stamens equalling perianth, or exceeding it by not more than 5 mm
\par
2 Leaves 35-60 cm
\par
3 Flowers yellow ................................................................................... {\b 4. vera}
\par
3 Flowers red
\par
4 Stem not more than 1 m, often absent; bracts and marginal
\par
  spines of leaves dark purple ....................................................... {\b 7. succotrina}
\par
4 Stem 1·5-3·5 m; bracts and marginal spines of leaves 
\par
  greenish .................................................................................... {\b 8. arborescens} 
\par
2 Leaves 6-20 cm
\par
5 Stem well-developed, ± decumbent; leaves not all 
\par
  crowded in terminal rosettes
\par
6 Leaves linear-lanceolate, with ciliate auricles; pedicels c. 5 mm ... {\b 5. ciliaris}
\par
6 Leaves ovate-lanceolate, without ciliate auricles;
\par
  pedicels c. 40 mm ........................................................................ {\b 6. perfoliata}
\par
5 Stem absent, or short and erect; leaves all crowded in 
\par
  dense, terminal rosettes
\par
7 Leaves 2½-4 times as long as wide; all perianth-
\par
  segments free ............................................................................... {\b 3. brevifolia}
\par
7 Leaves 5-8 times as long as wide; perianth-segments 
\par
  variously united
\par
8 Leaves with a flexuous apical arista 10-15 mm; bracts 
\par
  much shorter than pedicels .............................................................. {\b 1. aristata}
\par
8 Leaves with a stout apical spine 2-4 mm; bracts almost
\par
  as long as pedicels .......................................................................... {\b 2. humilis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. aristata} Haw.,{\i  Philos. Mag.}{\b  66}: 280 (1825). Herb; leaves in a dense, subglobose, sessile rosette 8-10 × 1-1·5 cm, narrowly triangular-lanceolate, erect or incurved, with subspinose, white tubercles on the lower and usually on the upper surface, and with a soft, whitish terminal arista 10-15 mm. Inflorescence 30-40 cm, simple or branched; lower part of peduncle without bracts. Racemes 15-20 × 12-15 cm, lax; pedicels up to 35 mm; bracts c. 12 mm. Perianth 30-40 mm, orange-red, variably tinged with brownish-green; outer segments connate except at apex; inner segments adnate to outer. Stamens scarcely exceeding perianth.{\i  Naturalized from gardens near the coast of S.E. France.} [Ga.] ({\i South Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. humilis} (L.) Miller, {\i Gard. Dict. }ed. 8, no. 10 in corrig. (1768) ({\i A. verrucose-spinose }All.). Like {\b 1} but leaves terminating in a stout spine 2-4 mm; bracts almost as long as pedicels and abundant on lower part of peduncle.{\i  Naturalized from gardens in S.E. France.} [Ga.] ({\i South Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. brevifolia} Miller,{\i  op. cit. }no. 8 in corrig. (1768). Stoloniferous herb with numerous leaf-rosettes, basal or rarely terminating stems up to 10 cm; leaves 6-15 × 2-4 cm, ovate-lanceolate, glaucous, usually with a few subspinose tubercles on lower surface near the apex. Inflorescence c. 40 cm, simple. Raceme 15 × 7 cm; bracts and pedicels c. 15 mm; bracts present on lower part of peduncle. Perianth 25-40 mm, orange-red; segments closely contiguous but free. Stamens exceeding perianth by 3-4 mm. {\i Naturalized from gardens near the coast of S.E. France.} [Ga.] ({\i South Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. vera} (L.) Burm. fil.,{\i  Fl. Ind.} 83 (1768) ({\i A. vulgaris} Lam.). Stoloniferous herb with numerous leaf-rosettes, basal or rarely terminating stems up to 10 cm; leaves 35-60 × 5-8 cm, narrowly triangular-lanceolate, glaucous, sometimes tinged with red, smooth on both surfaces. Inflorescence simple or with 1-2 branches. Racemes 30-50 × 5-6 cm; bracts 10 mm; pedicels 5 mm; flowers sharply deflexed. Perianth 25-30 mm, yellow; outer segments connate for 1/3 to 1/2 their length; inner segments adnate to outer in lower 1/3. Stamens exceeding perianth by 3-4 mm.{\i  Maritime sands and rocks. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} [Cr Gr Hs It Lu Si.] (?{\i Arabia, N.E. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. ciliaris} Haw.,{\i  Philos. Mag. }{\b 66}: 281 (1825). Freely branched shrub with decumbent stems up to 3(-5) m, 1-1·5 cm in diameter; leaves distributed over apical part of branch with internodes 5-15 mm, not crowded in a terminal rosette. Leaves 10-15 × 1·5-2·5 cm, linear-lanceolate, with sheathing base and conspicuous, ciliate auricles; marginal teeth small, scarcely spinose. Inflorescence 20-30 cm, simple. Racemes 8-20 cm; bracts 3 mm, whitish; pedicels 5 mm. Perianth c. 30 mm, scarlet; outer segments connate in basal 4/5; inner free. Stamens exceeding perianth by 2-4 mm.{\i  Naturalized from gardens near the coast of S.E. France}. [Ga.] ({\i South Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. perfoliata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 319 (1753) ({\i A. mitriformis }Miller). Shrub; stem 1-2 m, 4-6 cm in diameter, simple or sparingly branched near the base, procumbent to decumbent; internodes as in {\b 5}. Leaves 12-20 × 5-10(-15) cm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, somewhat glaucous; marginal spines 4-6 mm, white at first, later yellow or black. Inflorescence 40-60 cm, with 2-5 branches. Racemes c. 10 × 12 cm, subcapitate; bracts c. 10 mm; pedicels 40-45 mm at base of raceme, shorter above. Perianth 40-50 mm, dull scarlet; segments closely contiguous but free. Stamens scarcely exceeding perianth.{\i  Naturalized from gardens near the coast of S.E. France}. [Ga.] ({\i South Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. succotrina} All.,{\i  Auct. Syn. Stirp. Horti Taur.} 13 (1773) ({\i A. vera} Miller, non (L.) Burm. fil., {\i A. purpurascens} (Aiton) Haw.). Shrub of very variable habit; stem up to 2 m but often very short, simple or branched, erect to decumbent, 10-15 cm in diameter. Leaves 30-50 × 7-10 cm, triangular-lanceolate, dull greyish-green, sometimes with paler spots; marginal teeth dark purple.
\par

\par
20}
\par