{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 thick, rigid, pungent at the apex, with scattered spinules above, glabrous beneath, the cauline flat, with convolute margins. Spikes narrowed towards the apex, dense, with distinct gaps between the spikelets. Spikelets with 3-5 florets. Glumes with tangled cilia on the keel. Lemma 6 mm, glabrous or more or less hairy, with an awn 2 mm.{\i  Krym}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp. {\b cristatum,} from E. & C. Asia, with spikes without distinct gaps between the spikelets, has recently been reported from S. Ural, but it is probably introduced and perhaps only casual.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. imbricatum} Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 757 (1817) ({\i Triticum imbricatum} Bieb., non Lam.) is a variant of subsp. ({\b a}) with more or less hairy spikelets.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 50.    Eremopyrum}        (Ledeb.)Jaub.& Spach
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A. Melderis. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat; ligule short. Inflorescence a dense, compressed spike. Spikelets solitary at each node of the rhachis, arranged alternately and pectinately, sessile, with 3-6 florets, strongly compressed laterally; rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes and below the florets. Glumes equal, coriaceous, becoming very hard at maturity, with a prominent keel, connate at the base, unawned or shortly awned. Lemma coriaceous, 5-veined, keeled, acute or awned. Palea shorter than the lemma, membranous, 2-keeled, ciliate on the keels in the upper part.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: N. L. Bor in K. H. Rechinger,{\i  Flora Iranica}{\b  70}: 185-191. Graz. 1970.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Glumes 1-veined, conspicuously canaliculate along each
\par
  side of the keel, lower lemmas shortly hairy below, the
\par
  others glabrous ............................................................................. {\b 1. triticeum}
\par
1 Glumes 3- to 5-veined, not conspicuously canaliculate 
\par
  along each side of the keel; all lemmas hairy
\par
2 Spike elliptic-ovate; glumes lanceolate, with 2-3 
\par
  conspicuous marginal veins, strongly curved; lemma his-
\par
  pidulous ..................................................................................... .. {\b 2. orientale}
\par
2 Spike oblong; glumes linear-lanceolate, with obscure 
\par
  marginal veins, slightly curved; lemma villous .............................. {\b 3. distans}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. triticeum} (Gaertner) Nevski,{\i  Acta Univ. As. Med}. ser. 8b (Bot.), {\b 17}: 52 (1934). Stems up to 30 cm. Leaves up to 4 cm × 1-2 mm, scabrid or shortly hairy on the upper surface. Spike 1-1·7 cm × 6-10 mm, very dense, elliptic-ovate or orbicular in outline, often breaking off whole at maturity; rhachis fairly tough. Spikelets 6-10 mm, divergent at a wide angle from the rhachis, usually with 2-3 florets. Glumes 4-6 mm, 1/2-2/3 as long as the spikelet, broadly lanceolate, prominently inflated at the base, 1-veined, conspicuously canaliculate along each side of the keel, glabrous, with a spinose-subulate apex. Lemma 5-6 mm, shortly awned, the lower shortly hairy below, glabrous above, the others glabrous. Palea rounded or emarginate at the apex. 2n = 14.{\i  Steppes and other dry habitats. S.E. Europe, from E. Romania to W. Kazakhstan, and extending northwards to C. Russia; an occasional casual elsewhere.} Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. orientale} (L.) Jaub. & Spach,{\i  Ill. Pl. Or.}{\b  4}: 26 (1851). Stems up to 25 cm. Leaves 3-6 cm × 2-3 mm, scabridulous, sometimes puberulent on the upper surface. Spike up to 2·5 cm × 9-15 mm, dense, elliptic-ovate; rhachis fragile. Spikelets 10-15 mm, divergent from the rhachis, usually with 2-3 florets. Glumes 10-15 mm (including awns), lanceolate, asymmetrical, with 2-3 conspicuous marginal veins, strongly curved, hispid on the sides, with an awn 2-5 mm. Lemma as long as or slightly longer than the glumes, hispidulous, with an awn 4-5 mm. Keels of the palea prolonged into 2 tooth-like appendages. 2n = 28. {\i Steppes and semi-deserts. S.E. Europe, from E. Romania to W. Kazakhstan.} Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. E. distans} (C. Koch) Nevski, {\i Acta Univ. As. Med.} ser. 8b (Bot.), {\b 17}: 52 (1934). Stems up to 25 cm. Leaves 6-8 cm × 2-3 mm, scabrid, sometimes-sparsely hairy on the upper surface, glabrous beneath. Spike 2·5-5 cm × 8-15 mm, dense; rhachis very fragile. Spikelets 15-17 mm, more or less suberect, with 3-5(-6) florets. Glumes 13-17 mm (including awns), narrowly lanceolate, with 2-3 obscure marginal veins, slightly curved, villous on sides; awn 6-7 mm. Lemma as long as or slightly longer than the glumes, densely villous, with an awn 5-7 mm. Keels of the palea prolonged into 2 tooth-like appendages. 2n = 14, 28.{\i  Stony, sandy or clayey slopes. S.E. Russia.} Rs (E). ({\i S.W. & S.C. Asia; Algeria.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 51.    Crithopsis}     Jaub.& Spach
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A. Melderis. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat; ligule very short. Inflorescence a short, dense spike; rhachis compressed, very fragile, densely hairy. Spikelets in pairs at each node of the rhachis, with 2 florets, the lower bisexual, the upper sterile, rudimentary; rhachilla flattened, disarticulating below the florets. Glumes equal, coriaceous, strap-shaped, longer than the florets, scabrid. Lemma of the lower floret flattened dorsally, 5-veined, scabrid and often somewhat verrucose below, scabrid and more or less hirsute above, awned. Palea nearly as long as the lemma, 2-keeled, ciliate on the keels.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. delileana} (Schultes) Roshev.,{\i  Zlaki} 319 (1937) ({\i Agropyron cretense} Coust. & Gand.). Stems up to 35 cm, usually fasciculate, geniculate at the base, smooth and glabrous. Leaves up to 6 cm × 3 mm, linear-acuminate, scabrid and sparsely long-hairy on the upper surface and margins, smooth and glabrous beneath. Spike 2·5-3·5 cm (excluding awns). Glumes 15-21 mm (including awns), narrow, flattened, 3-veined. Lemma c. 7 mm, oblong-lanceolate, with a flattened awn 4-7 mm.{\i  Sandy calcareous soils. Kriti.} Cr. ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 52.     Aegilops}         L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin & C.J. Humphries. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves usually flat. Inflorescence a spike. Spikelets solitary at the nodes of the rhachis, all hermaphrodite or the upper sterile and the lower vestigial. Florets 2-8, the upper usually male or vestigial. Glumes equal, coriaceous, truncate, often with 1 or more teeth or awns, usually rounded on the back. Lemma thin below, coriaceous and strongly veined towards the toothed or awned apex. Palea with 2 keels.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Closely related to and sometimes united with {\i Triticum.} In spite of the occurrence of hybrids and the close genetic connection between the two genera they are sufficiently distinct morphologically to make it convenient to maintain them both.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   All species occur in dry, open habitats.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: A. Eig,{\i  Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih}.) {\b 55}: 1-228 (1929). N. L. Bor in C. C. Townsend & E. Guest,{\i  Flora of Iraq} {\b 9}: 173-194. Baghdad. 1968.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spike (excluding awns) more than 10 times as long as 
\par
  wide, ± cylindrical
\par
2 Spikelets ventricose; spike moniliform ..................................... {\b 2. ventricosa}
\par
2 Spikelets not or scarcely ventricose; spike not moniliform
\par
3 Glumes truncate, with a tooth or short awn .............................. {\b 1. speltoides}
\par
3 Glumes not truncate, those of the terminal spikelet 
\par
  long-awned
\par
4 Awns longer than the spike ..................................................... {\b 4. dischasians}
\par
4 Awns shorter than the spike ...................................................... {\b 3. cylindrica} 
\par
1 Spike (excluding awns) c. 5 times as long as wide or 
\par
  less, tapering markedly towards the apex
\par

\par
200}
\par