{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 disarticulating at maturity. Fertile spikelets (1-)2(-3), somewhat ventricose. Lower glume of lowest spikelet 7-8 × 5-6 mm, with (3-)4-5 long awns; awns of the lemma about as long as those of the glumes. Terminal spikelet sterile. 2n = 28.{\i  S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. neglecta} Req. ex Bertol., {\i Fl. Ital.}{\b  1}: 787 (1834) ({\i A. triaristata} Willd., nom illegit.,{\i  A. ovata} L. pro parte, {\i Triticum ovatum} var. {\i triaristatum} Ascherson & Graebner). Stems several, up to 45 cm. Leaves hairy; sheaths glabrous or the lower sparsely villous, somewhat inflated. Spike 1-3 × 0·8-1·3 cm (excluding awns), abruptly contracted above the second spikelet, with 2(-3) vestigial basal spikelets; rhachis not disarticulating at maturity. Spikelets 3-4, the lower 2 fertile, crowded, the upper 1-2 sterile, remote. Lower glume of fertile spikelets 8-11 × 5-7 mm, with 2-3 long awns; awns of lemma distinctly shorter than those of glumes. 2n = 28, 42.{\i  S. Europe.} Al Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 53.        Triticum}       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.J. Humphries. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a distichous spike. Spikelets solitary at each node of the rhachis, each with 2-6(-9) florets, the upper 1 or 2 of which are usually sterile. Glumes equal, chartaceous (rarely membranous), truncate, with 1-2 teeth, or awned. Lemma coriaceous, ventricose, scabrid. Palea membranous, with 2 keels.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: F. Kornicke,{\i  Die Arten und Varietäten des Getreides. Handbuch des Getreidbaues }{\b 1}. Bonn. 1885. J. Percival,{\i  The Wheat Plant.} London. 1921. C. A. Flaksberger,{\i  Kulturnaya Flora SSSR.} (1) {\i Khlebnye Zlaki. Psenica}. Moskva & Leningrad. 1935. R. F. Peterson, {\i Wheat. Botany, Cultivation and Utilization.} London & New York. 1965. N. L. Bor in C. C. Townsend & E. Guest,{\i  Flora of Iraq}{\b  9}: 194-208. Baghdad. 1968.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\i Triticum }consists of a polyploid series in which there are diploid, tetraploid and hexaploid representatives, with chromosome numbers of 14, 28 and 42. Genome analysis of the karyotypes has shown that the diploids have one {\i Triticum} genome, the tetraploids have this genome and another derived from {\i Aegilops speltoides} Tausch, and the hexaploids have both these and a third derived from{\i  Aegilops squarrosa} L.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The cultivation of {\b 2}, {\b 3}, {\b 5}, {\b 6} and {\b 7} is declining almost everywhere, giving way to {\b 4} and{\b  8}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Glumes 25-35(-40) mm, membranous, often concealing the
\par
  lemma ........................................................................................ {\b 6. polonicum}
\par
1 Glumes 15 mm or less, chartaceous, not concealing the lemma 
\par
2 Rhachis fragile, disarticulating at maturity
\par
3 Spikelets with 2 florets, one fertile
\par
4 Rhachis densely hairy, disarticulating readily at maturity ....... {\b 1. baeoticum}
\par
4 Rhachis sparsely ciliate, disarticulating only with 
\par
  pressure at maturity ............................................................... {\b 2. monococcum}
\par
3 Spikelets usually with 3-5 florets, usually 2 fertile
\par
5 Rhachis disarticulating above the spikelet .................................. {\b 3. dicoccon}
\par
5 Rhachis disarticulating below the spikelet ....................................... {\b 7. spelta}
\par
2 Rhachis tough, not disarticulating at maturity
\par
6 Glumes strongly keeled throughout
\par
7 Glumes nearly as long as lowest floret; endosperm 
\par
  flinty; spike slender, laterally compressed ....................................... {\b 4. durum}
\par
7 Glumes c. 2/3 as long as lowest floret; endosperm mealy;
\par
  spike stout, nearly square in section ............................................ {\b 5. turgidum}
\par
6 Glumes keeled in the upper half only
\par
8 Spikes lax, more than 3 times as long as wide; upper 
\par
  internodes of the rhachis 4-8 mm ................................................. {\b 8. aestivum}
\par
8 Spikes dense, not more than 3 times as long as wide;
\par
  upper internodes of the rhachis (0·5-)1-3 mm ......................... {\b 9. compactum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. baeoticum} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 13}): 69 (1853) ({\i T. monococcum} subsp.{\i  baeoticum} (Boiss.) Hayek). Stems 60-100 cm, solid or thick-walled, pubescent at the nodes. Leaves 2-4 mm wide, scabrid, ciliate and hairy on the veins. Spike 4-9 cm (excluding awns), slender, lax, laterally compressed. Rhachis densely hairy at the nodes and margin, brittle, disarticulating below the spikelet at maturity. Spikelets with 2 florets, one fertile. Glumes (4-)6-9(-10) mm, coriaceous, with two dentate keels, one of which is prominent. Fertile lemma with awn up to 10 cm.{\i  Grassland. Balkan peninsula and Krym. }Al Bu Gr Ju Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The plants from Krym, with two fertile florets in a spikelet and long awns on each fertile lemma, have been regarded as conspecific with {\b T. thaoudar} Reuter ex Hausskn., {\i Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver.} nov. ser., {\b 13-14}: 66 (1899), from S.E. Asia, which is doubtfully distinct from {\b 1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. monococcum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 86 (1753). Like {\b 1} but leaves up to 10 mm wide and glabrous, the rhachis sparsely ciliate at the nodes and less brittle and the spike shorter and more compact. 2n = 14. {\i Cultivated as a cereal} ({\i einkorn}){\i  on a small scale in the Balkan peninsula and Romania; a rare weed elsewhere.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. T. dicoccon} Schrank,{\i  Baier. Fl.}{\b  1}: 389 (1789) ({\i T. volgense} (Flaksberger) Nevski). Stems 80-130 cm, solid or thick-walled and hollow, glabrous to sparsely pubescent at the nodes. Leaves up to 20 mm wide, scabrid. Spike (2-)3-7(-11) cm (excluding awns), lax, laterally compressed. Rhachis glabrous or hairy at the nodes and margin, brittle, disarticulating above the spikelet at maturity. Spikelets with 3(-4) florets. Glumes (6-)7-10(-13) mm, coriaceous, persistent, with a single prominent, veined keel. Lemma usually with a scabrid awn up to 15 cm. 2n = 28.{\i  Cultivated as a cereal} ({\i emmer}) {\i locally in S.E. Europe and E.C. Russia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. T. durum} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  1}: 114 (1798). Stems 70-140 cm, solid or thick-walled and hollow, glabrous at the nodes. Leaves 7-16 mm wide, puberulent. Spike 4-11 cm (excluding awns), dense, laterally compressed. Rhachis hairy at the nodes and margin, tough. Spikelets with 5(-7) florets. Glumes (8-)10-12 mm, coriaceous, with a prominent, veined, crested keel and a secondary weak, dentate keel, sometimes pubescent towards the apex. Fertile lemma with a stout, scabrid awn up to 20 cm. Caryopsis extremely hard; endosperm flinty. 2n = 28.{\i  Cultivated as a cereal} ({\i durum wheat}){\i  widely in the Mediterranean region, and rarely elsewhere in S. & S.C. Europe, mainly for use in macaroni and similar products}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. T. turgidum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 86 (1753). Stems 120-170 cm, thick-walled, more or less solid. Leaves up to 18 mm wide, softly pubescent, at least when young. Spikes 7-12 cm, cylindrical, dense, sometimes branched below. Rhachis hairy at the nodes and margin, tough. Spikelets with 5-7 florets. Glumes 9-10 mm, broadly ovate, coriaceous, with prominent, 1-veined keel, terminating in an acute, curved, apical tooth. Awn of fertile lemma 8-12(-16) cm. Endosperm mealy. 2n = 28.{\i  Cultivated as a cereal} ({\i rivet wheat}){\i  locally throughout a large part of Europe, but mainly in the south}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. T. polonicum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 127 (1762). Stems 100-160 cm, thick-walled, filled with pith, glabrous or rarely pubescent at
\par

\par
202}
\par