{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b glaucum} (Steudel) Tzvelev, {\i Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 8}: 67 (1971) ({\i H. glaucum} Steudel): Leaves glaucous. Palea of central spikelet 0·7-0·8 times as long as palea of lateral spikelets. 2n = 14.{\i  Mediterranean region and S. W. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b leporinum} (Link) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital. }805 (1882) ({\i H. leporinum} Link): Leaves green. Palea of central spikelet 0·7-0·9 times as long as palea of lateral spikelets. 2n = 28. {\i S. Europe, extending northwards to N. W. France and C. Ukraine}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Covas considers subsp. ({\b c}) to be an allotetraploid arising from hybridization between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. H. marinum} Hudson, {\i Fl. Angl}. ed. 2,{\b  1}: 57 (1778) ({\i H. maritimum} Stokes). Stems 5-60 cm, erect or geniculately ascending. Leaves 1·5-4 mm wide, puberulent; basal leaf-sheaths glabrous or pubescent, with dense short hairs 0·1-0·25 mm. Spike (1-)1·5-5 cm (excluding awns), oblong, tapered towards the apex. Glumes subulate, scabridulous; inner glume of lateral spikelets expanded into a wing 0·6-1·4 mm wide at the base. 2n = 14, 28.{\i  Maritime sands and disturbed ground. S. Europe, and coasts of W. Europe, northwards to N.E. England.} Al Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr †Da Ga Ge Gr Hs Ho It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. H. hystrix} Roth,{\i  Catalecta Bot.}{\b  1}: 23 (1797) ({\i H. maritimum }subsp.{\i  gussonianum }(Parl.) Ascherson & Graebner). Like {\b 5} but basal leaf-sheaths with hairs 0·5-1(-1·2) mm; inner glumes of lateral spikelets 0·2-0·6(-0·7) mm wide, subulate or slightly swollen, but not winged. 2n = 14, 28.{\i  Dry, grassy places and disturbed ground. S., S.E. & E.C. Europe.} Al Au Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. BULBOHORDEUM Nevski. Perennials; stems swollen at the base. Spikes linear. Lateral spikelets male. Outer glume of lateral spikelets setaceous, the inner linear-lanceolate. Glumes of central spikelet linear-lanceolate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. H. bulbosum} L., {\i Cent. Pl.}{\b  2}: 8 (1756). Stems up to 100 cm, erect. Leaves 1-7 mm wide, scabridulous, sometimes covered with long, white hairs on the upper surface. Spike 5-15 cm, dense, compressed. Rhachis disarticulating readily at maturity. 2n = 14, 28.{\i  Dry grassland. Mediterranean region and S.E. Europe.} Al Bu Cr Gr Hs It Ju Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [Ga Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Diploid plants occur mainly in the W. & C. Mediterranean region; they are more delicate than the tetraploid plants, with more numerous tillers and narrower leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. STENOSTACHYS Nevski. Densely caespitose perennials. Spikes dense, linear, compressed, slender. Lateral spikelets sterile or male. Glumes of lateral spikelets more or less erect at maturity, subulate, scabridulous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. H. bogdanii} Wilensky,{\i  Izv. Saratovsk. Opyt. Stan.}{\b  12}: 13 (1918). Stems (40-)50-100 cm, erect; nodes pubescent. Leaves 2-10 mm wide, scabrid; walls of epidermal cells straight; sheaths smooth, sometimes hairy below. Spike 3-10 cm. Rhachis slightly scabrid on the angles, tough below but disarticulating readily above at maturity. Pedicels of lateral spikelets 1-1·5 mm; central spikelet sessile. Lemma of central spikelet 5-8 mm, lanceolate, scabrid-appressed-puberulent; awn 0·6-1·5(-2·5) cm; anthers 1·25-1·5 mm.{\i  Wet meadows. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E). ({\i C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. H. brevisubulatum} (Trin.) Link, {\i Linnaea}{\b  17}: 391 (1843). Stems 20-50 cm, slender, erect or geniculately ascending; nodes pubescent. Leaves 1-4 mm wide, scabridulous; walls of epidermal cells straight. Spike 4·5-7 cm. Rhachis ciliate on the angles, tough below, disarticulating at maturity above. Pedicels of lateral spikelets up to 1 mm; central spikelet sessile. Lemma of central spikelet 4-5·5 mm, lanceolate, sparsely scabrid-puberulent; awn 0·1-0·5 cm; anthers 2·5-4 mm.{\i  Saline meadows. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (C, E). ({\i Siberia and C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. H. secalinum} Schreber,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Lips.} 148 (1771) ({\i H. pratense} Hudson). Stems 15-70 cm, slender, erect; nodes glabrous. Leaves 0·2-0·5 cm wide, glabrous below, sparsely pubescent above; walls of epidermal cells sinuate; sheaths hairy below. Spike 2-5(-6) cm. Rhachis ciliate, disarticulating at maturity. Pedicels of lateral spikelets up to 1·5 mm; central spikelet sessile. Lemma of central spikelet 3-6 mm, lanceolate, glabrous, shortly awned. 2n = 14, 28.{\i  Meadows. From S. Sweden southwards to C. Spain, Sicilia and Bulgaria, but absent from a large part of C. Europe.} Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Hs Ho ?Hu Ju Lu It Po Rm Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Occasionally produces male-sterile hybrids with {\i Elymus repens} (L.) Gould ( × {\i Agrohordeum langei} (K. Richter) Camus).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CRITESION (Rafin.) Nevski. Caespitose perennials. Spikes narrowly linear, dense, slender. Lateral spikelets sterile. Glumes equal, long, slender, scabridulous, divaricate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. H. jubatum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 85 (1753) ({\i Critesion jubatum} (L.) Nevski). Stems 20-60 cm, erect or geniculately ascending. Leaves 2-4 mm wide, scabridulous above, pubescent below; sheaths more or less patent-hairy. Spike 3-8(-11) cm. Rhachis ciliate, disarticulating readily at maturity. Pedicels of lateral spikelets up to 3 mm; florets linear-subulate, awned, sterile; central spikelet with pedicel up to 1 mm. Glumes 3-8 cm, patent at maturity. Lemma of central spikelet smooth, lanceolate, with a slender awn 2-10 cm. 2n = 28.{\i  Naturalized in N. & W.C. Europe.} [Be Da Fe Ge He Ho No Su.] ({\i N. America, E. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 58.        Hordelymus}  (Jessen) C.O. Harz 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.J. Humphries. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Hordeum} but the rhachis always tough; lateral spikelets hermaphrodite; central spikelet usually hermaphrodite; glumes connate at the base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. europaeus} (L.) C.O. Harz, {\i Samenk.} 114 (1885) ({\i Cuviera europaea} (L.) Koeler, {\i Elymus europaeus} L., {\i Hordeum europaeum} (L.) All.). Caespitose perennial with a short, creeping rhizome. Stems 40-110 cm, scabridulous below the spike and pubescent at the nodes. Leaves 4-14 mm wide, green, usually scabridulous, at least towards the apex; sheaths hairy, sometimes glabrous above. Spike 4-12 cm, erect, dense. Glumes linear-lanceolate, stiff, glabrous to scabridulous, awned; lemma 8-10 mm, lanceolate, scabridulous to sparsely pubescent towards the apex, with an awn 1·5-2·5 cm. 2n = 28. {\i Woods and shady places. From N. Ireland and S.C. Sweden southwards to C. Spain, Sicilia and Krym.} Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K) Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 59.      Taeniatherum}    Nevski  
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.J. Humphries. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual. Leaves flat or involute. Inflorescence a dense, distichous spike, disarticulating at the nodes below the spikelets at maturity. Spikelets arranged in pairs at the nodes of the rhachis; florets 2, the lower hermaphrodite, the upper rudimentary and sterile. Glumes connate at the base, narrowly subulate, rigid. Lemma lanceolate, with a flattened callus and a long, flexuous, scabrid awn.
\par

\par
205}
\par