{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 shortly 2-fid at apex. 2n = 98.{\i  Dry slopes. N. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. A. gonzaloi} (Sennen) J. Holub,{\i  loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i Avena pratensis} subsp. {\i iberica} var.{\i  gonzaloi} Sennen). Caespitose, stoloniferous. Stems 50-90(-100) cm. Basal leaves 10-20 cm, 0·8-1 mm wide when conduplicate, usually closely conduplicate below and flat above, up to 1/4(-1/3) as long as stem, scabrid beneath, acute, with c. 6 lateral veins on each side of mid-vein, the cross-section ovate-orbicular in outline; ligule 1-2·5 mm in basal, 3-6(-10) mm in cauline leaves. Panicle 10-20 cm, with 7-17 spikelets; branches scabrid, 2(-3) at lower nodes. Spikelets 6-21 mm, with 5-6 florets; rhachilla-segments 2-3 mm, glabrous; callus-hairs c. 1 mm. Lower glume 10-12 mm, the upper 13-14 mm. Lemma 12-13 mm, narrowed in the upper 1/3, denticulate at apex.{\i  Dry places. • E. & C. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants with basal leaves 3-4 mm wide, sulcate beneath, up to half as long as stem, panicle 18-26 cm, and spikelets 20-25 mm, with 6-8 florets, were described from N.E. Spain as{\b  Avena bromoides} subsp. {\b iberica} var. {\b sennerlii} St-Yves,{\i  Candollea}{\b  4}: 457 (1931); they may represent a further species, related to {\b 12} or {\b 13}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. requienii} (Mutel) J. Holub, {\i Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}){\b  11}: 295 (1976) ({\i Avena requienii} Mutel). Caespitose, with short stolons. Stems 60-100 cm, robust. Basal leaves 30-50 cm × 1·2-1·3 mm, more or less junciform, rigid, up to ½ as long as stem, acute, with 4-5 lateral veins on each side of mid-vein, the cross-section orbicular in outline; sheaths of cauline leaves deeply sulcate; ligule 1·5-4·5 mm and hairy in basal leaves, 6-10 mm in cauline leaves. Panicle 15-20 cm, with 14-17 spikelets; branches scabrid, the primary with 2-3 remote spikelets. Spikelets 16-23 mm, with 4-7 florets; rhachilla-segments 2·5-3 mm, with hairs 2-2·5 mm. Lower glume c. 13 mm, the upper c. 17 mm. Lemma 14-16 mm. 2n = 112, 126, 133, 147.{\i  Dry places. • S.W. France, N.E. & C. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The varied chromosome-numbers suggest that {\b 14} probably includes several taxa of hybrid origin. Further investigation is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. A. pungens} (Sennen ex St-Yves) J. Holub, {\i Preslia }{\b 49}: 219 (1977) ({\i Avena pratensis} subsp.{\i  pratensis }var.{\i  pungens} Sennen ex St-Yves). Densely caespitose. Stems 50-80 cm, robust, shortly hairy above. Basal leaves 1·5-2 mm in diameter, closely convolute, subcylindrical, up to 1/4 as long as stem, slightly sulcate beneath, attenuate into a long, pungent apex; ligule 2-2·5 mm in basal, 8-10 mm in cauline leaves. Panicle 12-17 cm; branches more or less smooth, 2 at lower nodes, the primary with (1-)2-3 spikelets. Spikelets c. 20 mm, with c. 5 florets, suffused with violet; rhachilla-segments 3 mm, with hairs 2-3 mm in the upper part only. Lower glume c. 10 mm, the upper c. 14 mm. Lemma c. 14 mm, more or less violet at base, narrowed in the upper 1/3, acute and entire at apex. Palea c. 10 mm.{\i  Dry places. • E. Pyrenees.} ?Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Apparently known only from Llivia, a small Spanish enclave N.E. of Puigcerdá, surrounded by French territory.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. A. pratensis} (L.) Dumort.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Belg.}{\b  7}: 68 (1868) ({\i Avena pratensis} L.,{\i  Avenastrum pratense} (L.) Opiz,{\i  Arrhenatherum pratense} (L.) Samp.). Caespitose. Stems 30-80(-100) cm. Basal leaves 5-25 cm × 1-3(-4) mm, usually conduplicate, greyish-green, pruinose above, with 3-8 lateral veins on each side of mid-vein, the cross-section usually elliptical in outline; upper cauline leaf 0·5-3 cm, obtuse; sheaths of basal leaves subterete; ligule 0·5-1 mm in basal, 3-5(-7) mm in cauline leaves. Panicle 5-16(-20) cm, spiciform, with 5-18 spikelets; branches scabrid, 1-2 at lower nodes, the primary with 1-2 spikelets. Spikelets 12-23(-28) mm, with (3-)4-6(-8) florets; rhachilla-segments 2-3 mm, with hairs 2-3 mm; callus-hairs 1-2 mm. Lower glume 10-15 mm, the upper 12-18(-20) mm. Lemma (10-)12-16 mm. 2n = 126. {\i Dry grassland and open woods. • W. & C. Europe and W. & S. Fennoscandia, extending southwards to N.E. Spain.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs It ?Ju No Po ?Rm Rs (B, C, ?W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pratensis}: All basal leaves glabrous. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b hirtifolia} (Podp.) J. Holub,{\i  Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}){\b  11}: 295 (1976) ({\i Avenastrum pratense} var.{\i  hirtifolium} Podp.): At least the youngest basal leaves sparsely hairy beneath.{\i  C. Czechoslovakia, N.E. Austria}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    The occurrence of {\b 16} in S.E. Europe needs confirmation, as most records refer to {\b 17}. Plants from the mountains of Scotland and N. England, with larger and more strongly coloured spikelets, described as {\b Avena alpina} Sm., {\i Trans. Linn. Soc. London}{\b  10}: 335 (1811), may represent a distinct taxon.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. A. praeusta} (Reichenb.) J. Holub,{\i  Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}) {\b 11}: 295 (1976) ({\i Avena praeusta} Reichenb., {\i A. alpina} auct., non Sm.). Laxly caespitose, with short stolons. Stems 60-110(-130) cm, compressed below. Basal leaves 15-40(-60) cm × 2-6 mm, completely or partly flat, glaucous and scabrid above, with 6-10 lateral veins on each side of mid-vein; upper cauline leaf 1-5 cm. Sheaths of basal leaves compressed. Ligule c. 1 mm in basal, 4-7 mm in cauline leaves. Panicle 8-21 cm, with 12-30(-40) spikelets; branches scabrid, (1-)2 at lower nodes, the primary with (1-)2-3(-4) spikelets. Spikelets 16-22(-25) mm, greenish, only slightly suffused with violet; rhachilla-segments 2·5-3 mm, with hairs 2-3 mm; callus-hairs 2 mm. Lower glume 8-13 mm, the upper 13-18 mm. Lemma 11-16 mm, narrowed upwards from the middle. 2n = 126.{\i  Dry slopes and wood-clearings. • C. & S.E. Europe}. Au Cz Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  17} is morphologically intermediate between {\b 16} and {\b 18}. Some populations of robust plants with flat basal leaves 3-7 mm wide, strongly compressed basal sheaths and a large panicle with 10-40 spikelets are similar to {\b 18}; they have been called {\b Avena planiculmis} var. {\b taurinensis} Belli, {\i Malpighia}{\b  4}: 363 (1890) or {\b A. adsurgens} Schur ex Simonkai,{\i  Enum. Fl. Transs}. 547 (1887). Their taxonomic status is uncertain, as is that of {\b Avena pseudoviolacea} A. Kerner ex Dalla Torre,{\i  Anleit. Beob. Bestimm. Alpenpfl.} 228 (1882), and {\b A. ausserdorferi} (Ascherson & Graebner) Dalla Torre & Sarnth.,{\i  Fl. Tirol}{\b  6}({\b 1}): 199 (1906), both from high mountains in the C. Alps. The former has the panicle with few, deep violet spikelets and the panicle-branches more or less smooth. The latter differs mainly in the completely smooth panicle-branches and greenish spikelets.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. A. planiculmis} (Schrader) W. Sauer & Chmelitschek,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}) {\b 12}: 533 (1976) ({\i Avena planiculmis} Schrader). Laxly caespitose, with stolons up to 10 cm. Stems robust, scabrid above. Basal leaves flat or loosely conduplicate, with long whitish cilia towards the base, with 8-16 lateral veins on each side of mid-vein; sheaths of basal leaves strongly compressed, scabrid; ligule 1-2(-4) mm in basal, 3-10 mm in cauline leaves. Panicle dense, compound, often interrupted below. Spikelets with (4-)5-8 florets, usually variegated with brown, violet and white; rhachilla-segments c. 3 mm, with hairs 1·5-2·5 mm. Lower glume 10-12 mm, the upper 13-17 mm. Lemma 13-17 mm, indurate and distinctly veined in the lower ½. 2n = 126.{\i  Mountain grassland and scrub. E. Sudeten Mts, Carpathians and mountains of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Cz Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par
214}
\par