{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 moderately sulcate. Anthers 3·5-4 mm. •{\i  Pyrenees, N.E. Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from Portugal are usually taller and have narrower leaves than those from the Pyrenees and the lemma is uniformly yellowish-green. They may represent an additional subspecies, but require further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. albinervis} (Boiss.) Laínz,{\i  Comun. Inst. Nac. Invest. Agrar., Ser. Recurs. Nat.} ({\i Madrid}) {\b 1974}({\b 2}): 23 (1974) ({\i Avena albinervis} Boiss.). Stoloniferous. Stems 30-60 cm. Basal leaves 7-20(-25) cm × (2-)3-5(-7) mm, ¼-½ as long as stem, usually flat, greyish-green, more or less smooth on both surfaces, with 7-11 lateral veins on each side of mid-vein, laxly spirally twisted when dead; upper cauline leaf 0·5-1·5 cm, appressed to stem; ligule 0·5-2 mm in basal, 3-5 mm in cauline leaves. Panicle 7-16 cm, brownish, with 11-40 spikelets; branches scabrid, 2(-3) at lower nodes. Spikelets 12-16(-20) mm; hairs of rhachilla-segments 1·5-2 mm; callus-hairs 2-3 mm, reddish-brown. Lower glume 10-12 mm, the upper 11-14 mm. Lemma 10-14 mm, brown and sericeous in the lower ½, sulcate along the veins only at the glabrous base of the lemma, with inner setae 0·5-1 mm. Palea with keels ciliolate almost throughout. Anthers 3-5 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Pine-woods and other dry places. • N.W. Portugal, W. & S. Spain.} ?Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. occidentalis} (Gervais) J. Holub,{\i  Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}) {\b 11}: 295 (1976) ({\i Avenochloa albinervis} subsp. {\i occidentalis} Gervais). Like {\b 5} but stems 50-100 cm; basal leaves 0·4-3·5 mm wide, usually conduplicate, with 4-6(-7) lateral veins on each side of mid-vein, distinctly papillose beneath; callus-hairs 1-2 mm, whitish.{\i  Dry scrub. • C. & S.W. Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b occidentalis}: Basal leaves (0·7-)1·5-2·5(-3·5) mm wide, linear, usually conduplicate, more or less papillose above, strongly spirally twisted when dead; setae of lemma 0·5-1 mm; palea with keels ciliolate only in the median 1/3. 2n = 42.{\i  C. Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b stenophylla} Franco, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 359 (1978): Basal leaves 0·4-1 mm wide, linear-filiform, strongly conduplicate, smooth and pruinose above, not or only very laxly twisted when dead; setae of lemma 1-2 mm; palea with keels distinctly ciliolate nearly throughout.{\i  S.W. Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. delicatula} Franco,{\i  loc. cit.} (1978). Densely caespitose. Stems 20-40 cm × 0·5-1 mm, very slender. Basal leaves 1·5-4 cm × (0·4-)0·8-2 mm, 1/12-1/10 as long as stem, flat or conduplicate, greyish-green, with 3-5 lateral veins on each side of mid-vein, subacute, spirally twisted when dead; upper cauline leaf 0·1-0·7 cm, appressed to stem; ligule 1-3 mm in basal, 2-3·5 mm in cauline leaves. Panicle 2-6 cm, greenish or suffused with violet, with 3-10 spikelets. Spikelets 10-12 mm, with 3-5 florets; rhachilla-segments 1·5-2 mm, with white hairs 0·4-1 mm. Lower glume 7-9 mm, the upper 9-10 mm. Lemma 9-10 mm, uniformly yellowish-green, glabrous, moderately sulcate in lower ½, with 2 apical setae 0·2-0·5 mm. Anthers 3·5-4 mm.{\i  Dry mountain slopes. • N.E. Portugal, }?{\i N. Spain.} ?Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. levis} (Hackel) J. Holub,{\i  Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}) {\b 11}: 295 (1976) ({\i Avena levis} Hackel). Densely caespitose. Stems 20-50(-60) cm. Basal leaves 3-7(-12) cm × 2-4 mm, 1/5 as long as stem, conduplicate or flat, rigid, laxly spirally twisted, glaucous, pruinose; upper cauline leaf 0·2-1·2 cm; sheaths of basal leaves short, slightly compressed, ciliate at the mouth; ligule 1-1·5 mm in basal, 3-7 mm in cauline leaves. Panicle 6-13 cm, with 6-8 spikelets; branches 0·5-1·5 cm, more or less smooth, 1-2 at lower nodes. Spikelets 14-18(-22) mm, deep or yellowish-green, shiny, with 5-7 florets; rhachilla-segments c. 2 mm, with hairs 1·5-2·5 mm. Glumes smooth, the lower 9-11 mm, the upper 12-14(-15) mm. Lemma 9-12(-14) mm, indurate in the lower part, narrowed in the upper 1/4, subobtuse. 2n = 14.{\i  Alpine meadows and pastures, on schistose rocks. • S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The occurrence of this species in Morocco is doubtful.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. compressa} (Heuffel) W. Sauer & Chmelitschek, {\i Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}){\b  12}: 582 (1976) ({\i Avena compressa} Heuffel). Caespitose. Stems 30-70(-100) cm, slightly compressed at the base. Basal leaves 5-15 cm × 2-5 mm, flat or loosely conduplicate, glaucescent, with c. 6 lateral veins on each side of midvein; upper cauline leaf 1-4(-6) cm, appressed to stem; sheaths of basal leaves compressed; ligule 1·5-3 mm in basal, 4-10 mm in cauline leaves. Panicle 7-15 cm, brownish, with (5-)10-24(-27) spikelets; branches scabridulous, 1-2(-3) at lower nodes. Spikelets 14-21 mm, with 4-9 florets; rhachilla-segments 1·5-2·5 mm, glabrous; callus-hairs 0·5-1 mm, about reaching the base of the lemma. Lower glume 8-12 mm, the upper 10-15 mm. Lemma 9-14 mm, indurate, reddish-brown and sulcate in the lower ½, prominently veined, scabrid, narrowed in the upper 1/3, subobtuse and 2-fid. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry, stony slopes, wood-margins and clearings. S.E. & E.C. Europe, northwards to N. Hungary and eastwards to Krym}. Bu Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. aetolica} (Rech. fil.) J. Holub,{\i  Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}) {\b 11}: 294 (1976) ({\i Avenastrum aetolicum} Rech. fil.). Laxly caespitose, with short stolons. Stems 20-60 cm, slender. Basal leaves 4-8 cm × 1·5-2 mm, conduplicate, obtuse, smooth except for margins; ligule 4-6 mm in both basal and cauline leaves. Panicle 5-10 cm; branches 6-10 mm, slender, scabrid, usually solitary. Spikelets c. 20 mm, with 5-7 florets, shiny; rhachilla-segments 2-2·5 mm, with hairs c. 1·5 mm. Glumes acute, the lower c. 11 mm, the upper 14 mm. Lemma 12-14 mm, pale green, weakly veined, 2-fid.{\i  Calcareous mountain screes. • C. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. blavii} (Ascherson & Janka) W. Sauer & Chmelitschek,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm}. ({\i München}) {\b 12}: 582 (1976) ({\i Avena blavii} Ascherson & Janka). Densely caespitose, shortly stoloniferous. Stems 30-60 cm, slender. Basal leaves 15-30 cm, 1/3(-1/2) as long as stem, closely convolute, setaceous, 0·4-0·6 mm in diameter, with 3 lateral veins on each side of mid-vein; cross section suborbicular in outline; cartilaginous margin and mid-vein not distinct beneath; cauline leaves 5-7 cm, setaceous, very acute; ligule 1-2 mm in basal, 2-4 mm in cauline leaves. Panicle 4-13 cm, simple, with 4-9(-17) spikelets. Spikelets 15-30(-35) mm, with 4-7 florets; rhachilla-segments 2-3 mm, with hairs 1·5-2·5 mm. Lower glume 10-15 mm, the upper 14-20 mm. Lemma 12-18 mm, slightly veined, narrowed upwards from the middle.{\i  Stony slopes and rocks; calcicole. • Mountains of C. & S.W. Jugoslavia. }.Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. mirandana} (Sennen) J. Holub,{\i  Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}) {\b 11}: 295 (1976) ({\i Avena mirandana} Sennen). Stoloniferous. Stems 30-60(-80) cm × 1-2 mm. Basal leaves 6-15 cm × (0·3-)0·5-2(-2·5) mm, conduplicate, convex and deeply striate outside; ligule 0·5-3 mm in basal, 3-7(-10) mm in cauline leaves. Panicle 8-14 cm, more or less simple, with 3-12 spikelets; branches scabridulous. Spikelets 15-20 mm, with 4-6 florets; rhachilla-segments 2-3 mm, glabrous or with hairs 1-1·5 mm in the upper part; callus-hairs 1·5-2·5(-3) mm. Glumes very acute, the lower 9-12 mm, the upper 11-15 mm. Lemma 10-14 mm, stramineous or brown in the lower 1/2, narrowed in the upper 1/3, subobtuse,
\par

\par
213}
\par