{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 68.     Koeleria}    Pers.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.J. Humphries. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Caespitose perennials. Leaves flat or convolute. Inflorescence a spicate or lax panicle. Spikelets laterally compressed, with (1-)2-5 florets. Glumes equal or unequal, the upper the longer and usually equalling the first floret, the lower c. 2/3 as long as the first floret, distinctly keeled, 1- to 5-veined. Lemma lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, keeled, mostly longer than the glumes, usually obtuse, with or without an awn. Palea as long as or shorter than the lemma, 2-keeled, 2-fid at the apex. Grain oblong-fusiform.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: K. Domin,{\i  Biblioth. Bot.} ({\i Stuttgart}){\b  65}: 1-354 (1907). J. Ujhelyi in G. Vida (ed.),{\i  Evolution in Plants} ({\i Symposia biologica hungarica}{\b  12}) 163-176. Budapest. 1972.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Basal leaf-sheaths reticulately fibrous
\par
2 Old leaf-sheaths breaking down into a tight mass of veins ....... {\b 1. vallesiana}
\par
2 Old leaf-sheaths persistent, laxly imbricate ............ ({\b 5-13}). {\b macrantha} group
\par
1 Basal leaf-sheaths not reticulately fibrous
\par
3 Glumes of central spikelets ± equal
\par
4 Spikelets glabrous, sometimes scabrid ........................................... {\b 2. cenisia}
\par
4 Spikelets hirsute
\par
5 Plant densely caespitose, without creeping rhizomes;
\par
  old leaf-sheaths tightly imbricate, forming a tuberous
\par
  base to the stem ................................................................................ {\b 3. hirsuta}
\par
5 Plant laxly caespitose, with short, creeping rhizomes;
\par
  old leaf-sheaths loosely imbricate, not forming a 
\par
  tuberous base to the stem ................................................................ {\b 4. asiatica}
\par
3 Glumes of central spikelets distinctly unequal
\par
6 Lemma unawned, glabrous to slightly pubescent ... ({\b 5-13}). {\b macrantha} group
\par
6 Lemma awned, densely hirsute
\par
7 Plants densely caespitose; stems tuberous at the base .................... {\b 3. hirsuta}
\par
7 Plants laxly caespitose, with creeping rhizomes; stems 
\par
  slender at the base .......................................................................... {\b 4. asiatica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. K. vallesiana} (Honckeny) Gaudin,{\i  Alpina} ({\i Winterthur}) {\b 3}: 47 (1808) ({\i K. setacea} Pers.). Densely caespitose; stems 10-50 cm, woody and conspicuously tuberous at the base, glabrous to pubescent especially towards the inflorescence. Leaves of non-flowering shoots 3-12 cm, convolute and setaceous or flat and up to 3 mm wide, greyish-green, the margins minutely serrulate; sheaths tightly imbricate, breaking down into a persistent, reticulate-fibrous mass of veins. Panicle 15-70 × 6-12 mm, ovoid-spiciform. Spikelets 4-6 mm. Glumes unequal, acuminate to shortly aristate, shining green or pale brown, with a wide hyaline and somewhat silvery margin. Lemma acuminate to mucronate. 2n = 14+0-2B, 28, 40, 42, 43, 112, 126.{\i  Dry grass land and rocky places; calcicole. W. Europe, northwards to S.W. England; N. Appennini.} Br Ga ?Ge He Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b vallesiana} ({\i K. aurata} Bubani): Stems, rhachis and spikelets glabrous to sparsely hairy. {\i Limestone rocks. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b castellana} (Boiss. & Reuter) Domin,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  3}: 342 (1904) ({\i K. castellana} Boiss. & Reuter): Stems, rhachis and spikelets densely puberulent.{\i  Gypsaceous soils. C. & S.E. Spain.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp. ({\b a}) occasionally hybridizes with {\b 5}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. K. cenisia} Reuter ex Reverchon,{\i  Bull. Soc. Étud. Sci. Angers}{\b  3}: 139 (1874) ({\i K. brevifolia} Reuter). Densely caespitose. Stems 10-25 cm, slender, somewhat tuberous at the base, glabrous. Leaves of non-flowering shoots 2-5(-7) cm × 0·5-1 mm, flat or plicate, somewhat soft, glabrous to pruinose or velutinous; sheaths tightly imbricate, persistent and undivided, markedly dilated, glabrous or hairy, sometimes corrugated. Panicle 10-50 × c. 8 mm, cylindrical-oblong, spiciform. Spikelets 4-7 mm. Glumes more or less equal, acuminate to shortly aristate, brown or violet, variegated with white, with a wide hyaline margin. Lemma acuminate, with a scabridulous, subapical, dorsal awn. 2n = 14+0-2B.{\i  Dry grassland and rocks,} 1200-2500{\i  m. • S. Alps, eastwards to} 8°{\i  E.} Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. K. hirsuta} Gaudin, {\i Alpina} ({\i Winterthur}){\b  3}: 48 (1808). Densely caespitose. Stems 10-35 cm, slender, somewhat tuberous at the base, glabrous to densely hirsute above. Leaves of nonflowering shoots 3-15 cm × 0·5-2 mm, carinate-convolute, hard, acute, minutely pubescent; sheaths tightly imbricate, persistent and entire, somewhat dilated, densely and softly pubescent to more or less glabrous, sometimes slightly corrugated. Panicle 10 × 2-5 mm, compact, ovoid-spiciform. Glumes equal or subequal, shortly aristate, greenish-violet, with a silvery hyaline margin. Lemma acuminate, with a scabrid, subapical, dorsal awn up to 3 mm. 2n = 14+0-5B. {\i Dry grassland, rocks and screes,} 1700-3100 {\i m. • S. & E. Alps.} Au He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. K. asiatica} Domin,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss.} ser. 2, {\b 5}: 947 (1905). Laxly caespitose, with short creeping rhizomes. Stems 5-20 cm, slender, pubescent. Leaves of non-flowering shoots 4-10 cm × 1-2 mm, convolute or flat, soft; sheaths loosely imbricate, persistent, slightly dilated, glabrous, with parallel veins. Panicle 10-40 × 7-12 mm, compact-spiciform. Spikelets 3-4 mm. Glumes equal to subequal, acute, green or purplish, with a silvery hyaline margin, glabrous. Lemma shortly awned, densely pubescent. 2n = 28.{\i  Dry tundra, rocky slopes and screes. Ural and N.E. Russia}. Rs (N, C). ({\i N. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b 5-13}). {\b K. macrantha} group. Laxly or densely caespitose. Stems bulbous or rhizomatous at the base. Old leaf-sheaths loosely imbricate, usually corrugated, with parallel or rarely reticulate venation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   This group is a complex that is very imperfectly understood; a great deal of variation occurs as a result of polyploidy and adaptation to a wide range of ecological conditions. Many populations, which may represent only ecotypes and variants of different ploidy-levels, have variously and inconsistently been given specific, subspecific and varietal rank. From the limited data available there is little evidence to uphold these taxa and correlate chromosome-number with morphology. Consequently, the species recognized in this aggregate are based entirely on morphology, and therefore may still only represent minor taxa. Until their true relationships can be worked out from detailed population-studies and cytogenetic analyses the treatment must remain provisional.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Laxly caespitose; stems slender at the base; leaves usually not glaucous
\par
2 Spikelets 6-8 mm
\par
3 Spikelets glabrous .................................................................. {\b 13. pyramidata}
\par
3 Spikelets pubescent ............................................................... {\b 12. eriostachya}
\par
2 Spikelets less than 6 mm
\par
4 Leaves of non-flowering shoots usually convolute,
\par
  densely silvery-scabrid .................................................................... {\b 6. glauca}
\par
4 Leaves of non-flowering shoots flat or plicate,
\par
  slightly scabrid or smooth above
\par
5 Upper glume ovate to ovate-lanceolate, with narrow
\par
  hyaline margin; lemma herbaceous ........................................... {\b 5. macrantha}
\par
5 Upper glume lanceolate, with wide hyaline margin; lemma
\par
  membranous ................................................................................. {\b 11. nitidula}
\par

\par
218}
\par