{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Inflorescence up to 100 cm, usually simple. Raceme 25-35 cm; bracts 20 mm, purple; pedicels 25-30 mm. Perianth 30-40 mm, pinkish-red; segments free. Stamens exceeding perianth by 3-5 mm. {\i Naturalized from gardens in S.E. Spain and S.E. France.} [Ga Hs.] ({\i South Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. arborescens} Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 3 (1768). Freely-branched shrub with erect to spreading stems 1·5-3·5 m, up to 30 cm in diameter. Leaves 50-60 × 5-7 cm, dull greyish-green, patent or somewhat deflexed, crowded in terminal rosettes, the dead leaves persistent for c. 50 cm below the rosette; surface smooth, without spots; marginal teeth scarcely spinose, forwardly  curved, greenish. Inflorescence c. 80 cm, simple or with one short branch. Raceme 20-30 × 10-12 cm; bracts 15-20 mm, greenish; pedicels 35-40 mm. Perianth 35-40 mm, scarlet; segments free. Stamens exceeding perianth by 3-5 mm.{\i  Naturalized from gardens on rocks, mostly near the sea, in S.W. Europe}. [Ga Hs Lu.] ({\i Southern Africa, northwards to Malawi.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. ferox} Miller, {\i op. cit.} no. 22 (1768). Shrub; stem 2-3(-5) m, erect, simple, 10-15 cm in diameter, densely clothed with dead leaves. Leaves 50-100 × 5-15 cm, dull green, sometimes tinged with red, usually with numerous spines on both surfaces, especially near the apex; marginal spines up to 6 mm, stout, reddish-brown. Inflorescence c. 100 cm, with 5-8 branches; racemes 50-75 cm, stiffly erect; bracts 8-10 mm, brownish; pedicels 4-5 mm. Perianth 30-35 mm, scarlet or orange; outer segments connate in basal 1/3; inner free, but adnate to outer at base. Stamens exceeding perianth by 20-25 mm.{\i  Naturalized from gardens near the coast of S.E. France}. [Ga.] ({\i South Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 15.     Androcymbium}       Willd. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Corms with a dark brown, coriaceous tunic. Stem short, largely subterranean, with a cylindrical, membranous spathe sometimes partly enveloping the leaves and flowers. Leaves few, borne in a rosette at the apex of the stem and forming a conspicuous involucre to the umbellate inflorescence, sheathing at the base. Flowers 1-6, white or pink, sometimes with purplish veins or spots. Perianth-segments free, with a long, narrow claw and an elliptical to lanceolate limb. Stamens inserted towards the base of the limb. Styles free. Fruit a capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Perianth-segments acuminate, the limb nearly twice as long
\par
  as the claw; fruit subglobose, fracturing at the base ................. {\b 1. europaeum}
\par
Perianth-segments acute, the limb often scarcely longer 
\par
  than the claw; fruit obpyriform, remaining intact ...................... {\b 2. rechingeri}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. europaeum} (Lange) K. Richter,{\i  Pl. Eur.}{\b  1}: 188 (1890) ({\i Erythrostictus europaeus} Lange). Corms single or 2-3 one above the other. Stem 2-7 cm. Leaves 20-150 × 4-15 mm, linear to lanceolate, flat or slightly plicate, glabrous, patent, sometimes deflexed. Flowers 1-4, shortly pedicellate; perianth-segments (including claw) 20-25 × 2-5 mm, the limb nearly twice as long as the claw, acuminate. Filaments 3-5 mm; anthers 1-1·5 mm. Fruit 6-8 mm, subglobose, glandular-punctate, fracturing at the base. 2n = 18.{\i  Dry, rocky places; calcicole. • S.E. Spain, between Almeria and Cabo de Gata.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Frequently confused with {\i A. gramineum }(Cav.) Macbride, from North Africa, which has fruits 15-20 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. rechingeri} W. Greuter, {\i Candollea }{\b 22}: 248 (1967). Like {\b 1} but flowers often more numerous; perianth-segments acute at the apex; capsule obpyriform, not glandular-punctate except occasionally at the apex, remaining intact.{\i  Between rocks on maritime sands. W. Kriti} ({\i island of Elaphonisos}). Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 16.       Colchicum}           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.D. Brickell. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs; stock a corm, occasionally stoloniferous, enclosed by tunics which are frequently extended into a neck above the corm. Flowers solitary or in fascicles, each subtended by a small bract and very shortly pedicellate, purple, pink or white, sometimes with alternating squares of dark and light colour ({\i tessellated}). Perianth of two rows of equal or subequal segments united below into a long, narrow tube. Stamens inserted near the base of the perianth-segments, usually in two rows; anthers versatile; filaments slender, frequently thickened at the base. Styles 3, free. Ovary subterranean. Fruit a septicidal capsule, maturing at or just above ground-level. Seeds numerous.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A taxonomically difficult genus, particularly in respect of those species which flower in autumn and do not produce their leaves until late winter or spring. Many herbarium specimens of such species are of flowering material only and are difficult to determine.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Several of the characters traditionally used to distinguish species may prove unreliable when used alone, particularly the presence or absence of cilia or hairs on the leaves and the colour of the anthers; both of these can vary within a single population of certain species but are diagnostic in others.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: B. Stefanov,{\i  Sborn. Balg. Akad. Nauk.}{\b  22}: 1-99 (1926).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves at least partly developed at anthesis 
\par
2 Corm with underground stolons .................................................... {\b 6. psaridis} 
\par
2 Corm not stoloniferous 
\par
3 Tunic membranous, evanescent; leaves with scabrid or 
\par
  glabrous margins ........................................................................ {\b 1. triphyllum} 
\par
3 Tunic coriaceous to membranous, persistent; leaves with
\par
  ciliate or glabrous margins 
\par
4 Leaves 3-18, 1-4(-5) mm wide, narrowly linear .......................... {\b 5. pusillum} 
\par
4 Leaves 2 or 3, linear-lanceolate, at least 7 mm wide on
\par
  well-developed plants 
\par
5 Leaves usually 2, glabrous, rarely sparsely ciliate at
\par
  base; flowering September-December ............................................ {\b 4. cupanii} 
\par
5 Leaves 2 or 3, ciliate, often hairy on dorsal surface
\par
  flowering December-April 
\par
6 Leaves usually 3; filaments hairy at least below; tunic
\par
  coriaceous, ribbed ............................................................................. {\b 2. burttii} 
\par
6 Leaves usually 2; filaments glabrous; tunics papery, smooth  {\b 3. hungaricum} 
\par
1 Leaves undeveloped at anthesis (rarely beginning to 
\par
  appear as the flowers fade) 
\par
7 Stigmas punctiform 
\par
8 Corm with underground stolons ................................................... {\b 7. boissieri} 
\par
8 Corm not stoloniferous 
\par
9 Tunic coriaceous; leaves (4-)6-8(-10), not more than 
\par
  4 mm wide, linear to narrowly linear .......................................... {\b 8. parlatoris} 
\par
9 Tunic membranous to subcoriaceous; leaves 2-5, up to 
\par
  17 mm wide, linear-lanceolate or ligulate 
\par
10 Leaves 3-5; 8-20 cm; flowers 1-4; perianth-segments
\par
   25-40 × 3-10 mm ....................................................................... {\b 9. arenarium} 
\par
10 Leaves 2(-3), 8-12(-15) cm; flowers 1(-3); perianth
\par
   segments 17-30 × 4-6(-10) mm .................................................. {\b 10. alpinum} 
\par
7  Stigmas decurrent 
\par
11 Flowers not tessellated 
\par
12 Flowers deep crimson-purple, occasionally paler;
\par
   leaves glaucous, ciliate .............................................................. {\b 19. turcicum} 
\par
12 Flowers pink to purplish or white; leaves neither 
\par
   glaucous nor ciliate  
\par
13 Anthers black ................................................................... {\b 20. callicymbium} 
\par

\par
21}
\par