{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from mountain regions, with bronze and violet variegated spikelets, 3-veined lower glume, upper glume 13-18 mm and lemma 11-15 mm, have been given specific status as {\b Avena amethystina} Clarion ex DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 3}: 56 (1805) and {\b Avena lucida} Bertol.,{\i  Fl. Ital.}{\b  1}: 701 (1835); their status is uncertain and requires further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Avenula}. Cartilaginous margin of basal leaves serrate. Glumes 3(-5)-veined. Veins of lemma reaching the upper margin. Lower part of the awn flattened, twisted, alternately thick and thin when viewed from the side. Keels of palea shortly ciliate or aculeolate. Lodicules thin, long-acuminate, with a lateral tooth, longer than ovary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. AVENULA. Basal leaves in cross-section without a continuous subepidermal layer of sclerenchyma beneath. Rhachilla-segments glabrous or with hairs not more than 3 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. versicolor} (Vill.) Laínz,{\i  Comun. Inst. Nac. Invest. Agrar., Ser. Recurs. Nat.} ({\i Madrid}) {\b 1974}({\b 2}): 23 (1974) ({\i Avena versicolor }Vill., {\i Avenastrum versicolor} (Vill.) Fritsch). Laxly caespitose, with extravaginal shoots. Stems 15-40(-50) cm, slender. Basal leaves 5-20 cm × 2-4·5 mm, glaucescent, smooth, with 3-4 lateral veins on each side of mid-vein; upper cauline leaf (1-)2-7(-12) cm, more or less patent; sheaths of basal leaves entire in the lower 1/3(-1/2); ligule 1-2 mm in basal, 3-5 mm in cauline leaves. Panicle (2-)3-8(-10) cm, with 1-2 branches at lower nodes. Spikelets 10-15 mm, with 4-6 florets, shiny, brown; rhachilla-segments 1·5-2 mm, with dense hairs 2 mm; callus-hairs c. 1 mm. Lemma 8-11 mm, indurate, brown and distinctly veined in the lower ½, 2-fid and shortly 2-setose at apex.{\i  Alpine meadows and pastures; calcifuge. Mountains of C. & S. Europe from the Carpathians to the Pyrenees, C. Appennini and S.W. Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b versicolor}: Basal leaves usually flat, rather soft. Upper cauline leaf (1-)2-7(-12) cm. Panicle oblong-ovate, with 5-14 spikelets; branches scabridulous. Spikelets variegated with brown and violet. Lower glume 6-10 mm, the upper 8-12 mm. 2n = 14+0-3B.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except the Appennini and Alpi Apuane}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pretutiana} (Parl. ex Arcangeli) J. Holub,{\i  Folia Geobot. Phytotax} ({\i Praha}) {\b 11}: 295 (1976) ({\i Avena scheuchzeri} subsp.{\i  pretutiana} Parl. ex Arcangeli): Basal leaves usually conduplicate, rather stiff. Upper cauline leaf very short. Panicle linear-oblong, with 12-18 spikelets; branches scabrid. Spikelets brown, not variegated with violet. Lower glume 9-11 mm, the upper 11-13 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  N. & C. Appennini, Alpi Apuane}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. schelliana} (Hackel) W. Sauer & Chmelitschek,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}){\b  12}: 582 (1976) ({\i Avena schelliana} (Hackel) Roshev.). Laxly caespitose, with extravaginal shoots. Stems 40-80 cm. Basal leaves 10-20 cm × 2-4 mm, usually flat, glaucescent, with 5-6 lateral veins on each side of mid-vein; upper cauline leaf 2-4 cm; sheaths of basal leaves slightly compressed; ligule 0·5-3 mm in basal, 3-5 mm in cauline leaves. Panicle 5-15 cm, with 12-30(-40) spikelets; branches scabridulous, 1-2(-3) at the lower nodes. Spikelets 10-16(-17) mm, pale brown, with (3-)4-6 florets; rhachilla-segments 1·5-2 mm, with hairs 1-1·5 mm. Lower glume 7-10 mm, the upper 9-13 mm. Lemma 8-12 mm, brownish, greenish and whitish, slightly indurate, veined, subobtuse. 2n = 14.{\i  Steppes and dry meadows. S. & C. parts of U.S.S.R.,from C. Ural to W. Ukraine.} Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The relationship of this species with{\b  A. hookeri} (Scribner) J. Holub, {\i Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}) {\b 11}: 295 (1976), described from North America, requires further investigation. Relationships between plants from Europe and from East Asia (whence {\b 3} was described) also require investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 4-7}). {\b A. marginata} group. Basal leaves usually laxly spirally twisted when dead; upper cauline leaf not more than 2 cm, appressed to stem; sheaths of basal leaves slightly compressed. Panicle often brownish. Spikelets 10-20 mm, with (3-)4-6(-8) florets. Lemma indurate, often brown in the lower half, longitudinally sulcate at least at base, the veins prominent, excurrent in 2(4) setae at apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ligule of upper cauline leaf 2-3·5 mm; basal leaves 
\par
  1/12-1/10 as long as stem; spikelets 10-12 mm, with 3-5
\par
  florets .......................................................................................... {\b 7. delicatula} 
\par
1 Ligule of upper cauline leaf 3-10 mm; basal leaves 1/10-1/2 
\par
  as long as stems; spikelets 10-20 mm, with 4-6 florets
\par
2 Lemma glabrous, distinctly sulcate along the veins in 
\par
  the lower ½; basal leaves flat or loosely conduplicate;
\par
  plant caespitose .......................................................................... {\b 4. marginata}
\par
2 Lemma usually sericeous in the lower part, distinctly 
\par
  sulcate along the veins only at the glabrous base;
\par
  basal leaves ± conduplicate; plant stoloniferous
\par
3 Basal leaves ± smooth, 2-4 mm wide, with 7-11 lateral
\par
  veins on each side of mid-vein; callus-hairs 2-3 mm,
\par
  reddish-brown ............................................................................. {\b 5. albinervis}
\par
3 Basal leaves distinctly papillose, 1·5-2·5 mm wide,
\par
  with 4-6 lateral veins on each side of mid-vein;
\par
  callus-hairs 1-2 mm, whitish ................................................... {\b 6. occidentalis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. marginata} (Lowe) J. Holub,{\i  Preslia}{\b  49}: 219 (1977) ({\i Avena marginata} Lowe). Caespitose. Basal leaves flat or loosely conduplicate, subobtuse; ligule 1-3(-7) mm in basal, 4-10 mm in cauline leaves. Panicle 6-15(-20) cm, greyish-violet-brown or greenish; branches 2-5 cm, slender, scabrid, 1-3 at lower nodes, the primary with 1-3(-5) spikelets. Spikelets 10-20 mm; rhachilla-segments 1·5-2·5 mm, with often brownish hairs towards apex. Lemma glabrous, longitudinally sulcate in the lower ½. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry meadows and wood-margins; usually calcifuge. W. Europe, northwards to N.W. France.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Upper glume not more than 11 mm ................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b pyrenaica} 
\par
1 Upper glume at least 12 mm
\par
2 Lemma 13-16 mm, yellowish-green throughout ............ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b marginata} 
\par
2 Lemma 10-13 mm, reddish-brown in lower half ................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b sulcata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b marginata}: Stems 40-100 cm × 2-3 mm. Basal leaves 8-15 cm × 2-5 mm, 1/7-1/5 as long as stem, with 10-14 lateral veins on each side of mid-vein. Upper cauline leaf 0·5-1 cm, longer than its ligule. Panicle 10-15(-20) cm, with 12-36 spikelets. Rhachilla-segments with hairs 2-3 mm. Lower glume 12-14 mm, the upper 15-17 mm. Lemma 13-16 mm, uniformly yellowish-green, with 2 apical setae 1·5-2 mm. Anthers 4-5 mm.{\i  W.C. Portugal} ({\i Serra de Sintra}). ({\i Madeira}.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sulcata} (Gay ex Delastre) Franco,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  78}: 236 (1979) ({\i Avena sulcata} Gay ex Delastre): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but basal leaves up to 25(-40) cm × 6(-8) mm, 1/5-2/5 as long as stem; upper cauline leaf up to 2 cm; lower glume 9-12 mm, the upper 12-15 mm; lemma 10-13 mm, deeply sulcate, reddish-brown in lower ½, lighter above, with 2 apical setae 0·8-1·2 mm.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b pyrenaica} J. Holub, {\i Preslia}{\b  49}: 208 (1977): Stems 20-40(-80) cm × 1-1·5 mm. Basal leaves (2-)6-10(-15) cm × (0·4-)0·8-2(-3) mm, 1/10-1/6 as long as stem, with 7-11 lateral veins on each side of mid-vein. Upper cauline leaf 0·2-0·7 cm, sometimes shorter than its ligule. Panicle 6-12(-15) cm, with 3-16(-25) spikelets. Rhachilla-segments with hairs 1·5-2 mm. Lower glume 7-9 mm, the upper 10-11 mm. Lemma 9-10 mm,
\par

\par
212}
\par