{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Densely caespitose, stems somewhat bulbous at the base;
\par
  leaves usually glaucous
\par
6 Leaves flaccid .............................................................................. {\b 11. nitidula}
\par
6 Leaves rigid
\par
7 Panicle not more than 25 mm
\par
8 Lemma with an awn up to 0·5 mm; glumes acuminate ................... {\b 7. lobata}
\par
8 Lemma unawned; glumes acute ................................................ {\b 10. crassipes}
\par
7 Panicle more than 25 mm
\par
9 Spikelets (4-)6-8 mm ................................................................. {\b 8. splendens}
\par
9 Spikelets 3-5·5 mm
\par
10 Spikelets distinctly pedicellate; glumes linear-lanceolate ............ {\b 6. glauca}
\par
10 Spikelets ± sessile; glumes obovate
\par
11 Stems at least 45 cm; inflorescence usually more than
\par
   80 mm, interrupted below; anthers 1·2-1·6 mm ............................ {\b 9. caudata}
\par
11 Stems usually less than 30 cm; inflorescence usually
\par
   less than 50 mm, not interrupted; anthers 1·5-2·5 mm ............. {\b 10. crassipes}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. K. macrantha} (Ledeb.) Schultes in Schultes & Schultes fil.,{\i  Mantissa}{\b  2}: 345 (1824) ({\i K. alpigena} Domin, {\i K. cristata} (L.) Pers. pro parte,{\i  K. gracilis} Pers., {\i K. sclerophylla} P. Smirnov). Laxly caespitose, sometimes with creeping rhizomes. Stems 10-40 cm, usually glabrous or puberulent. Leaves of non-flowering shoots up to 15 cm × 1-2 mm, usually flat or plicate, green or sometimes glaucous; sheaths persistent, glabrous or hairy, with parallel veins. Panicle 20-80(-100) × c. 10 mm, narrowly oblong, more or less lobed especially below. Spikelets 2-5(-6) mm. Glumes unequal, acuminate, mucronate or shortly aristate, green, brown or purplish, with silvery hyaline margin. Lemma acuminate, glabrous. 2n = 14, 28+0-6B, 42, 70.{\i  Europe northwards to N. Scotland and Lithuania; casual in Fennoscandia.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable in habit, leaf-size and indumentum. Populations with apparently distinctive combinations of these characters have been described as separate taxa, but it is generally not possible to distinguish them from the remainder by any single character. Laxly caespitose rhizomatous plants with slender somewhat glaucous leaves, from C. Russia and N. Ukraine, separated as{\b  K. delavignei} Czern. ex Domin,{\i  Biblioth. Bot.} ({\i Stuttgart}){\b  65}: 247 (1907) (incl. {\i K. incerta} Domin), are perhaps worth specific status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. K. glauca} (Schrader) DC.,{\i  Cat. Pl. Horti Monsp. }116 (1813) ({\i K. maritima} Lange,{\i  K. pohleana} (Domin) Gontsch.). Densely caespitose. Stems 10-45(-60) cm, robust, thickened towards the base, glabrous below, puberulent above. Leaves of non-flowering shoots 2-5 cm, convolute or rarely flat, stiff glaucous, silvery-scabrid; sheaths persistent, glabrous or pubescent to densely hairy, breaking down into filaments when old. Panicle 20-110 × c. 8 mm, spiciform, interrupted below; rhachis densely puberulent. Spikelets 4-5 mm. Glumes unequal, obtuse when flat, pale green or brown, glabrous to minutely puberulent. Lemma subobtuse or mucronulate, minutely puberulent at least below. 2n = 14 (28, 42, 70).{\i  Sandy soils. Europe,from N. Spain, Hungary and Krym northwards to N. Scotland and to} 61° 30' {\i in N. Russia.} Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Ho Hs Hu Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. K. lobata} (Bieb.) Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 620 (1817) ({\i K. brevis} Steven, {\i K. degenii} Domin). Densely caespitose, forming small, compact tufts. Stems 20-35 cm, with enlarged bulbous bases. Leaves of non-flowering shoots 2-5 cm × 1-1·5 mm, convolute, glaucous, glabrous; sheaths persistent, dilated with parallel or corrugated veins, glabrous. Panicle a short dense spike 20-25 × c. 8 mm. Spikelets 5-7 mm, sessile or shortly pedicellate. Glumes unequal, acuminate, pale green or purplish, scabrid or hairy. Lemma glabrous to slightly hairy, with an apical awn up to 1 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Dry places. S.E. Europe,from Turkey to S.E. Russia.} Bu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. K. splendens} C. Presl,{\i  Cyper. Gram. Sic.} 34 (1820) ({\i K. bivestita} Schur, {\i K. dasyphylla} Willk.,{\i  K. subaristata} (Pancic) Domin). Densely caespitose, forming large compact tufts with short, intravaginal creeping rhizomes. Stems 20-45 cm, somewhat bulbous at the base. Leaves of non-flowering shoots 3-5(-12) cm × c. 1 (-2) mm, flat to convolute, glaucous, scabrid above, pubescent or glabrous beneath, ciliate at the margin, the veins and margins whitish; sheaths persistent, inflated, pubescent and ciliate at the margin or glabrous. Panicle 30-80 × c. 12 mm, ovate-oblong, robust, dense, sometimes interrupted below, with a puberulent rhachis. Spikelets (4-)6-8 mm, shortly pedicellate. Glumes unequal, acuminate to shortly aristate, glabrous to densely pubescent above. Lemma acuminate to shortly aristate, usually glabrous. 2n = 28.{\i  Dry habitats; usually calcicole. S. Europe.} Al ?Au Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. K. caudata} (Link) Steudel, {\i Syn. Pl. Glum.}{\b  1}: 293 (1854). Densely caespitose, with hard, intravaginal, shortly creeping rhizomes. Stems (45-)60-95 cm, distinctly bulbous at base, glabrous but puberulent near apex. Leaves scabrid, plicate or flat, glaucous; leaves of non-flowering shoots 5-12 cm × 1-2 mm, flaccid, not or very sparsely ciliate; lower sheaths retrorsely pubescent. Panicle (45-)80-170 × 5-13 mm, spiciform, narrowly oblong, interrupted below. Spikelets 3·5-5·5 mm, subsessile. Glumes unequal, subobtuse, mucronate, ciliate on the keel. Anthers 1·2-1·6 mm. {\i Open woods and mountain grassland. • E.C. Portugal.} ?Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. K. crassipes} Lange,{\i  Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kjøbenhavn}{\b  1860}: 43 (1861). Like {\b 9} but stems 10-30 cm, glabrous or slightly papillose near apex; leaves convolute or rarely flat, those of non-flowering shoots 2-5(-8) cm × 0·5-1 mm, rigid, ciliate at least in the lower half; lower sheaths glabrous; panicle (20-)25-50(-80) × 4-8 mm, not interrupted; spikelets 3-4·5 mm; glumes acute; anthers 1·5-2·5 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry places. • Spain, N.E. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. K. nitidula} Velen.,{\i  Fl. Bulg.} 611 (1891). Laxly or densely caespitose, with short, creeping rhizomes. Stems 30-40(-65) cm, very slender. Leaves of non-flowering shoots 15-25 cm × c. 1 mm, plicate or flat, glabrous, soft, green or greyish-green; sheaths occasionally breaking down into ribbons when mature, slightly pubescent. Panicle 60-80 × 15-30 mm, narrowly lanceolate and dense when young, ovoid and lax when mature. Spikelets 4-4·5 mm, with long pedicels. Glumes unequal, acute, narrowly lanceolate, bright green and shining, glabrous. Lemma acute or aristate, narrowly lanceolate, hyaline.{\i  Rocky places and dry grassland. C. & E. parts of Balkan peninsula.} ?Au Bu ?Hu Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Variants with a densely caespitose habit and short, glaucous, somewhat convolute leaves, with an appearance similar to {\b 12}, are sometimes distinguished as {\b K. glaucovirens} Domin, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  3}: 273 (1904).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. K. eriostachya} Pancic, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  6}: 591 (1856) ({\i K. pyramidata} subsp.{\i  eriostachya} (Pancic) Schinz & R. Keller). Densely caespitose, with short, creeping rhizomes. Stems up to 45 cm, glabrous. Leaves of non-flowering shoots 5-10 cm × 2-3 mm, convolute or plicate, slightly pubescent; sheaths persistent, smooth to scabrid. Panicle 20-80 × 10-15 mm,
\par

\par
219}
\par