{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. A. hackelii} (Henriq.) J. Holub,{\i  loc. cit.} (1916) ({\i Avena hackelii} Henriq.). Densely caespitose, with intravaginal shoots. Stems 40-80 cm. Basal leaves 20-45 cm × 0·5-0·7 mm, narrowly junciform, rigid, scabrid, pungent, with indistinct cartilaginous margin and mid-vein, the cross-section more or less orbicular in outline; upper cauline leaf 0·7-2·5(-3·5) cm; sheaths of basal leaves greyish-violet, ciliate at mouth; ligule 1-1·5 mm in basal, 5-8 mm in cauline leaves. Panicle 7-20 cm, with 7-17 spikelets; branches scabrid, 2 at lower nodes. Spikelets 15-21 mm, with 4-7 florets; rhachilla-segments 2-2·5 mm, with hairs 2·5-4 mm; callus hairs 2-3 mm. Lower glume 10-14 mm, the upper 12-18 mm. Lemma 11-17 mm, indurate and slightly sulcate in the lower 1/3, acuminate, 2- to 4-denticulate to -setose at apex.{\i  Dry places. • S.W. Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 63.      Danthoniastrum}    (J.Holub) J.Holub   
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J. Holub. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Helictotrichon} but panicle spicate, with few spikelets; lower glume (3-)5-veined, the upper 5- to 7-veined; lemma deeply 2-dentate, with long, soft hairs below; awn arising from the sinus, geniculate, the basal part compressed and 3-veined; lodicules 3, hairy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: B. R. Baum, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  122}: 51-57 (1973).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. compactum} (Boiss. & Heldr.) J. Holub,{\i  Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}){\b  5}: 436 (1970) ({\i Avena compacta} Boiss. & Heldr.). Stems 10-30(-50) cm, erect, slender, glabrous, smooth. Leaves 5-18 cm × 0·5-0·8 mm, setaceous, convolute, rigid, somewhat pungent, glabrous, smooth, with caducous lamina; ligule 1-1·5 mm, shortly ciliate at apex; basal sheaths persistent. Panicle 3-6 cm, with (2-)3-6(-7) spikelets; branches up to 6 mm, erect, usually with 1 spikelet. Spikelets 14-20(-25) mm, with (3-)4-7 (-9) florets, yellowish-green, shining. Glumes lanceolate, acuminate, glabrous, the lower (8-)10-14(-15) mm, the upper (9-)11-15(-17) mm. Lemma 8-14 mm, ovate-lanceolate; awn 11-20 mm. Palea 6-11 mm, linear-lanceolate. Anthers 3-4·5 mm.{\i  Mountain rocks and stony pastures; calcicole. S., W. & C. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 64.     Arrhenatherum}        Beauv.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J. Holub. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials; basal internodes often swollen and globose. Leaves flat, convolute when young, not strongly ribbed above. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets slightly compressed laterally, usually with 2 florets and one rudiment. Lower floret male, with a geniculate dorsal awn arising from the lower 1/3 of lemma, the upper female or hermaphrodite, usually with a short, slender, straight seta, rarely both florets hermaphrodite and awned. Glumes unequal, hyaline, the lower 1- to 3-veined, the upper about as long as florets, 3(-5)-veined. Lemma 5- to 9-veined. Palea shorter than lemma, shortly 2-dentate at apex, ciliate on keels. Lodicules 2. Stamens 3. Florets falling together at maturity. Grain more or less terete, with hilum 1/2-2/3 its length.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: R. B. Fernandes,{\i  Mem. Soc. Brot.}{\b  6}: 6-11 (1950). B. Kitanov,{\i  Izv. Bot. Inst.} ({\i Sofia}) {\b 2}: 195-208 (1951).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lemma of second floret glabrous or with sparse hairs not
\par
  more than 1 mm; awn of lower floret 10-20 mm, arising in
\par
  the lower 1/3 of the lemma; rhachilla between first and 
\par
  second florets not more than 0·6 mm ............................................... {\b 1. elatius}
\par
1 Lemma of second floret with hairs 2-3 mm; awn of lower 
\par
  floret 15-27 mm, arising at the base of the lemma;
\par
  rhachilla between first and second florets 1-2 mm
\par
2 Spikelets 11-13 mm; grain 4·5-5 mm; lemma 8-11 mm;
\par
  anthers 4-5 mm ........................................................................ {\b 2. palaestinum} 
\par
2 Spikelets 7-10 mm; grain 3·5-4 mm; lemma c. 8 mm;
\par
  anthers c. 3 mm ................................................................................. {\b 3. album}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. elatius} (L.) Beauv. ex J. & C. Presl,{\i  Fl. Cechica }17 (1819). Laxly caespitose. Stems 50-150(-180) cm, smooth, shining. Leaves 10-40 cm × 1-8(-10) mm, green, usually glabrous or subglabrous, more or less scabrid; ligule 1-3 mm, obtuse, usually ciliate. Panicle (5-)10-25(-30) cm, oblong or lanceolate, lax to rather dense. Spikelets 7-10 mm, oblong; rhachilla between first and second florets not more than 0·6 mm. Glumes acute, the lower 4-6 mm, oblong-lanceolate, the upper 7-10 mm, ovate-lanceolate. Lemma 7-10 mm, oblong-lanceolate, subacute, often shortly 2-dentate, glabrous or with sparse hairs up to 1 mm. Awn of the lower floret 10-20 mm, arising in the lower 1/3 of the lemma. Anthers 4-5 mm. Grain 4-5 mm. {\i Meadows and roadsides. Most of Europe, but absent from much of the northeast.} All except ?Al Cr Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b elatius}: Basal internodes not swollen; nodes usually glabrous. 2n = 28.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, but rarer in the south-west.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b bulbosum} (Willd.) Schübler & Martens, {\i Fl. Würtemberg} 70 (1834): Stems with (1-)2-6(-8) swollen, globose basal internodes 6-10 mm in diameter; nodes often hairy. 2n = 28.{\i  Mainly in S. & W. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. almijarense} Gand.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  55}: 159 (1908), with smaller tubers, more slender and shorter stems, glaucous leaves, shorter glumes and spiciform panicle was described from S. Spain. It needs further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Diploid plants (2n = 14) from S.W. Europe, have been described as {\b A. elatius} subsp.{\b  sardoum} (E. Schmid) Gamisans,{\i  Candollea}{\b  29}: 46 (1974) (subsp. {\i braun-blanquetii} P. Monts. & L. Villar,{\i  A. murcicum} Sennen). They are like subsp. ({\b a}) but are densely caespitose, with numerous stems 30-65(-80) cm, leaves shorter and not more than 3 mm wide and panicle (3-)6-12 cm, subspicate, with few spikelets; grain 3·5-4 mm. They are recorded from Corse, Sardegna, Pyrenees and S.E. Spain and may be worth specific rank, but further investigation is needed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. palaestinum} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 13}): 51 (1853) ({\i A. erianthum} auct. balcan., non Boiss. & Reuter). Caespitose. Stems (40-)50-100(-120) cm × 1-3 mm, with the lower internodes swollen and globose; nodes and swollen internodes glabrous. Leaves usually glabrous, scabrid; ligule short, entire to lacerate, ciliate. Panicle 10-20 cm, oblong, lax. Spikelets 11-13 mm; rhachilla between first and second florets 1-1·5(-2) mm. Glumes more or less acute, the lower 5-6 mm, lanceolate, the upper 9-10 mm, lanceolate-ovate. Lemma 8-11 mm, oblong-lanceolate, shortly 2-dentate, that of the lower floret glabrous, that of the upper floret long-hirsute, except at apex; hairs 2-3 mm; awn of the lower floret 20-27 mm, stout, arising from near the base; seta of the upper floret 4-8 mm, arising in the upper 1/3, or absent. Anthers 4-5 mm. Grain 4·5-5 mm.{\i  Dry grassland. S. part of Balkan peninsula, S. Aegean region. }Bu Cr Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. album} (Vahl) W. D. Clayton,{\i  Kew Bull.}{\b  16}: 250 (1962) ({\i A. erianthum} Boiss. & Reuter). Laxly caespitose. Stems 50-100 cm, with the lower internodes swollen and globose; nodes and swollen internodes hairy or glabrous. Leaves glabrous or hirsute, more or less scabrid; ligule shortly ovate, lacerate. Panicle 10-20(-30) cm, narrow, rather dense. Spikelets 7-10 mm; rhachilla between first and second florets 1-2 mm. Glumes acute, the lower 4-6 mm, the upper c. 8 mm. Lemma c. 8 mm, that of the lower floret usually long-ciliate in the lower half, with an awn
\par

\par
216}
\par