{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  in diameter; lower glume c. 10 mm, the upper c. 12 mm; callus-hairs 3-3·5 mm. {\i Rocky slopes. S.E. Spain} ({\i Prov. Murcia}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. H. cantabricum} (Lag.) Gervais,{\i  Denkschr. Schweiz. Naturf. Ges.}{\b  88}: 69 (1973). Sometimes with short stolons; non-flowering shoots intra- and extravaginal. Stems 60-125 cm, 3-6 mm in diameter. Basal leaves 20-50(-80) cm × 2-3 mm, rigid, erect, acute, glabrous beneath, subglaucous above, more or less persistent when dead; sheaths rather soft, stramineous, sometimes suffused with violet when young, without a continuous subepidermal layer of sclerenchyma; ligule 0·2-0·5 mm, ciliate. Panicle (10-)13-25 cm, with 20-60 spikelets, pale; pedicels clavate. Spikelets 11-14(-15) mm, with 2-3 fertile florets. Rhachilla disarticulating below each floret; segments 3 mm, with hairs 4·5-5 mm; callus-hairs 3 mm. Lower glume 8-9 mm, the upper 11-12 mm. Lemma 10-13 mm, 2-fid. Palea 9-11 mm. 2n = 84, 98.{\i  Mountain pastures and wood-clearings. • Pyrenees, Cordillera Cantábrica.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The species includes various taxa needing further investigation. Plants with 2n = 84 occur in the Pyrenees, plants with 2n = 98 in the Cordillera Cantábrica.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. H. desertorum} (Less.) Nevski,{\i  Sovetsk. Bot.}{\b  1937}({\b 4}): 41 (1937) ({\i Avena desertorum} Less.,{\i  Avenastrum desertorum }(Less.) Podp.). Non-flowering shoots intravaginal. Stems 30-60 cm, slender. Basal leaves 20-50 cm × 0·5-0·7 mm, setaceous, greyish-green, soon deciduous when dead; sheaths of basal leaves pale grey or stramineous, rather tough, persistent, the inner more or less shiny; ligule of basal leaves 3-8 mm, acute, of cauline leaves 1-3 mm, truncate, lacerate, usually glabrous. Panicle (4-)5-8 (-10) cm, with 7-17 spikelets; primary branches with 2-3 spikelets; pedicels not clavate. Spikelets 9-12(-14) mm, with 2(-3) fertile florets. Rhachilla disarticulating below each floret; segments 2-2·5 mm, with hairs 2·5-3 mm; callus-hairs 2 mm; pedicel of the sterile floret up to 4 mm, hairy. Lower glume 6·5-9 mm, the upper 10-11 mm. Lemma 8-10 mm. Palea 8-9 mm.{\i  Steppes and stony slopes. From W. Czechoslovakia to S. Ural, northwards to} 55°{\i  N. in C. Russia.} Au Cz Rs (W, C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b desertorum}: Sheaths of cauline leaves glabrous. Lemma usually 2-fid.{\i  S.E. Russia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b basalticum} (Podp.) J. Holub, {\i Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}) {\b 5}: 436 (1970) ({\i Avenastrum desertorum} var. {\i basalticum} Podp.): Sheaths of cauline leaves puberulent. Lemma usually 3-to 4-dentate. 2n = 14.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 62.      Avenula}     (Dumort.)Dumort.  
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J. Holub. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Helictotrichon} but roots without a ring of sclerenchyma surrounding the endodermis; basal leaves without ribs above, with 2 distinct lines of bulliform cells along the mid-vein above; ligule of cauline leaves acute; spikelets erect, with 2-7 fertile florets; lower glume (1-)3-veined, the upper 3(-5)-veined; awn twisted and usually compressed in lower part.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Measurements of the width of the stem refer to its thickness in the lower 1/3 and the length of the ligule of cauline leaves refers to the uppermost leaf, unless this leaf is exceptionally short. Spikelet-length excludes the awns, the number of florets includes sterile rudimentary florets and the length of rhachilla-segments and of their hairs refers to the segment between the first and second florets. Glume-length is measured on a lateral spikelet and characters of the lemma refer to the first and second florets at anthesis.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The treatment of species from S. Europe and particularly from Spain is provisional and further investigation is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: C. Gervais,{\i  Denkschr. Schweiz. Naturf. Ges.}{\b  88}: 3-166 (1973). J. Holub, {\i Acta Horti Bot. Prag.}{\b  1962}: 75-86 (1962);{\i  Acta Mus. Nation. Prag.}{\b  17}({\b B}),{\b  1961}({\b 5}): 189-244 (1962). E. Paunero,{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles }{\b 17}({\b 1}): 267-283 (1959). W. Sauer & H. Chmelitschek,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}) {\b 12}: 513-607 (1976). A. St-Yves, {\i Candollea}{\b  4}: 423-490 (1931).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lower part of awn terete, of uniform thickness when 
\par
  viewed from the side; keels of palea glabrous and 
\par
  smooth; veins not reaching upper margin of lemma .................. {\b 1. pubescens}
\par
1 Lower part of awn flattened, alternately thick and thin
\par
  when viewed from the side; keels of palea shortly 
\par
  ciliate or aculeolate; veins reaching upper margin of 
\par
  lemma
\par
2 Basal leaves in cross-section with a continuous subepi-
\par
  dermal layer of sclerenchyma beneath; rhachilla-segments
\par
  with hairs 2·5-4 mm ..................................................................... {\b 27. hackelii}
\par
2 Basal leaves in cross-section without a continuous sub-
\par
  epidermal layer of sclerenchyma beneath; rhachilla
\par
  segments glabrous or with hairs not more than 3 mm
\par
3 Rhachilla-segments glabrous or with sparse hairs near
\par
  apex, the hairs shorter than those of the callus
\par
4 Lemma sericeous or hairy on the back in the lower ½
\par
5 Basal leaves deeply sulcate beneath; uppermost cauline
\par
  leaf 3-8 cm, patent; lower glume 10-12 mm, the upper 
\par
  12-16 mm .................................................................................... {\b 24. gervaisii}
\par
5 Basal leaves not sulcate beneath; uppermost cauline 
\par
  leaf not more than 1·5 cm, appressed to stem; lower 
\par
  glume 6-9 mm, the upper 8-11 mm
\par
6 Basal leaves 1·5-3 mm wide, V-shaped in cross-section,
\par
  spirally twisted when dead, ± smooth; cartilaginous 
\par
  margin and mid-vein distinct beneath ..................................... {\b 19. bromoides}
\par
6 Basal leaves 0·3-0·4 mm wide, orbicular in cross-section,
\par
  not spirally twisted when dead, scabrid; cartilaginous 
\par
  margin and mid-vein not distinct beneath ................................... {\b 20. murcica}
\par
4 Lemma not sericeous or hairy on the back in the lower ½
\par
7 Lateral veins of basal leaves connected by sclerenchyma
\par
  and colourless parenchyma with at least 1 leaf-surface
\par
8 Lemma reddish-brown, longitudinally sulcate in the lower half
\par
9 Basal leaves 2-5 mm wide, not sulcate beneath, and with
\par
  4-6 sclerenchyma-strands on each side of midvein;
\par
  callus-hairs 0·5-1 mm ................................................................ {\b 9. compressa}
\par
9 Basal leaves 0·3-2(-2·5) mm wide, sulcate beneath, and
\par
  with 1(-3) sclerenchyma-strands on each side of midvein;
\par
  callus-hairs 1·5-2·5 mm ........................................................... {\b 12. mirandana}
\par
8 Lemma greenish-yellow, not longitudinally sulcate
\par
10 Basal leaves not sulcate beneath; callus-hairs c. 1 mm;
\par
   panicle with 7-17 spikelets ........................................................ {\b 13. gonzaloi}
\par
10 Basal leaves sulcate beneath; callus-hairs 1·5-2·5 mm;
\par
   panicle with 3-10 spikelets ..................................................... {\b 12. mirandana}
\par
7  Lateral veins of basal leaves separated from subepidermal
\par
   sclerenchyma by chlorenchyma
\par
11 Basal leaves flat or conduplicate, the cross-section 
\par
   oblong in outline
\par
12 Basal leaves not sulcate beneath; subepidermal sclerenchyma
\par
   groups small or almost absent; callus-hairs 0·4-0·8 mm ........ {\b 19. bromoides}
\par
12 Basal leaves sulcate beneath; subepidermal sclerenchyma
\par
   groups present opposite all veins; callus-hairs c. 1·5 mm
\par
13 Spikelets 18-24 mm, with 5-7 florets; lemma narrowed 
\par
   from the middle, acute; anthers 5-6 mm ................................. {\b 21. cincinnata}
\par
13 Spikelets (20-)25-30 mm, with 7-9 florets; lemma nar-
\par
   rowed in the upper 1/3, subtruncate; anthers 6-8 mm .... {\b 22. peloponnesiaca}
\par
11 Basal leaves usually setaceous or junciform, the cross-
\par
   section elliptical to orbicular in outline
\par
14 Basal leaves 1-2 mm in diameter, junciform; lemma
\par
   narrowed from the middle
\par

\par
210}
\par