{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 15 Basal leaves 1-1·5 mm in diameter, deeply sulcate;
\par
   panicle 7-15 cm ......................................................................... {\b 25. pruinosa}
\par
15 Basal leaves 1·5-2 mm in diameter, smooth or slightly
\par
   sulcate; panicle 15-22 cm ....................................................... {\b 26. crassifolia}
\par
14 Basal leaves 0·3-0·8 mm in diameter, setaceous; lemma
\par
   narrowed in the upper 1/3
\par
16 Basal leaves 10-40 cm, deeply sulcate, the upper 
\par
   cauline at least 3 cm; panicle with 13-21 spikelets;
\par
   lower glume 10-12 mm .............................................................. {\b 24. gervaisii}
\par
16 Basal leaves 2-7 cm, not sulcate, the upper cauline 
\par
   not more than 1 cm; panicle with 2-8 spikelets; lower 
\par
   glume 7-8 mm ............................................................................. {\b 20. murcica}
\par
3  Rhachilla-segments hairy at least in the upper ½, the
\par
   hairs longer than or about as long as those of the callus
\par
17 Ligules of basal and cauline leaves of about the same length
\par
18 Densely caespitose; lateral veins of basal leaves not
\par
   connected with the epidermis by sclerenchyma; ligule 
\par
   of basal leaves 2-3 mm ............................................................ {\b 23. cycladum}
\par
18 Stoloniferous; lateral veins of basal leaves connected
\par
   with the epidermis by sclerenchyma; ligule of basal 
\par
   leaves 4-6 mm ............................................................................. {\b 10. aetolica}
\par
17 Ligule of cauline leaves usually at least twice as 
\par
   long as that of the basal leaves
\par
19 Lateral veins of basal leaves not connected with the
\par
   epidermis by sclerenchyma (S. Aegean region) ...................... {\b 23. cycladum}
\par
19 Lateral veins of basal leaves connected with the 
\par
   epidermis by sclerenchyma and colourless parenchyma
\par
20 Lemma reddish-brown in lower ½
\par
21 Basal leaves 4-12 mm wide, their sheaths very strongly
\par
   compressed ........................................................................... {\b 18. planiculmis}
\par
21 Basal leaves 0·4-6 mm wide, their sheaths terete to 
\par
   slightly compressed
\par
22 Veins of lemma not excurrent; hairs of rhachilla-segments
\par
   1-1·5 mm ................................................................................... {\b 3. schelliana}
\par
22 Veins of lemma excurrent, forming 2(4) setae; hairs of
\par
   rhachilla-segments 1·5-2·5 mm
\par
23 Sheaths of basal leaves closed in the lower 1/3(-1/2);
\par
   lemma not longitudinally sulcate in the lower 1/2;
\par
   upper cauline leaf 2-7 cm, ± patent ........................................... {\b 2. versicolor}
\par
23 Sheaths of basal leaves closed at the base only; lemma
\par
   longitudinally sulcate in the lower ½; upper cauline
\par
   leaf not more than 2 cm, appressed to stem .............. ({\b 4-7}). {\b marginata} group 
\par
20 Lemma not reddish-brown in the lower ½
\par
24 Basal leaves 2-12 mm wide, their sheaths very strongly
\par
   compressed
\par
25 Basal leaves 4-12 mm wide, with 8-16 lateral veins on
\par
   each side of the mid-vein; panicle often interrupted 
\par
   in the lower part .................................................................... {\b 18. planiculmis}
\par
25 Basal leaves 2-6 mm wide, with 6-10 lateral veins on 
\par
   each side of the mid-vein; panicle usually not inter-
\par
   rupted in the lower part .............................................................. {\b 17. praeusta}
\par
24 Basal leaves 0·4-6 mm wide, their sheaths terete or 
\par
   slightly compressed
\par
26 Basal leaves convolute, setaceous to junciform, the 
\par
   cross-section elliptical to orbicular in outline
\par
27 Basal leaves not more than ¼ as long as stem,
\par
   1·5-2 mm in diameter, very pungent, slightly sulcate;
\par
   pedicels ± smooth; plant without stolons .................................. {\b 15. pungens}
\par
27 Basal leaves 1/3-1/2 as long as stem, 0·4-1·3 mm in 
\par
   diameter, not or only slightly pungent, not sulcate;
\par
   pedicels scabrid; plant with short stolons 
\par
28 Stems 30-60 cm, slender; ligule of upper cauline 
\par
   leaves 2-4 mm; basal leaves setaceous, 0·4-0·6 mm in
\par
   diameter, with c. 3 lateral veins on each side of the
\par
   mid-vein; panicle 4-13 cm, with 4-9 spikelets ............................... {\b 11. blavii} 
\par
28 Stems 60-100 cm, robust; ligule of upper cauline 
\par
   leaves 6-10 mm; basal leaves junciform, 1·2-1·3 mm in
\par
   diameter; panicle 15-20 cm with 14-17 spikelets ..................... {\b 14. requienii}
\par
26 Basal leaves flat or conduplicate, the cross-section 
\par
   oblong to oblong-elliptical in outline 
\par
29 Basal leaves 2-7 cm
\par
30 Basal leaves c. 1/5 as long as stem, 2-4 mm wide;
\par
   spikelets 14-18 mm, with 5-7 florets; rhachilla-
\par
   segments with hairs 1·5-2·5 mm; upper glume 12-14 mm ................ {\b 8. levis}
\par
30 Basal leaves 1/12-1/10 as long as stem, 0·8-2 mm wide;
\par
   spikelets 10-12 mm, with 3-5 florets; rhachilla-
\par
   segments with hairs 0·4-1 mm; upper glume 9-10 mm ({\b 4-7}). {\b marginata} group
\par
29 Basal leaves 5-40 cm
\par
31 Lemma longitudinally sulcate, at least at base, with
\par
   2(4) setae at apex; upper cauline leaf not more than
\par
   2 cm, appressed to stem ............................................. ({\b 4-7}). {\b marginata} group
\par
31 Lemma not longitudinally sulcate in lower ½, without
\par
   distinct setae at apex; upper cauline leaf usually more
\par
   than 2 cm, patent
\par
32 Spikelets 10-16 mm; rhachilla-segments 1·5-2 mm, with
\par
   hairs 1-1·5 mm; upper glume 9-13 mm; anthers 3·5-4·5 mm .... {\b 3. schelliana}
\par
32 Spikelets 12-23 mm; rhachilla-segments 2-3 mm, with 
\par
   hairs 2-3 mm; upper glume 12-18 mm; anthers 5-8 mm
\par
33 Basal leaves 1-3 mm wide, usually conduplicate, with
\par
   subterete sheaths; plant densely caespitose, usually
\par
   without stolons; panicle with 5-18 spikelets ............................. {\b 16. pratensis}
\par
33 Basal leaves 2-6 mm wide, usually flat, with compressed
\par
   sheaths; plant laxly caespitose to ± creeping,
\par
   with stolons; panicle with 12-30 spikelets ................................. {\b 17. praeusta}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Pubavenastrum} (Vierh.) J. Holub. Cartilaginous margin of basal leaves not serrulate; ligule of basal leaves truncate-dentate. Lower glume 1- to 3-veined. Veins of lemma not reaching the upper margin. Lower part of awn terete, twisted, of uniform thickness when viewed from the side. Keels of palea glabrous and smooth. Lodicules thick, shortly 2-dentate at apex, usually shorter than ovary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. pubescens} (Hudson) Dumort.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Belg.}{\b  7}: 68 (1868) ({\i Avena pubescens} Hudson, {\i Avenastrum pubescens} (Hudson) Opiz,{\i  Arrhenatherum pubescens} (Hudson) Samp.). Laxly caespitose, with short extravaginal stolons. Stems 30-100 cm. Basal leaves 10-30 cm × 2-6 mm, flat or conduplicate, soft, green, subobtuse, usually with long hairs, the margin very narrowly cartilaginous and smooth; sheaths of basal leaves closed nearly to the mouth, usually shortly hairy; ligule 0·5-1 mm and more or less truncate in basal, 5-8 mm and acute in cauline leaves. Panicle (6-)8-15(-20) cm; branches slender, more or less flexuous, 2-6(-9) at lower nodes. Spikelets usually pale green and white, with 2-4 florets; rachilla-segments 2·5 mm, villous with hairs 3-6 mm; callus-hairs 2-3 mm. Lower glume 1(-3)-veined. Lemma soft, weakly veined denticulate at apex. 2n = 14+0-2B.{\i  Meadows, pastures and wood-clearings. From arctic Norway southwards to N. Portugal, C. Appennini and Bulgaria.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (?N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pubescens}: Spikelets 10-17 mm, usually with 2-3 florets. Lower glume 7-13 mm, the upper 10-18 mm and about as long as florets. Lemma 9-13 mm; awn 12-22 mm.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b laevigata} (Schur) J. Holub, {\i Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}) {\b 11}: 295 (1976) ({\i Avena laevigata} Schur): Spikelets 15-20(-26) mm, with 3-4 florets. Lower glume 10-17(-20) mm, the upper 14-21(-26) mm and (-20) mm; awn 16-26 mm. {\i W.S. Alps, S.&E. Carpathians}.
\par

\par
211}
\par