{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b planiculmis}: Stems 60-120 cm × c. 3 mm. Basal leaves 6-12 mm wide, deep green. Panicle 13-26(-30) cm, with 15-40(-55) spikelets; branches 2-3 at lower nodes, the primary with 2-5 spikelets. Spikelets 20-28(-35) mm. •{\i  E. Sudeten Mts, N. Carpathians}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b angustior} J. Holub, {\i Preslia}{\b  49}: 209 (1977): Stems 30-80(-100) cm × 1·5-2·5 mm. Basal leaves 4-7 mm wide, greyish-green. Panicle 7-23(-30) cm, with (6-)10-35 spikelets; branches usually 2 at lower nodes, the primary with 1-3 spikelets. Spikelets 15-25 mm. {\i Carpathians and mountains of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. A. bromoides} (Gouan) H. Scholz,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  7}: 420 (1974) ({\i Avena bromoides} Gouan). Caespitose. Stems 25-50(-70) cm, smooth. Basal leaves 3-15 cm × 1·5-3(-4) mm, up to 1/6-1/3 as long as stem, flat or conduplicate, glaucous, pruinose, smooth except for the distinct cartilaginous margin, spirally twisted when dead, flat beneath, with vascular bundles separated from subepidermal sclerenchyma by chlorenchyma; upper cauline leaf 0·2-1·5 cm; ligule 0·5-1(-2) mm in basal, 2-6 (-10) mm in cauline leaves. Panicle 6-15(-20) cm, with 5-15 spikelets. Spikelets (10-)12-20(-22) mm, with 7-8 florets; rhachilla-segments 1·5-3 mm, glabrous; callus-hairs 0·4-0·8 mm, not reaching beyond the base of the lemma. Glumes obtuse, the lower 6-9 mm, the upper 8-11 mm. Lemma 8-13 mm, soft, sometimes sericeous in the lower 1/3, narrowed in the upper 1/4-1/3 and irregularly denticulate at apex; awns divaricate. 2n = 14+0-2B.{\i  Dry meadows and stony ground. S.W. Europe. }Bl Ga Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Tetraploid and hexaploid chromosome-numbers recorded for material from S. Spain refer to {\b 24} or {\b 25}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. A. murcica} J. Holub, {\i Preslia}{\b  49}: 206 (1977). Caespitose. Stems 30-45 cm × 0·5-1 mm; nodes dark violet. Basal leaves 2-7 cm × 0·3-0·4 mm, setaceous, 1/10-1/6 as long as stem, not spirally twisted when dead, strongly scabrid, convex beneath; cartilaginous margin and main vein not distinct; upper cauline leaf 0·3-0·9 cm; ligule of cauline leaves 1-2 mm. Panicle simple, with 2-8 more or less sessile spikelets. Spikelets 14-15 mm, punctulate-scabrid; rhachilla-segments 1·5-2 mm, glabrous; callus-hairs 0·8-1 mm. Lower glume 7-8 mm, the upper c. 9 mm. Lemma 9-10 mm, usually hairy below, narrowed in the upper 1/3, rounded-truncate and irregularly denticulate at apex.{\i  Dry places. • S. Spain, S.E. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. A. cincinnata} (Ten.) J. Holub,{\i  Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}) {\b 11}: 294 (1976) ({\i Bromus cincinnatus} Ten., {\i Avena australis} Parl.). Caespitose. Stems 40-80 cm × c.1 mm. Basal leaves 10-15 cm × 2-3 mm, more or less flat to loosely conduplicate glaucous, with a distinct cartilaginous margin, sulcate beneath twisted into a lax spiral when dead, the cross-section oblong in outline; vascular bundles separated from the distinct groups of subepidermal sclerenchyma by chlorenchyma; upper cauline leaf 0·5-3 cm; ligule 1-1·5 mm in basal, 4-5 mm in cauline leaves. Panicle 6-12(-15) cm, with 6-17 spikelets. Spikelets 18-24 mm with 5-7 florets; rhachilla-segments 2-3 mm, more or less glabrous; callus-hairs c. 1·5 mm, exceeding base of lemma. Glumes narrowly lanceolate, acute, the lower 10-14 mm, the upper 13-18 mm. Lemma 12-16 mm, narrowed upwards from middle, acute, 2-fid, glabrous. 2n = 14. {\i Dry places. S. Italy, Sicilia.} ?Bl ?Hs It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Records from Spain and Islas Baleares need confirmation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. A. peloponnesiaca} J. Holub,{\i  Preslia}{\b  49}: 207 (1977). Like {\b 21} but with long stolons; stems 1·5-2 mm in diameter; spikelets (20-)25-30 mm, with 7-9 florets; lemma narrowed in the upper 1/3, subtruncate, shortly 2-fid or irregularly denticulate at apex. {\i Stony mountain sides. • S. Greece} ({\i S. Peloponnisos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  A. agropyroides} (Boiss.) J. Holub, {\i Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}) {\b 11}: 294 (1976) ({\i Avena agropyroides }Boiss.,{\i  Avenastrum agropyroides} (Boiss.) Halácsy), collected in S.E. Greece (Argolis) in 1841, has not been refound since. It is like {\b 21} but has 8-9 spikelets 15-18 mm, in a simple panicle, with the branches solitary at the nodes. The lemma has silky hairs in the lower half.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. A. cycladum} (Rech. fil. & Scheffer) W. Greuter, {\i Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  1}: 75 (1973) ({\i Avenastrum cycladum} Rech. fil. & Scheffer, ?{\i Avena sibthorpii} Nyman). Densely caespitose. Stem 20-30(-50) cm, slender, rigid, erect. Basal leaves 2-5 cm × 1·5-2 mm, conduplicate, rigid, recurved, pruinose, smooth except for margin, the lateral veins not connected with the epidermis by sclerenchyma; upper cauline leaf very short; sheaths of basal leaves smooth, keeled; ligule 2-3 mm in basal, 3-4 mm in cauline leaves. Panicle 5-7 cm, with (2-)4-7 spikelets; branches 1-2 at lower nodes, rigid, very short; some spikelets subsessile. Spikelets 15-22 mm, with 3-5 florets; rhachilla-segments hairy, glabrous in the lower 1/3. Lower glume c. 12 mm, the upper c. 17 mm, 3- to 5-veined.{\i  Dry, stony places. • Kikladhes, Kriti.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. A. gervaisii} J. Holub,{\i  Preslia}{\b  49}: 205 (1977). Caespitose. Stems 50-80 cm × 1-2 mm, moderately scabrid; nodes violet. Basal leaves 10-40 cm × c. 0·6 mm, usually convolute, greyish-green, sulcate outside; upper cauline leaf 3-8 cm, patent; sheaths greyish-violet, scabrid; ligule 1·5-3·5 mm in basal, 4-7 mm in cauline leaves. Panicle 10-22 cm, with (6-)13-21(-27) spikelets. Spikelets 18-30 mm, with 7-9 florets, greenish-stramineous; rhachilla-segments 1·5-2·5 mm, glabrous; callus-hairs 0·5-1 mm. Lower glume 10-12 mm, the upper 12-16 mm. Lemma 12-15 mm, pale greenish, broadly hyaline at apex, slightly sericeous in the lower 1/3, narrowed in the upper 1/3, shortly 2-fid and 2-setose at apex.{\i  Dry hillsides. • S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. A. pruinosa} (Batt. & Trabut) J. Holub,{\i  Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}){\b  11}: 295 (1976) ({\i Avena pruinosa} Batt. & Trabut). Stoloniferous. Stems 50-80 cm, Basal leaves 20-25 cm × 1·1-1·5 mm, usually convolute, more or less rigid, glaucous, with distinctly cartilaginous margin and mid-vein, strongly scabrid, sulcate beneath, somewhat spirally twisted when dead, the cross-section broadly elliptical to suborbicular in outline; vascular bundles separated from the subepidermal sclerenchyma by chlorenchyma; upper cauline leaf c. 1·5 cm; sheaths of basal leaves glabrous or ciliate; ligule 1-2 mm in basal, 3-4 mm in cauline leaves. Panicle 7-13(-15) cm, with 10-16 spikelets; branches 1-2 at lower nodes, with 1 spikelet. Spikelets (18-)22-30(-35) mm, with 5-7 florets; rhachilla-segments 3 mm, with hairs 0·6 mm; callus-hairs 1 mm. Lower glume 10-17 mm, the upper 17-20 mm. Lemma 14-18 mm, narrowed upwards from the middle. {\i Dry places. S. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. A. crassifolia} (Font Quer) J. Holub, {\i loc. cit.} (1976) ({\i Avena crassifolia} Font Quer). Like {\b 25} but basal leaves thicker, conduplicate and 1·5-2 mm in diameter or more or less flat and c. 4 mm wide, not or scarcely sulcate; sheaths of basal leaves densely sericeous; panicle 15-22 cm; primary branches with 1-2 spikelets; lemma often with 2 setae at apex.{\i  Dry places. • Islas Baleares.} Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. SCLERAVENASTRUM (J. Holub) J. Holub. Basal leaves with a continuous layer of subepidermal sclerenchyma. Hairs of rhachilla-segments 2·5-4 mm.
\par

\par
215}
\par