{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 15-25 mm, arising from near the base; lemma of the upper floret hirsute except at apex, and with a seta 3-5 mm; hairs 2-3 mm. Anthers c. 3 mm. Grain 3·5-4 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Dry grassland. C. & S. Spain, Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Intermediates between {\b 1} and {\b 3}, presumably of hybrid origin, occur in Spain and Portugal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 65.     Pseudarrhenatherum}     Rouy
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J. Holub. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\b  Arrhenatherum} but basal internodes never swollen and globose; leaves with prominent ribs on upper surface; awn of the lower floret arising at or above the middle of the lemma; rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes only; grain dorsally compressed, deeply sulcate, with hilum 1/3 its length.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Sheaths, leaves and nodes usually hairy; leaves flat, 
\par
  later convolute; lower glume 3-veined; awn arising in
\par
  the upper 1/3 of the lemma; spikelets 5-7 mm, yellowish-
\par
  green, often tinged with violet ................................................. {\b 1. longifolium} 
\par
Sheaths, leaves and nodes usually glabrous; leaves filiform,
\par
  convolute; lower glume usually 1-veined; awn arising
\par
  in the lower half of the lemma; spikelets 
\par
  9-10 mm, pale green ........................................................................ {\b 2. pallens}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. longifolium} (Thore) Rouy, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  68}: 401 (1922) ({\i Avena longifolia} Thore). Stems (30-)40-120(-150) cm, scabridulous above, hairy at the nodes. Leaves flat, later convolute, 1-4 mm wide, scabrid above, hairy to subglabrous beneath; sheaths of cauline leaves usually with dense deflexed hairs; ligule finely ciliate at apex. Panicle (5-)8-20 cm, elliptical, rather dense. Spikelets 5-7 mm, yellowish-green or tinged with violet. Glumes lanceolate-ovate, acuminate, 3-veined, the lower 4-6 mm, with very short lateral veins, the upper 5-7 mm. Lemma 5-6·5 mm, elliptical, that of the lower floret more or less 2-fid, that of the upper floret acute; awn 7-9 mm, arising in the upper 1/3 of the lemma and the lower twisted part distinctly overtopping it. Palea 4-5 mm, lanceolate. Anthers 2·5-4 mm. Grain 2·5-3 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Pine-woods and heaths; calcifuge. • W. Europe, from N.W. France to C. Portugal and S. Spain.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. pallens} (Link) J. Holub, {\i Taxon }{\b 15}: 167 (1966) ({\i Avena pallens} Link). Like {\b 1} but stems 30-70 cm, smooth, usually with glabrous nodes; leaves filiform, convolute, 0·6-0·8 mm in diameter, usually glabrous; sheaths of cauline leaves glabrous; panicle 5-12 cm; spikelets 9-10 mm, pale green; lower glume 7-8 mm, usually 1-veined, the upper 9-10 mm, 3-veined; awn 12-15 mm, arising in the lower half of the lemma; palea 6-7 mm; anthers 4-5 mm.{\i  Dry grassland; calcicole. • C. Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 66.       Gaudinia}      Beauv.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or biennials. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a distichous spike. Rhachis fragile, disarticulating above the insertion of the spikelet. Spikelets laterally compressed, sessile, more or less appressed to the concave rhachis, with 3-11 florets. Glumes unequal, shorter than to about as long as the spikelet, the lower with 3(-5), the upper with 5-7(-11) strong veins. Lemma obscurely 7- to 9-veined, coriaceous, often with a dorsal awn. Palea shorter than lemma.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lower glume more than ¾ the length of the upper ..................... {\b 3. coarctata} 
\par
1 Lower glume less than 2/3 the length of the upper
\par
2 Upper glume (7-)8-10(-12) mm; lemma with a geniculate awn .... {\b 1. fragilis}
\par
2 Upper glume 4·5-5 mm; lemma unawned .................................. {\b 2. hispanica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. fragilis} (L.) Beauv.,{\i  Agrost.} 95, 164 (1812). Stems 15-120 cm, usually several, erect or ascending, glabrous, smooth, shiny. Leaves and sheaths more or less villous; ligule very short, truncate. Inflorescence up to 35 cm. Spikelets 10-18 mm. Glumes shorter than the spikelets, glabrous and scabrid on the veins or sometimes villous, the lower 3-6 mm, lanceolate, acute, the upper (7-)8-10(-12) mm, oblong, obtuse. Lemma c. 7 mm, lanceolate, glabrous or sometimes villous, with a geniculate awn c. 10 mm. Anthers 4-5 mm. Grain 2·5 × 0·5 mm. 2n = 14+0-2B.{\i  Grassy, usually damp habitats. S. Europe; a frequent casual in N.W. & E. Europe and occasionally persisting.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga He Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [*Az Br Hb].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. G. hispanica} Stace & Tutin,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 353 (1978). Like {\b 1} but stems not more than 25 cm; inflorescence c. 10 cm, very slender; spikelets 6-9 mm; lower glume c. 2·5 mm, the upper 4·5-5 mm; lemma 5·5-6·5 mm, unawned. Anthers c. 3 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Sandy soil. • S.W. Spain} ({\i Prov. Huelva}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. G. coarctata} (Link) T. Durand & Schinz,{\i  Consp. Fl. Afr.}{\b  5}: 845 (1894). Like {\b 1} but stems rarely more than 30 cm; spikelets not more than 10 mm, usually with 3-5 florets; glumes usually nearly as long as the spikelet, the lower 5·5-7 mm, the upper 6·5-9 mm; anthers 2·5-2·75 mm; grain 1·5 × 0·75 mm. {\i Rocks and sandy ground, usually near the sea. • Açores.} Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 67.       Ventenata}       Koeler
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  (incl. {\i Gaudiniopsis} Eig)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves convolute or plicate. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 2-7 florets. Glumes somewhat unequal, with a wide, scarious margin, the lower 3- to 7-veined, the upper 3- to 9-veined. Lemma 5-veined, chartaceous, with a scarious margin, the lowest shorter than the others, unawned, the uppermost with a dorsal awn.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Inflorescence a lax panicle; lowest lemma with an apical
\par
  seta up to 4 mm .................................................................................. {\b 1. dubia}
\par
Inflorescence spike-like; lowest lemma without an apical
\par
  seta .................................................................................................... {\b 2. macra}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. V. dubia} (Leers) Cosson in Durieu,{\i  Expl. Sci. Algérie}{\b  2}: 104 (1855) ({\i V. avenacea} Koeler). Stems 15-70 cm, slender, erect, puberulent below the nodes. Leaves and sheaths glabrous or sparsely hairy; ligule 6-9 mm, acute or lacerate. Panicle up to 20 cm, lax, pyramidal, with few spikelets borne near the ends of the long, minutely hispidulous branches. Spikelets 10-15 mm (excluding awns), usually with 2-3 florets. Glumes lanceolate, acuminate, minutely hispidulous on the veins, the lowest 5- to 7-, the upper 7- to 9-veined. Lemma lanceolate, the lowest with an apical seta up to 4 mm, the others 2-fid, with 2 apical setae 1·5-2 mm; awn 10-15 mm, geniculate. Anthers c. 1 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry places. S. & C. Europe.} Al Au †Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. V. macra} (Bieb.) Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or. }{\b 5}: 540 (1884) ({\i Gaudiniopsis macra} (Bieb.) Eig). Stems 10-50 cm, glabrous, erect or ascending. Leaves somewhat hairy above; ligule 3-6 mm, lacerate. Inflorescence 4-10 cm, spike-like. Spikelets c. 10 mm (excluding awns) usually with 4-7 florets; pedicels 1-3·5 mm, stout, erect. Glumes lanceolate, acute, the lower 3-, the upper 3- to 5-veined. Lowest lemma acute, the others shortly 2-dentate; awn c. 10 mm, geniculate. Anthers 2·5 mm. {\i Dry, rocky places. Krym; once recorded from S. Greece.} ?Gr Rs (K). ({\i S.W. & C. Asia}.)
\par

\par
217}
\par