{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 that from Parnon Oros chiefly by its shorter rhachilla-hairs. Until more material is available it seems preferable to regard them as conspecific.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. T. distichophyllum} (Vill.) Beauv., {\i Agrost}. 88, 180 (1812). Extensively creeping, stoloniferous perennial with ascending stems 10-30 cm, glabrous to hairy. Leaves up to 6 cm × 3 mm, flat or canaliculate, puberulent, more or less patent, crowded and markedly distichous below. Sheaths glabrous to densely pubescent with scattered longer hairs. Panicle 3-6 × 1-3 cm, ovoid, rather lax, with 20-50 usually silvery-brownish to violet spikelets. Spikelets 5·5-8·5 mm. Glumes almost smooth, broadly hyaline, the lower 3/4-5/6 as long as the upper, narrower, usually with 2 shorter lateral veins. Rhachilla with dense hairs c. 3 mm; hairs at base of lemma about reaching the base of awn. Lemma 4-5·5 mm, with 2 short setae; awn 4·5-6·8 mm, inserted c. 1/3 of the way from apex to base of lemma, geniculate near the base, twisted. Anthers 2-3 mm. 2n = 28, 56.{\i  Rocks and screes; calcicole. • Alps; E. Pyrenees; mountains of Crna Gora and N. Albania.} Al Au Ga Ge He Hs It Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. T. argenteum} (Willd.) Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 665 (1817). Like {\b 4} but up to 35 cm and more slender; leaves usually canaliculate, narrower and more slender, scabridulous only beneath; panicle up to 8 cm, lanceolate to narrowly ovoid, lax, with spikelets 4-6*5 mm; lower glume c. 3/4 as long as upper, always 1-veined; rhachilla-hairs 2-2·5 mm; hairs at base of lemma reaching up to half-way to base of awn; lemma 3·7-5 mm; anthers 2-2·5 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Rocks and screes; calcicole. • E. Alps}. Au ?He It Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. T. glaciale} (Bory) Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 87 (1838). Densely caespitose perennial with glabrous stems 8-20 cm. Shoots surrounded by a dense layer of old fibrous sheaths. Basal leaves up to 5 cm × 1·5 mm, tomentose, especially beneath, rigid, distinctly veined; midvein and margins thickened, cartilaginous. Cauline leaves less than 1 cm, almost scale-like. Sheaths distinctly veined, velutinous-tomentose. Panicle 2·5-3 × 0·7-1 cm, cylindrical, dense. Spikelets c. 5 mm, with 1-2 florets. Glumes subequal, equalling the florets, smooth. Rhachilla densely hairy, the hairs c. 1 mm. Lemma 3·5-4·5 mm, slightly 2-fid, glabrous; awn 4-5 mm, inserted slightly above the middle, geniculate. Anthers c. 2 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Alpines screes. • S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. T. gracile} (Moris) Boiss.,{\i  Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 654 (1842). Densely caespitose perennial with nearly glabrous stems 4-15 cm. Non-flowering shoots surrounded by papery, pubescent sheaths and numerous older leaves. Basal leaves 0·8-3 cm, curved and rigid, canaliculate, prominently veined, greyish-green when young, finely pubescent above. Cauline leaves few, up to 1·2 cm; sheaths glabrous, distinctly veined, somewhat inflated. Panicle c. 2 × 1·2 cm, ovoid, rather dense, with 15-25 spikelets. Spikelets 4-7 mm. Glumes subequal, equalling the florets, smooth. Rhachilla with erecto-patent hairs c. 1 mm. Lemma 3·5-5 mm, 2-fid for c. 1/6 of its length, glabrous or hairy between the awn and the base; awn c. 5 mm, inserted below middle of lemma, geniculate. Anthers c. 2·5 mm. 2n = 14. {\i Mountain grassland. • Corse, Sardegna.} Co Sa.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  T. conradiae} Gamisans, {\i Candollea}{\b  26}: 322 (1971), from high altitudes in Corse, does not seem to warrant recognition at specific level, as it differs from {\b 7} only in having a hairy lemma.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. T. bertolonii} Jonsell,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 320 (1978) ({\i T. villosum} (Bertol.) Schultes, non Pers.). Caespitose perennial, with villous (rarely glabrous) stems 10-25 cm. Leaves greyish-green, involute and setaceous, c. 1 mm wide, curved, finely pubescent above; basal leaves up to 12 cm, the cauline much shorter. Sheaths rather persistent, glabrous. Panicle 2-6 × 1-1*5 cm, narrowly ovoid, rather lax, with 20-40 spikelets. Spikelets 6*5-9 mm. Glumes smooth, the upper equalling or slightly shorter than the florets, the lower c. 2/3 as long as the upper, much narrower. Rhachilla and callus with hairs 1*5-2*5 mm. Lemma 4*8-7*5 mm, smooth, with 2 setae c. 1/4 as long as undivided part awn 9-13 mm, inserted above middle of lemma, angled. Anthers 2-2·5 mm.{\i  Mountain cliffs. • C. & S. Appennini.} It.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. T. hispidum} Lange,{\i  Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kjøbenhavn}{\b  1860}: 42 (1861). Densely caespitose perennial with vigorous non-flowering shoots. Old sheaths rather persistent, 3-5 mm wide, stramineous, with purplish bases, densely villous. Stems 30-80 cm, tomentose and with numerous patent or deflexed long hairs. Leaves up to 25 cm × 5 mm, erect, tomentose to villous like the young sheaths. Panicle 6-12 × 1-2·5 cm, narrowly cylindrical, tapered towards the apex, with erecto-patent, very crowded branches. Spikelets 4*5-6 mm. Glumes equalling the florets, hairy, the lower slightly shorter than the upper. Rhachilla with hairs c. 0*5 mm. Lemma 3-3*8 mm, shortly 2-aristate densely hairy; awn 2*5-4*5 mm, inserted c. 1/4 of the way from apex to base of lemma, bent near the point of insertion. Anthers 1·6-2·4 mm.{\i  Rock-crevices. • Mountains of N.W. Spain and N. Portugal. }Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. T. spicatum} (L.) K. Richter,{\i  Pl. Eur. }{\b 1}: 59 (1890) ({\i T. subspicatum} (L.) Beauv.). Caespitose perennial. Stems 8-40 cm, erect, more or less villous with retrorse hairs. Leaves flat or somewhat involute, villous to finely scabridulous, usually 1-3 mm wide; basal leaves up to 10 cm, the upper up to 5 cm. Panicle 1·5-5 × 0·5-1·5 cm, narrowly cylindrical to ovoid, dense but sometimes interrupted. Spikelets 4·2-7·5 mm. Glumes subequal or the lower c. 1/3 as long as the upper. Rhachilla with hairs c. 0·5 mm. Lemma 3-5·2 mm, 2-fid; awn 2·5-4 mm, inserted in upper third of lemma, strongly curved. Anthers 0·6-1 mm. {\i Tundra, meadows, stony slopes and mountain rocks. Arctic and subarctic Europe, extending southwards in the mountains to S. Norway and N.C. Ural; Alps; Pyrenees.} Au Fe Ga Ge He Hs Is It No Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Sheaths almost glabrous ..................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b ovatipaniculatum}
\par 1 Sheaths villous
\par 2 Upper glume distinctly shorter than florets, abruptly 
\par  tapered; panicle nearly always purplish-brown ................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b spicatum}
\par 2 Upper glume equalling or slightly shorter than florets,
\par  gradually tapered; panicle greenish to pale violet ........ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b pilosiglume}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b spicatum}: Usually 15-30 cm. Leaves moderately pubescent. Sheaths villous. Panicle usually 2-4 × 1 cm, purplish to brownish (very rarely greenish). Glumes scabridulous along the keels, otherwise smooth; upper glume broadly ovate, usually abruptly tapered, distinctly shorter than florets. Lemma finely scabridulous or smooth. 2n = 28.{\i  N. Europe}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ovatipaniculatum} Hultén ex Jonsell, {\i Svensk Bot. Tidskr.}{\b  69}: 132 (1975): Up to c. 20 cm. Leaves and sheaths almost glabrous. Panicle 1·5-3 × c. 1 cm, ovoid, brownish to purplish. Glumes scabridulous on the keel, otherwise smooth; upper glume ovate, gradually tapered, slightly shorter than florets. Lemma nearly smooth. 2n = 28.{\i  Alps and Pyrenees}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b pilosiglume} (Fernald) Hultén, {\i op. cit.}{\b  53}: 215 (1959): Up to 40 cm. Leaves moderately to densely pubescent. Sheaths villous. Panicle 3-6 × 0·5-1 cm, often narrowly cylindrical sometimes interrupted ,greenish to pale violet (very seldom dark).
\par
\par 222}
\par