{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min30}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min30}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1067}{\nofchars6085}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 caespitose; stems 10-40 cm. Leaves 2-15 cm \'d7 2-4 mm, aculeolate on margin and upper surface. Panicle 5-16 cm, usually dense; branches smooth. Spikelets 4-5\'b75 mm, purple and yellowish, usually proliferating. Glumes ovate-lanceolate; keel smooth. Lemma acute, with slightly toothed apex; awn not more than 1 mm longer than the lemma, arising from the middle or above. Rhachilla prolonged by 1/4-1/3 the length of the floret. 2n = 52, 56.}{\i\fs28  Damp, stony places and rocks, usually on mountains. N. Europe.}{\fs28 
\par   (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 obensis}{\fs28  (Roshev.) Tzvelev,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\fs28  210 (1974) (}{\i\fs28 D. obensis}{\fs28  Roshev.): Laxly caespitose; stems 20-50 cm. Leaves 12-20 cm \'d7 2-3 mm, smooth or weakly aculeolate. Panicle 10-17 \'d7 up to 3 cm, lax; branches smooth. Spikelets 6\'b75-9 mm, stramineous, not proliferating. Glumes narrowly lanceolate; keel smooth. Lemma truncate, with 4 subequal teeth at apex; awn not more than 1 mm longer than lemma, arising from near base. Rhachilla prolonged by 1/4-1/3 the length of the upper floret.}{\i\fs28  Maritime sands. Arctic Russia.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 N. Siberia.}{\fs28 )
\par   (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 bottnica}{\fs28  (Wahlenb.) G. C. S. Clarke,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  76}{\fs28 : 363 (1978) (}{\i\fs28 Aira bottnica}{\fs28  Wahlenb., }{\i\fs28 D. bottnica}{\fs28  (Wahlenb.) Trin.): Like subsp. (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) but stems 50-100 cm; leaves 12-20 cm, bluish-green, soon becoming stramineous; panicle 20-30 cm; central teeth at apex of lemma longer than the outer; awn 2-5 mm longer than lemma; rhachilla prolonged by \'bd the length of the upper floret. 2n = 26, 26+2B, 28.}{\i\fs28  Stony sea-shores. \bullet  N. & E. parts of Baltic region}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 borealis}{\fs28  (Trautv.) Tzvelev in Fedorov,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Part. Eur. URSS }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 210 (1974) (}{\i\fs28 D. borealis}{\fs28  (Trautv.) Roshev.): Densely caespitose; stems 10-30 cm, slender. Leaves 1\'b75-4 cm \'d7 1 mm, weakly aculeolate, convolute. Panicle 3-8 \'d7 up to 3 cm; branches patent, smooth. Spikelets 3-4 mm, not proliferating, brownish-purple. Glumes ovate-lanceolate; keel smooth. Lemma truncate the apex toothed, with the longest teeth in the centre; awn not exceeding the lemma, arising at the middle or above. Rhachilla prolonged by \'bc the length of the upper floret. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  Damp meadows or by streams and lakes. Arctic Russia.}{\fs28 
\par   (}{\b\fs28 f}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 orientalis}{\fs28  Hult\'e9n, }{\i\fs28 Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.}{\fs28  ser. 3,}{\b\fs28  5}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 109 (1927): Densely caespitose; stems 20-80 cm, slender. Leaves 4-12 cm \'d7 less than 2 mm, smooth or weakly aculeolate, flat. Panicle 10-25 \'d7 up to 10 cm, lax; branches smooth. Spikelets 3-5 mm, not proliferating, greyish-yellow. Glumes lanceolate; keel smooth. Lemma truncate, the apex with 4 subequal teeth; awn not exceeding lemma by more than 1 mm, arising at the middle. Rhachilla prolonged by \'bd the length of the upper floret.}{\i\fs28  Meadows and river-banks. N. Russia}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 g}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 paludosa}{\fs28  (Schubler & Martens) G.C.S. Clarke,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  76}{\fs28 : 363 (1978) (}{\i\fs28 Aira cespitosa}{\fs28  subsp. }{\i\fs28 paludosa}{\fs28  Schubler & Martens, }{\i\fs28 A. wibeliana}{\fs28  Sonder, }{\i\fs28 D. wibeliana}{\fs28  (Sonder) Parl.): Laxly caespitose, stoloniferous; stems erect or slightly decumbent at base, sometimes rooting at lowest nodes. Leaves 10-30 cm \'d7 2-4 mm, sparsely aculeolate on margin and upper surface. Panicle 7-40 \'d7 2\'b75-25 cm, lax; branches weakly aculeolate. Spikelets 5-6\'b75 mm, yellowish and purple, not proliferating. Glumes long-lanceolate, the keel of the lower glume aculeolate. Lemma truncate, the apex with 4 subequal teeth; awn up to 1 mm longer than lemma, arising from near the base. Rhachilla prolonged by 1/4-1/3 the length of the upper floret. 2n = 26+0-2B.}{\i\fs28  Estuarine marshes. \bullet  N.W. Germany}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par   A northern, mainly coastal variant which is usually smaller, has short, involute, glaucous basal leaves and is generally less strongly aculeolate than subsp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ), has been called subsp. glauca (Hartman) Tzvelev in Fedorov, }{\i\fs28 Fl. Part. Eur. URSS}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 209 (1974). Plants with short ligules, proliferating spikelets, long rhachilla-prolongation and sparse aculeolation, from river- and lake-margins in the C. Alps, have been called}{\b\fs28  D. littoralis}{\fs28  (Gaudin) Reuter, }{\i\fs28 Cat. Pl. Vasc. Gen\'e8ve}{\fs28  ed. 2, 236 (1861); they have 2n = 56.
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28  D. brevifolia}{\fs28  R. Br. in Parry, }{\i\fs28 Jour. Voy. N.W. Pass., Suppl. App.}{\fs28  291 (1824) (}{\i\fs28 D. arctica}{\fs28  (Sprengel) Ostenf.), which is like subsp. (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) but has an almost spike-like panicle and more robust stems, has been reported from arctic Russia and Svalbard, but its presence there needs confirmation.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. D. media}{\fs28  (Gouan) Roemer & Schultes,}{\i\fs28  Syst. Veg.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 687 (1817). Laxly caespitose; stems 8-70 cm, erect, smooth. Leaves 2-20 cm \'d7 1 mm, convolute, setaceous, glaucous; margin aculeolate; ligule 5 mm, acute. Panicle 3-24 \'d7 up to 15 cm, usually lax; branches erecto-patent or patent, weakly aculeolate. Spikelets 3-5 mm, often silvery or purplish, not proliferating. Glumes ovate-lanceolate, acute, the lower with weakly aculeolate keel. Lemma 3-4 mm, ovate-oblong; apex truncate, toothed, with the outer teeth much the longest; awn straight, shorter or up to 1 mm longer than the lemma, arising above or near the middle. Rhachilla prolonged by at least \'bd the length of the upper floret. 2n = 26.}{\i\fs28  Wet pastures and river-banks. W. & C. Mediterranean region, extending locally northwards to }{\fs28 49\'b0 30'}{\i\fs28  in W. Germany}{\fs28 . ?Al Ga Ge ?Gr Hs It Ju Lu.
\par 
\par   Plants from Spain and N.E. Portugal with folded, rather than convolute, basal leaves which curve downwards towards the ground and have a long ligule have been distinguished as}{\b\fs28  D. refracta}{\fs28  (Lag.) Roemer & Schultes,}{\i\fs28  loc. cit}{\fs28 . (1817).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. D. setacea}{\fs28  (Hudson) Hackel,}{\i\fs28  Cat. Rais. Gram. Port.}{\fs28  33 (1880) (}{\i\fs28 D. discolor}{\fs28  (Thuill.) Beauv.). Densely caespitose; stems 20-70 cm, erect, smooth. Leaves 5-20 cm \'d7 up to 1 mm, setaceous or rarely flat, rough above, smooth beneath; ligule 3-8 mm, narrowly lanceolate. Panicle 5-15 \'d7 up to 10 cm, lax; branches erecto-patent, aculeolate. Spikelets 4-5 mm, purple and yellowish, not proliferating. Glumes ovate-oblong, acute, the upper 1-veined; keel aculeolate above. Lemma 3 mm, ovate-oblong, truncate, the apex toothed, with the marginal teeth much the longest; awn longer than lemma by up to 3 mm, geniculate, twisted, arising near the base. Rhachilla prolonged by at least \'bd the length of the upper floret. 2n = 14.}{\i\fs28  Bogs and wet heaths. W. Europe from N. Spain to S. Norway and extending eastwards to W. Poland.}{\fs28  Be Br Da Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs No Po Su.
\par 
\par   Outside Europe this species seems to be known only from the Chilean Andes.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. D. foliosa}{\fs28  Hackel,}{\i\fs28  loc. cit. }{\fs28 (1880). Caespitose; stems 15-30 cm, erect, slender, smooth, laterally compressed so that the leaves appear 2-ranked. Leaves 5-15 cm \'d7 up to 0\'b76 mm, folded, aculeolate above, smooth on margin and beneath; ligule 4-7 mm, lanceolate. Panicle 4-9 \'d7 1-5 cm, rather lax; branches erecto-patent, weakly aculeolate. Spikelets 3\'b75-6 mm, stramineous or sometimes purplish, not proliferating. Glumes lanceolate, the upper strongly 3-veined in the lower half; keel smooth. Lemma 2\'b75-4 mm, truncate, the apex toothed, with the outer teeth the longest; awn longer than lemma by up to 5 mm, straight or weakly geniculate, arising near the base. Rhachilla prolonged by \'bd the length of the upper floret.}{\i\fs28  Mountain pastures. A\'e7ores.}{\fs28  Az. (}{\i\fs28 Madeira}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par   Sect. AVENARIA (Reichenb.) Holmberg. Palea not bifid. Rhachilla prolonged by less than \'bc the length of the upper floret. Anthers 2 mm or more.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. D. flexuosa}{\fs28  (L.) Trin., }{\i\fs28 Bull. Sci. Acad. Imp. Sci. P\'e9tersb.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 66 (1836) (incl.}{\i\fs28  D. stricta}{\fs28  Hackel). Caespitose; stems 20-100 cm, erect, smooth, sometimes with slender stolons. Leaves up to
\par 
\par 226}
\par }