{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 20 cm × 0·3-0·8 mm, setaceous, weakly aculeolate above, smooth beneath; ligule 1-3 mm, obtuse. Panicle 5-15 × up to 8 cm, lax; branches usually patent, smooth or sparsely aculeolate. Spikelets 4-7 mm, purplish or silvery, rarely proliferating. Glumes ovate-lanceolate, acute; keel smooth. Lemma 3-6 mm, ovate-oblong, truncate and minutely toothed at the apex; awn longer than the lemma by up to 5 mm, sharply geniculate, twisted, arising near the base. Rhachilla prolonged by less than ¼ the length of the upper floret. 2n = 26, 28, 56.{\i  Moors, heaths and open woodlands; calcifuge. Much of Europe, but rarer in the south and absent from much of the south-east.} All except Az Bl Cr Rs (K, E) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 75.      Vahlodea}       Fries
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Deschampsia} but glumes about twice as long as lemma; lemma with hairs at the base, which reach 1/2-2/3 of the way to the apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. V. atropurpurea} (Wahlenb.) Fries ex Hartman, {\i Handb. Skand. Fl.} ed. 4, 30 (1843). Laxly caespitose; stems 15-30 cm, slender, smooth. Leaves flat, glabrous, up to 3 mm wide; ligule c. 2 mm. Panicle 3-7 cm, lax; branches flexuous, very slender, the lower often deflexed, scabrid especially distally. Spikelets c. 5 mm, borne only towards the ends of the branches. Glumes lanceolate, acuminate, shortly and sparsely hairy, purplish, with a wide, brownish, scarious margin. Lemma c. 2 mm, obtuse, shortly hairy in the upper half; awn arising about the middle., hairy below, not exserted. Anthers 0·5-0·7 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Damp, grassy places; calcifuge. N. & W. Fennoscandia, arctic Russia.} Fe No Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 76.       Aira}           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves often convolute. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 2 hermaphrodite florets, the upper sessile or subsessile. Glumes subequal, membranous, as long as to longer than the florets, 1- to 3-veined. Lemma 5-veined in the basal half, 2-fid at apex, with a dorsal awn from below the middle or sometimes the lower or both florets unawned. Palea shorter than lemma. Rhachilla not prolonged. Grain subfusiform, longitudinally sulcate on the adaxial face, glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All species occur in dry, open habitats.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Panicle narrow, dense, with short, erect branches;
\par
  pedicels mostly shorter than spikelets ........................................... {\b 1. praecox} 
\par
1 Panicle wide, lax, with erecto-patent to divaricate 
\par
  branches; pedicels 1-8 times as long as spikelets
\par
2 Pedicels 2-8 times as long as spikelets
\par
3 Pedicels 5-8 times as long as spikelets; glumes obtuse .................. {\b 7. tenorii}
\par
3 Pedicels 2-5 times as long as spikelets; glumes acute
\par
4 Both awns long-exserted ..................................................... {\b 6. elegantissima}
\par
4 Awn of lower floret shorter than glumes or absent
\par
5 Spikelets c. 3·5 mm ................................................................ {\b 8. provincialis}
\par
5 Spikelets 1·5-2·5 mm ........................................................... {\b 6. elegantissima}
\par
2 Pedicels 1-2 times as long as spikelets
\par
6 Glumes acute to acuminate
\par
7 Spikelets 2·5-3·5 mm; anthers 0·3-0·6 mm; both florets awned
  ................................................................................................ {\b 2. caryophyllea}
\par
7 Spikelets 2-2·5 mm; anthers c. 1·3 mm; lower floret 
\par
  often unawned ............................................................................ {\b 4. uniaristata}
\par
6 Glumes obtuse or subobtuse, usually denticulate and 
\par
  often mucronate
\par
8 Leaf-sheaths not inflated, the uppermost far below the
\par
  panicle ........................................................................................ {\b 3. cupaniana}
\par
8 Leaf-sheaths inflated, the uppermost enclosing the base
\par
  of the panicle ................................................................................. {\b 5. scoparia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. praecox} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 65 (1753). Stems 2-12(-20) cm, erect to procumbent, slender. Leaves up to 5 cm × 0·5 mm, glabrous, convolute; sheaths smooth; ligule up to 3 mm, obtuse. Panicle 0·5-5 cm, narrow, with short, erect branches. Spikelets 2·5-3·5 mm, crowded. Glumes lanceolate, scabridulous on the keel, shining. Lemma as long as glumes, scabridulous towards the apex, with short hairs at base; awn exserted, arising c. 1/3 of the way from base to apex. 2n = 14.{\i  Europe, eastwards to S.W. Finland} ({\i Ahvenanmaa}),{\i  Lithuania, W. Czechoslovakia and N.W. Italy.} Az Be Br Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs It Lu No Po Rs (B) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. caryophyllea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 66 (1753). Stems (3-)10-30(-50) cm, erect or erecto-patent, slender. Leaves up to 5 cm × 0·3 mm, glabrous, convolute; sheaths retrorsely scabridulous, not inflated, the uppermost far below the panicle; ligule up to 5 mm, denticulate at apex. Panicle 1-12 × 1-12 cm, lax, with long, erecto-patent branches; pedicels gradually thickened at apex. Spikelets 2-3·5 mm. Glumes ovate, acuminate, scabridulous on the keel, 1- to 3-veined, shining. Lemma ¾ as long as glumes, scabridulous towards the apex, with short hairs at base; awn exserted, arising c. 1/3 of the way from base to apex. Anthers 0·3-0·6 mm.{\i  S., W. & C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden; doubtfully native in north and east parts of its range}. Al Au Az Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge ?Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (?C, W, K) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b caryophyllea}: Plant usually 5-35 cm; spikelets 2·5-3·5 mm; longer pedicels usually more than 5 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b multiculmis} (Dumort.) Bonnier & Layens,{\i  Fl. Fr.} 358 (1894): Plant usually 20-50 cm; spikelets 2-2·5 mm; longer pedicels usually less than 5 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Mainly in the southwestern part of the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. cupaniana} Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Syn.}{\b  1}: 148 (1843). Like {\b 2} but pedicels abruptly thickened at apex; glumes subobtuse, denticulate towards the apex, often mucronate; lemma 1/2-2/3 as long as glumes; lower floret often unawned; anthers 0·2-0·4 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  S. Europe.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. uniaristata} Lag. & Rodr.,{\i  Anal. Ci. Nat}{\b . 6}: 148 (1803). Like {\b 2} but ligule not denticulate; panicle-branches flexuous and usually divaricate; spikelets 2-2·5 mm, the lower floret often unawned; anthers c. 1·3 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Spain and S.C. Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. scoparia} Adamovic,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 74}: 117 (1904). Like {\b 2} but leaf-sheaths inflated, the uppermost enclosing the base of the panicle; spikelets c. 2 mm, very numerous, crowded; glumes subobtuse, shortly mucronate; lower florets sometimes unawned. • {\i S. Jugoslavia} ({\i near Bitola}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Apparently known only from the type-collection.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. elegantissima} Schur, {\i Verh. Mitt. Siebenb. Ver. Naturw.}{\b  4 }({\i Sert. Fl. Transs.}): 85 (1853) ({\i A. capillaris} Host, non Savi,{\i  A. elegans} Willd. ex Gaudin, nom. illegit.). Stems 10-40 cm, erect or decumbent, slender. Leaves up to 4 cm × 0·8 mm, glabrous, flat or convolute; sheaths scabrid; ligule 2-3 mm, acute. Panicle 4-9 × 2-5 cm, very lax; pedicels mostly 2-5 times as long as spikelets, abruptly thickened at apex. Spikelets 1·5-2·5 mm. Glumes ovate-lanceolate, acute, scabridulous on the keel, 1-veined, shiny. Lemma c. 2/3 as long as glumes, scabrid, with short hairs at base; lower floret often unawned, the upper with an exserted awn arising below the middle. Anthers 0·3-0·5 mm.
\par

\par
227}
\par