{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 72.        Parvotrisetum}  Chrtek
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By B. Jonsell. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets small, laterally compressed, with 2-3 florets. Glumes keeled, membranous, the lower 1-veined, the upper 3-veined. Lemma 2-fid or with 2 short setae, membranous, keeled, with an awn inserted near the middle. Palea 2-keeled, 3- to almost 4-fid. Rhachilla glabrous; callus puberulent. Anthers elongate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. myrianthum} (Bertol.) Chrtek,{\i  Preslia}{\b  37}: 201 (1965) ({\i Trisetum myrianthum} (Bertol.) Parl.). Annual 20-60 cm, with 1-several glabrous stems. Leaves up to 12 cm × 2 mm, involute, puberulent above, glabrous beneath. Sheaths glabrous. Panicle 6-20 × 1-3 cm, fairly lax but usually rather congested. Pedicels scabridulous. Spikelets 2·4-3·3 mm. Glumes glabrous, with sparsely scabridulous keels, the lower slightly shorter. Lemma 1·2-1·7 mm, 2-fid or with 2 short setae, glabrous to somewhat pubescent. Awn 2-3 mm, very slender, angled, minutely scabridulous. Anthers c. 1 mm.{\i  Grassland and cultivated ground; usually calcifuge. • N. Italy; S. & W. parts of the Balkan peninsula.} ?Al Gr It Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 73.          Lagurus}          L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a dense, ovoid or subcylindrical to subglobose panicle. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 1 floret. Glumes subequal, linear, membranous, with a long, densely ciliate, setaceous apex, 1-veined. Lemma 5-veined, membranous, hairy at the base, with 2 long apical setae and a dorsal, geniculate awn. Palea somewhat shorter than lemma. Rhachilla prolonged, ciliate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. ovatus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 81 (1753). More or less greyish-pubescent. Stems 8-50 cm, erect or ascending, simple or branched from the lower nodes. Leaves up to 10 mm wide, soft, long-acute; sheaths inflated; ligule up to 3 mm, obtuse or truncate, more or less lacerate, villous. Panicle 0·5-6 × 0·5-2 cm (excluding awns), very softly and densely hairy. Spikelets 7-9 mm (excluding awns), those at base of panicle mostly sterile. Glumes villous on the back; setaceous apex with hairs c. 2 mm. Lemma c. 3 mm (excluding awn and apical setae), lanceolate; awn 8-20 mm; apical setae 2-6 mm. Anthers c. 1·5 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Maritime sands; more rarely on dry waste places inland. S. Europe; sometimes cultivated for ornament and a frequent casual in C. Europe.} Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 74.        Deschampsia}     Beauv.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By G.C.S. Clarke. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials, usually caespitose. Leaves flat or setaceous. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 2(-3) hermaphrodite florets. Glumes subequal, membranous, somewhat shorter than to almost as long as the florets, 1- to 3-veined. Lemma obscurely 5-veined, truncate and irregularly toothed at apex, with short hairs at the base; awn dorsal, straight or geniculate. Palea as long as the lemma, with 2 scabrid keels. Rhachilla prolonged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: A. Buschmann, {\i Phyton }({\i Austria}){\b  2}: 216-287 (1950). S. Kawano, {\i Bot. Mag. Tokyo}{\b  79}: 293-307 (1966). E. Paunero, {\i Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  13}: 175-229 (1955). K. von Weihe & G. Reese,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  88}: 1-48 (1968).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lemma acute or with truncate, toothed apex with the 
\par
  central teeth at least as long as the outer
\par
2 Leaves less than 1 mm wide, tightly inrolled; awn 
\par
  sharply geniculate ......................................................................... {\b 5. flexuosa}
\par
2 Leaves more than 1 mm wide, flat or sometimes inrolled;
\par
  awn straight .................................................................................. {\b 1. cespitosa} 
\par
1 Lemma with truncate, toothed apex, the outer teeth much
\par
  the longest
\par
3 Awn shorter than lemma or not more than 1 mm longer;
\par
  leaves glaucous ................................................................................. {\b 2. media}
\par
3 Awn up to 5 mm longer than lemma; leaves green
\par
4 Upper glume strongly 3-veined in the lower half; leaves
\par
  arising in 2 ranks ............................................................................. {\b 4. foliosa}
\par
4 Lateral veins of upper glume scarcely visible; leaves 
\par
  not 2-ranked .................................................................................... {\b 3. setacea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. DESCHAMPSIA. Palea bifid. Rhachilla prolonged by more than ¼ the length of the upper floret. Anthers less than 2 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. cespitosa} (L.) Beauv.,{\i  Agrost.} 91, 160 (1812). Caespitose; stems 12-200 cm, erect, smooth. Leaves 3-60 cm × up to 5 mm, flat or convolute, green or glaucous, aculeolate on margin and often on upper surface; ligule 3-15 mm, acute. Panicle 3-50 × up to 20 cm, usually lax, branches smooth or aculeolate. Spikelets 3-9 mm, silvery, purplish or stramineous, sometimes proliferating. Glumes ovate to lanceolate, acute. Lemma usually truncate with a toothed apex, the outer teeth not longer than the inner; awn straight, as long as or exceeding lemma. Rhachilla prolonged by up to ½ the length of the upper floret.{\i  Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region.} All except Az Bl Co Cr Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A very complex species, with many variants which differ to a greater or lesser degree in ecology, cytology and morphology. The following subspecies represent the most distinct taxa and have more or less discrete areas of distribution, although they appear to hybridize readily.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Panicle-branches and keel of lower glume at least 
\par
  sparsely aculeolate
\par
2 Plant slender; basal leaves flat, less than 2 mm wide;
\par
  awn arising from middle of lemma .................................. ({\b f}) subsp. {\b orientalis}
\par
2 Plant robust; basal leaves flat and more than 2 mm wide
\par
  or inrolled; awn arising from base of lemma
\par
3 Plant stoloniferous, laxly caespitose; glumes long-
\par
  lanceolate ......................................................................... ({\b g}) subsp. {\b paludosa}
\par
3 Plant not stoloniferous, densely caespitose; glumes
\par
  ovate-lanceolate ............................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b cespitosa} 
\par
1 Panicle-branches and keel of lower glume smooth
\par
4 At least some spikelets proliferating; lemma acute,
\par
  with few small teeth at apex; awn arising from the
\par
  middle or above .................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b alpina}
\par
4 Spikelets not proliferating; lemma truncate, with large teeth
\par
5 Laxly caespitose; the uppermost leaf-blade not much 
\par
  shorter than the lower ......................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b obensis}
\par
5 Densely caespitose; the uppermost leaf-blade much 
\par
  shorter than the lower
\par
6 Stems 50-100 cm; spikelets 6-9 mm, the awn conspicuously
\par
  longer than lemma ............................................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b bottnica}
\par
6 Stems 10-30 cm; spikelets 3-5 mm, the awn equalling or
\par
  shorter than lemma ............................................................ ({\b e}) subsp. {\b borealis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cespitosa}: Densely caespitose; stems usually more than 30 cm. Leaves 10-60 cm × 2-5 mm when flat, rarely inrolled, usually strongly aculeolate on margin and upper surface. Panicle 10-50 cm, usually lax; branches aculeolate. Spikelets 4-6 mm, silvery and purple, rarely proliferating. Glumes ovate-lanceolate, the lower with aculeolate keel. Lemma truncate, with several prominent, subequal teeth at the apex; awn not more than 1 mm longer than the lemma, arising near the base. Rhachilla prolonged by 1/3-1/2 the length of the upper floret. 2n = 24, 26+0-7B.{\i  Damp grassland. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b alpina} (L.) Tzvelev in Fedorov, {\i Fl. Part. Eur. URSS}{\b  1}: 209 (1974) ({\i D. alpina} (L.) Roemer & Schultes): Densely
\par

\par
225}
\par