{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Annual, without non-flowering shoots
\par
2 Pedicels very rigid and tough; glumes cartilaginous 
\par
  with rigid hairs; basal part of awn twice as wide as 
\par
  distal part ...................................................................................... {\b 22. ovatum}
\par
2 Pedicels not very rigid, brittle; glumes membranous,
\par
  glabrous or with soft hairs; awn of about equal width
\par
  throughout
\par
3 Lemma with two setae more than half as long as the undivided
\par
  part
\par
4 Anthers less than 1 mm; lemma smooth ........................... {\b 23. loeflingianum}
\par
4 Anthers more than 1 mm; lemma scabridulous ............... {\b 24. macrochaetum}
\par
3 Lemma with setae less than half as long as the undivided part
\par
5 Spikelets in an elongate, usually lax panicle; lower 
\par
  glume ½ as long as upper .................................................... {\b 20. parviflorum}
\par
5 Spikelets crowded, sometimes in a spike-like panicle;
\par
  lower glume at least ¾ as long as upper
\par
6 Panicle narrowly cylindrical; glumes subequal ................ {\b 21. scabriusculum}
\par
6 Panicle pyramidal, broadly cylindrical or ovoid; lower 
\par
  glume shorter and narrower than the upper
\par
7 Awn inserted not more than ¼ of the way from apex to
\par
  base of lemma, straight or weakly curved, greyish;
\par
  palea divided to c. 1/6 of its total length ................................... {\b 18. paniceum}
\par
7 Awn inserted at about 1/3 of the way from apex to base 
\par
  of lemma, twisted and obtusely angled, brownish; palea
\par
  divided to less than 1/6 of its total length ..................................... {\b 19. aureum}
\par
1 Perennial, with non-flowering shoots
\par
8 Leaves of non-flowering shoots and those of basal parts
\par
  of stem distichous, often bluish-green
\par
9 Sheaths velutinous; rhachilla-hairs less than 2 mm .................. {\b 1. velutinum}
\par
9 Sheaths glabrous or hairy but not velutinous; rhachilla-
\par
  hairs more than 2 mm
\par
10 Leaves more than 6 mm wide ........................................... {\b 2. macrotrichum}
\par
10 Leaves less than 6 mm wide
\par
11 Hairs at base of lemma reaching half-way to the point
\par
   of insertion of the awn; panicle narrowly ovoid to 
\par
   lanceolate .................................................................................. {\b 5. argenteum}
\par
11 Hairs at base of lemma reaching more than half-way to
\par
   the point of insertion of the awn; panicle ovoid .............. {\b 4. distichophyllum}
\par
8  Leaves not distichous, green or greyish-green
\par
12 Stems less than 20 cm; plant densely caespitose;
\par
   leaves rigid; old sheaths long-persistent
\par
13 Leaves flat, tomentose beneath, with cartilaginous margins ...... {\b 6. glaciale}
\par
13 Leaves involute or canaliculate, glabrous beneath;
\par
    margins not cartilaginous
\par
14 Awn less than 7 mm; glumes subequal ........................................ {\b 7. gracile}
\par
14 Awn more than 7 mm; lower glume c. 2/3 as long as the 
\par
   upper .......................................................................................... {\b 8. bertolonii}
\par
12 Stems usually more than 20 cm; plant caespitose or 
\par
   rhizomatous; leaves membranous; old sheaths evanescent
\par
15 Pedicels and upper part of stem densely pubescent to 
\par
   villous; plant caespitose
\par
16 Ligule 2-3 mm; stems usually more than 30 cm; leaves
\par
   c. 4 mm wide .............................................................................. {\b 9. hispidum}
\par
16 Ligule less than 1 mm; stems not more than 40 cm;
\par
   leaves not more than 3 mm wide .............................................. {\b 10. spicatum}
\par
15 Pedicels and upper part of stem usually scabridulous 
\par
   to glabrous; plant laxly caespitose to rhizomatous
\par
17 Many rhachilla-hairs more than 2 mm; plant rhizomatous
\par
18 Leaves tomentose .................................................................... {\b 3. laconicum}
\par
18 Leaves ciliate, otherwise nearly glabrous ......................... {\b 2. macrotrichum}
\par
17 All rhachilla-hairs less than 2 mm; plant laxly caespitose
\par
19 Anthers less than 1 mm ....................................................... {\b 11. subalpestre}
\par
19 Anthers more than 1 mm 
\par
20 All rhachilla-hairs less than 1 mm ....................................... {\b 15. tenuiforme} 
\par
20 At least some rhachilla-hairs 1 mm or more
\par
21 Hairs at base of awn longer than width of awn ......................... {\b 16. fuscum}
\par
21 Pricklets at base of awn shorter than width of awn
\par
22 Lower sheaths glabrous or with very short appressed
\par
   hairs; awn strongly curved but not geniculate .......................... {\b 17. sibiricum}
\par
22 Lower sheaths with at least some longer hairs; awn 
\par
   usually sharply geniculate
\par
23 Panicle nearly always more than 6 cm, with more than 
\par
   50 spikelets; flowering stem with more than 2 nodes ............ {\b 13. flavescens}
\par
23 Panicle not more than 6 cm, with usually not more than
\par
   50 spikelets; flowering stem with 2 nodes
\par
24 Upper glume almost entirely colourless, broadly 
\par
   obovate; ovary glabrous; panicle contracted ........................... {\b 12. baregense}
\par
24 Upper glume strongly pigmented towards the base, 
\par
   obovate; ovary with an apical tuft of short hairs;
\par
   panicle usually diffuse ................................................................ {\b 14. alpestre}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. velutinum} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus }88 (1838). Rhizomatous perennial with stolons. Stems 25-40 cm, puberulent to glabrous. Leaves up to 8 cm × 0·4 mm (usually much shorter), mostly involute, crowded near the base, patent and strikingly distichous. Leaves and sheaths velutinous. Panicle 5-11 × 1-3 cm, cylindrical or narrowly pyramidal, rather open. Spikelets 4·8-8 mm, shining, the florets equalling or exceeding the upper glume. Glumes smooth, the lower distinctly shorter than the upper. Rhachilla with rather soft, dense hairs 1·2-2 mm. Lemma 4·5-6·4 mm, very shortly 2-fid, smooth; awn 4·5-7·5 mm, inserted c. ¼ of way from apex to base of lemma, geniculate and somewhat twisted. Anthers c. 3 mm. {\i Calcareous mountain rocks. • S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. rigidum} (Bieb.) Roemer & Schultes, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 662 (1817), has been recorded rather doubtfully from Krym. It is like {\b 1} but has finely pubescent sheaths and rhachilla-hairs 4-5 mm and occurs in S.W. Asia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. macrotrichum} Hackel, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  2}: 110 (1903). Stoloniferous perennial. Stems 40-50 cm, scabridulous above, otherwise glabrous. Leaves up to 15 cm × 10 mm, flat, scabrid, ciliate, otherwise nearly glabrous. Sheaths with scattered hairs, scabridulous. Panicle 6-10 × 2-3 cm, rather lax, erect or nodding, yellowish. Spikelets 5-8 mm. Glumes smooth or sparsely scabridulous along the keel, the lower acute, c. 2/3 as long as the upper and much narrower. Rhachilla and callus with dense, soft hairs 2·5-4 mm. Lemma 4-6·5 mm, slightly 2-fid, minutely scabridulous; awn 3·5-5·5 mm, inserted between 1/3 and 1/2 of way from apex to base of lemma, scabridulous, curved or geniculate. Anthers c. 2 mm.{\i  Rocky mountain slopes. • S. & E. Carpathians.} Rm ?Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. T. laconicum} Boiss. & Orph. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 4}): 129 (1859). Stoloniferous perennial. Stems 50-60 cm, glabrous. Leaves up to 12 cm × 4 mm, erect; leaves and basal sheaths tomentose. Panicle 6-15 × 2-3 cm, cylindrical, not very dense. Spikelets 6-9 mm. Upper glume hyaline and shining, scabridulous along the keel; lower glume 2/3 as long as upper. Rhachilla with hairs up to 2·5 mm. Lemma 4·5-7·5 mm, very shortly 2-aristate, scabridulous; awn 5-10 mm, inserted above the middle, bent near the point of insertion, minutely scabridulous. Anthers 2·7-4 mm. •{\i  S. Greece} ({\i Parnon Oros; Evvoia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The plant from Evvoia has been separated as {\b T. rechingeri} Chrtek, {\i Acta Univ. Carol.} ({\i Biol}.){\b  1966}: 92 (1967), differing from
\par

\par
221}
\par