{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Glumes scabridulous to densely pubescent; upper glume gradually tapered, equalling or slightly shorter than florets Lemma scabridulous to pubescent. 2n = 42. {\i Iceland.} ({\i Greenland, North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. T. subalpestre} (Hartman) Neuman,{\i  Sver. Fl.} 755 (1901) ({\i T. agrostideum} (Laest.) Fries). Laxly caespitose perennial with glabrous stems 20-40 cm. Leaves up to c. 15 cm × 1-3 mm, flat or somewhat convolute, pubescent above or subglabrous, shortly ciliate. Sheaths rather densely retrorsely pubescent. Panicle 3-7 × 0·5-1 cm, rather lax, lanceolate to narrowly oblong, often brownish. Spikelets 4·2-5·7 mm. Glumes broadly hyaline, almost smooth, the lower c. 3 as long as the upper. Rhachilla-hairs c. 0·7 mm; callus-hairs very short. Lemma 3·5-4·5 mm, 2-fid; awn 4·5-7 mm, inserted c. 1/3 of way from apex to base of lemma, strongly curved. Anthers c. 0-7 mm. 2n = 28. {\i Along streams and rivers. Arctic Fennoscandia.} Fe No Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. T. baregense} Laffitte & Miégeville, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  21}: 46 (1874) ({\i T. agrostideum} auct., non (Laest.) Fries). Like {\b 11}, but sheaths with longer hairs; spikelets 4·2-5·5 mm; glumes almost entirely hyaline, thin; rhachilla-hairs up to 1 mm; callus-hairs up to 0·5 mm; awn straight or angled; anthers 1·5-2 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Subalpine meadows. • Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. T. flavescens} (L.) Beauv., {\i Agrost.} 88, 180 (1812) ({\i T. pratense} Pers.). Laxly caespitose perennial with erect or geniculate stems 25-80 cm, glabrous or hairy at the nodes. Leaves flat or somewhat involute, 2-5(-10) mm wide, very attenuate, moderately villous; basal leaves up to 20 cm, the upper up to 10 cm. Basal sheaths more or less villous, the upper often glabrous. Panicle 5-16 × 1-4 cm, usually rather lax, shining yellowish, rarely purplish. Spikelets 5-7·5 mm, very numerous. Glumes broadly hyaline, somewhat scabridulous, the lower 2/3-3/4 as long as upper, much narrower. Rhachilla and callus with hairs up to 1-2 mm. Lemma 4-5·3 mm, 2-fid or bicuspidate; awn 4·5-6·5 mm, inserted c. 1/3 of way from apex to base of lemma, angled, scabridulous. Anthers 1·5-2·5 mm. Ovary glabrous.{\i  Grassland, roadsides and open woods. Most of Europe but only as an alien in much of the north.} All except Bl Fa Is Sb Rs (N, K, E), but only naturalized in Fe No Rs (B) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13} is a very complex species, even in the rather narrow sense taken here, with some close allies ({\b 12}, {\b 14}, {\b 15}) being treated as separate species. The division into subspecies is tentative. Variants from the Alps and Carpathians resemble one another and are here united in subsp. ({\b c}), but further investigation is needed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves usually more than 5 mm wide ...................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b purpurascens}
\par
1 Leaves usually less than 5 mm wide
\par
2 Panicle strongly contracted, golden at maturity ............ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b splendens}
\par
2 Panicle lax, ± stramineous at maturity .......................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b flavescens}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b flavescens}: Leaves usually less than 5 mm wide. Panicle more or less lax, yellowish at maturity. Spikelets up to 7·5 mm, usually with 2-4 florets. 2n = 28.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b splendens} (C. Presl) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} 779 (1882): Leaves usually less than 5 mm wide. Panicle contracted, golden. Spikelets up to 6 mm, with usually only 2 well-developed florets.{\i  S. Italy, Sicilia, Sardegna, S. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b purpurascens} (DC.) Arcangeli,{\i  loc. cit.} (1882) ({\i T. candollei} (Serres) Verlot): Stems up to c. 70 cm. Leaves 5-10 mm wide. Panicle very long and wide, dense, purplish. Spikelets up to 7·5 mm, with 3-4 florets. 2n = 12.{\i  Carpathians and Alps}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. T. alpestre} (Host) Beauv., {\i Agrost.} 88, 180 (1812). Like {\b 13}({\b a}) but more densely caespitose and with 2 nodes usually concealed by sheaths; stem 15-35 cm, sometimes pubescent; leaves often convolute, 1-2 mm wide, the basal up to 8 cm, the upper up to 4 cm; panicle 3-6 cm, with up to c. 50 spikelets, rather lax and wide, usually brownish; lower glume usually c. ¾ as long as the upper; ovary with an apical tuft of short hairs. 2n = 14.{\i  Mountain meadows and screes; calcicole. • Carpathians, E. & S. Alps.} Au Cz Ge ?He It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Some plants from the S.W. Alps (Isere) resemble {\b 14} but have more slender stems, shorter rhachilla-hairs and only a few hairs on the ovary. They approach {\b 12} but have much more diffuse and brownish panicles. Their taxonomic status needs further study.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. T. tenuiforme} Jonsell,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 320 (1978) ({\i T. tenue} (Hackel) Chrtek, non Roemer & Schultes). Laxly caespitose perennial with slender, glabrous stems 15-40 cm. Leaves up to 6 cm × c. 1 mm, mostly convolute, somewhat hairy or glabrous. Basal sheaths densely retrorsely puberulent. Panicle 3-6 × 0·5-1·5 cm, lax, with fewer than 50 spikelets, narrowly lanceolate to oblong, light brownish. Spikelets 4-6 mm. Glumes broadly hyaline, the lower c. ¾ as long as the upper. Rhachilla-hairs c. 0·5 mm; callus-hairs c. 0·3 mm. Lemma 4-5·5 mm, 2-fid; awn inserted somewhat above middle of lemma, slightly to strongly curved. Anthers 2-2·5 mm. •{\i  Mountains of N.W Greece and E. Albania. }Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  T. burnoufii} Req. ex Parl.,{\i  Fl. Ital.}{\b  1}: 263 (1850) ({\i T. flavescens }var.{\i  burnoufii} (Req. ex Parl.) Briq.), described from Corse, has not been collected since 1844. It is like {\b 15} but has densely puberulent stem and spikelets and rhachilla-hairs up to 1 mm. Plants from Corse intermediate between {\i T. burnoufii} and {\b 13} have been called {\i T. flavescens }var. {\i corsicum} (Rouy) Briq. They require further study.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. T. fuscum} (Kit. ex Schultes) Schultes in Roemer & Schultes, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 664 (1817) ({\i T. carpathicum }auct., non (Host) Roemer & Schultes. {\i T. ciliare} (Kit. ex Schultes) Domin). Laxly caespitose perennial with glabrous stems 25-70 cm. Leaves up to 15 cm × 3-5 mm, flat, ciliate and moderately pubescent. Lower sheaths with rather dense retrorse hairs, the upper subglabrous. Panicle 5-13 × 1-4 cm, rather lax, brownish to purplish. Spikelets 4·4-7·5 mm. Glumes broadly hyaline, with scabridulous to ciliate keel, the lower c. ¾ as long as the upper. Rhachilla-hairs up to 1·3 mm. Lemma 4·2-5 mm, 2-fid, with ciliate keel; awn 4-7 mm, inserted c. 1/3 of way from apex to base of lemma, strongly curved and with hairs 0·1-0·3 mm, especially towards the base. Anthers 2-2·5 mm. Ovary with a few apical hairs.{\i  Mountain meadows and stream-sides. • Carpathians.} Cz Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. T. sibiricum} Rupr., {\i Beitr. Pfl. Russ. Reich.}{\b  2}: 65 (1845). Laxly caespitose perennial with glabrous stems 20-100 cm. Leaves 4-16 cm × 0·3-0·8 mm, flat, glabrous or moderately hairy above. Sheaths glabrous or with very short appressed hairs. Panicle 2·5-16 × 1·5-3 cm, lax and elongate to dense and ovoid, brownish. Spikelets 5·2-8·5 mm. Glumes broadly hyaline, sparsely scabridulous, the lower 2/3-3/4 as long as the upper. Rhachilla with hairs c. 1 mm; callus-hairs very short. Lemma 4·5-5·8 mm, 2-fid; awn 5-10 mm, inserted c. 1/3 of way from apex to base of lemma, strongly curved, scabridulous; callus-hairs very short. Anthers 2-2·5 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Wet meadows, river gravels and scrub. U.S.S.R., southwards to} c. 50°{\i  N. in C. Ukraine, and extending to N.E. Poland.} ?Ju Po ?Rm Rs (N, B, C, W).
\par

\par
223}
\par