{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 13 Anthers yellow
\par
14 Stigma decurrent for not more than 0·5 mm
\par
15 Tunic ± coriaceous; flowers (1-)2-6; leaves ligulate ............ {\b 13. umbrosum}
\par
15 Tunic membranous; flowers 1-2(3); leaves linear-
\par
   lanceolate to lanceolate, tapering towards the apex .................. {\b 11. corsicum}
\par
14 Stigma decurrent for at least 1 mm
\par
16 Leaves 2(-3); perianth-segments 10-20(-30) mm ............... {\b 12. micranthum}
\par
16 Leaves 3 or more; perianth-segments usually at least
\par
   30 mm ................................................................... ({\b 14-18}). {\b autumnale} group
\par
11 Flowers ± tessellated
\par
17 Pollen green; leaves up to 35 cm × 140 mm, strongly plicate,
\par
   ovate to elliptic-ovate ....................................................... {\b 21. macrophyllum}
\par
17 Pollen yellow; leaves usually not more than 30 cm × 60 mm,
\par
   not plicate
\par
18 Perianth infundibuliform; segments tapering gradually
\par
   to apex and often twisted ....................................................... {\b 22. variegatum}
\par
18 Perianth narrowly campanulate to broadly campanulate;
\par
   segments shortly acute to rounded at apex, not or slightly twisted
\par
19 Leaves glaucous, ciliate; flowers obscurely tessel
\par
   lated; deep crimson-purple, occasionally paler ......................... {\b 19. turcicum}
\par
19 Leaves neither glaucous nor ciliate; flowers obscurely
\par
   or strongly tessellated; pink to purplish or white
\par
20 Flowers ± strongly tessellated ................................................... {\b 23. bivonae}
\par
20 Flowers narrowly campanulate, lightly tessellated
\par
   ................................................................................ ({\b 14-18}).{\b  autumnale} group
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. triphyllum} G. Kunze,{\i  Flora}({\i Regensb.}) {\b 29}: 755 (1846) (incl. {\i C. catacuzenium} Heldr., {\i C. clementei }Graells, {\i C. biebersteinii} Rouy, {\i C. bulbocodioides} Bieb., non Brot.). Corm c. 2 × 1-1·5 cm, oblong; tunic reddish-brown, membranous, evanescent, with a short neck. Leaves 3(-4), 3-4(-7) cm at anthesis, 12-15 cm × 4-8(-10) mm at maturity, lanceolate, obtuse to subacute; margins scabrid or glabrous. Flowers 1-3(-6); perianth-segments 15-30 × 6-12 mm, purplish-pink, elliptical, obtuse, occasionally with filiform auricles at the base. Filaments 5-7 mm, glabrous; anthers 2·5 mm, purplish-black or purplish-green; pollen yellow. Styles straight; stigmas punctiform. Capsule up to 30 mm, oblong. Flowering (December-)February to March (-May) 2n = 20, 21.{\i  Open, stony habitats. S.E. Europe, from S.E. Greece to Krym; C. & S. Spain}. Bu Gr Hs Rm Rs (W, K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C. szovitsii} Fischer & C. A. Meyer,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Petrop.}{\b  1835}: 24 (1835), from S.W. Asia, is known from one locality in European Turkey. It is like {\b 1} but with a coriaceous tunic and 2 (rarely 3) leaves per corm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C. davidovii} Stefanov, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Bulg.}{\b  1}: 69 (1926) ({\i Merendera caucasica} Davidov), described from E. Bulgaria, is poorly known; it is said to be like{\i  C. szovitsii} but has narrower perianth-segments with filiform auricles at the base. {\b C. diampolis} Delip. & Ceschm. ex Kuzmanov & Kozuharov in Jordanov,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Bulg.}{\b  2}: 402 (1964), also from E. Bulgaria, has auricles at the base of the perianth-segments, and further differs from {\i C. szovitsii} in its robust habit and more numerous, wider leaves; it has 2n = 18.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. burttii} Meikle,{\i  Bot. Mag.}{\b  81}: t.735 (1976). Like {\b 1} but corms with thick, coriaceous, persistent tunics; leaves ciliate; filaments hairy.{\i  Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i  W. end of Gelibolu peninsula}). Tu. ({\i N.W. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. hungaricum} Janka, {\i Term. Füz. }{\b 10}: 75 (1886) (incl. {\i C. doerfleri} Halácsy). Corm 2-3 × 1-2 cm, oblong; tunic dark brown, papery to subcoriaceous, with a short neck. Leaves 2(-3), 3-6(-10) cm at anthesis, up to 20 cm × 10-20 mm at maturity, linear-lanceolate, acute; margins retrorsely ciliate; dorsal surface sometimes entirely or partially covered with short hairs. Flowers (1-)3-6(-8); perianth-segments up to 30 × 6-7 mm, purplish-pink, pink or white, elliptic-lanceolate or narrowly elliptical, acute. Filaments up to 10 mm; anthers 2-3·5 mm, purplish-black; pollen yellow or orange. Styles straight or slightly curved at apex; stigmas punctiform. Capsule c. 10 mm, subglobose. Flowering December to April. 2n = 54{\i  Stony places and dry hillsides. From Hungary to Macedonia}. Al Bu Gr Hu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. cupanii} Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Prodr}.{\b  1}: 452-3 (1827). Corm 1-2 × 1-1·5 cm, ovoid; tunic dark brown, coriaceous, with a short neck. Leaves 2(-3), up to 8(-10) cm at anthesis, up to 15 cm × 10-18 mm (rarely only 7 cm × 2-3 mm) at maturity, linear to linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, glabrous, rarely ciliate at base. Flowers 1-5(-12); perianth-segments up to 25 × 3-5 mm, purplish-pink, narrowly elliptical obtuse to acute. Filaments up to 12 mm; anthers 2-3 mm purplish-black; pollen yellow. Styles straight; stigmas punctiform. Capsule c. 15 mm, oblong. Flowering September to December. 2n = 54.{\i  Rocky ground. Mediterranean region, westwards to S.E. France; local. }?Al ?Cr Ga Gr It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. cousturieri} W. Greuter, {\i Candollea}{\b  22}: 247 (1967), described from two islands off the S. coast of Kriti, is doubtfully distinct, apparently differing only in the longitudinally purple-striped perianth-segments.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. pusillum} Sieber,{\i  Flora }({\i Regensb.}) {\b 5}: 248 (1822). Corm up to 2 × 2 cm, subglobose to ovoid; tunic dark brown, membranous to subcoriaceous, with long neck. Leaves 3-6(-8), up to 1-3(-4) cm at anthesis, up to 14 cm × 1-2(-5) mm at maturity, filiform to narrowly linear, obtuse to acute, glabrous, sometimes ciliate. Flowers 1-4(5); perianth-segments 10-20 × 1·5-2(-3) mm, pinkish-lilac to white, linear-elliptical, obtuse. Filaments up to 8 mm, glabrous or sometimes hairy at the base; anthers 1·5-3(-4·5) mm, purplish-black to grey or pale brown, less often yellow; pollen yellow. Styles straight; stigmas punctiform. Capsule c. 3 mm. Flowering October to November.{\i  Rocky ground. C. & S. Greece and S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Anther-colour varies considerably in different populations, those from Kriti being grey (occasionally yellow), those from the Peloponnisos purplish-black, and those from the Kikladhes pale brown. Plants from the mountains of Kriti, with slightly larger anthers and with the leaves frequently developing after anthesis, have been distinguished as{\b  C. cretense} W. Greuter,{\i  Candollea}{\b  22}: 246 (1967). The extent to which the leaves are developed at anthesis varies considerably in {\b 5}, and plants from high altitudes can change in respect of this character in cultivation in the lowlands. {\b C. peloponnesiacum} Rech. fil. & P. H. Davis,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  95}: 427 (1949), described from S. Greece (Peloponnisos), has affinities with {\b 5} and is characterized by the yellow anthers and bright purplish-pink, lanceolate perianth-segments up to 30 × 9 mm. It is also closely related to {\b C. stevenii} Kunth, {\i Enum. Pl.}{\b  4}: 144 (1843), from S.W. Asia. The relationships of this group of plants are uncertain and in need of critical study.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. psaridis} Heldr. ex Halácsy, {\i Consp. Fl. Graec. }{\b 3}: 274 (1904). Corm with underground stolons; tunic reddish-brown, membranous or papery. Leaves 2(-3), up to 9 cm at anthesis, 7-15 cm × 3-15 mm at maturity, linear-lanceolate to linear, obtuse to acute, sometimes ciliate. Flowers 1-6; perianth-segments 12-27 × 3-6 mm, pink-purple, linear to oblong-elliptical, obtuse to acute. Filaments up to 8 mm; anthers 2 mm, purplish-black; pollen yellow. Styles straight; stigmas punctiform. Capsule up to 15 mm, conic-oblong. Flowering September to December.{\i  Stony hillsides and olive-groves. S. Greece }({\i Peloponnisos}). Gr.
\par

\par
22}
\par