{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   Apomixis occurs in the genus. Measurements of leaf-widths refer to the leaves of non-flowering shoots.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: G. Weimarck,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  124}: 129-175 (1971).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Awn more than 1 mm; plant caespitose
\par
2 Longest awn not more than 3 mm; pedicels with hairs
\par
  0·1-0·3 mm long immediately below spikelets ............................. {\b 1. australis}
\par
2 Longest awn more than 5 mm; pedicels glabrous or with
\par
  hairs not more than 0·1 mm long ...................................................... {\b 7. alpina}
\par
1 Awn not more than 1 mm, or absent; plant with creeping rhizomes
\par
3 Spikelets 1-2 at each node; leaves not more than 2 mm wide .. {\b 6. pauciflora}
\par
3 Spikelets 3 or more at the lower nodes; leaves at least
\par
  2·2 mm wide
\par
4 Base of stem without conspicuously numerous greyish 
\par
  leaf-sheaths; leaves green; panicle pyramidal
\par
5 Lemma of hermaphrodite floret with ± appressed hairs;
\par
  lemmas of male florets sparsely ciliate, unawned,
\par
  mucronate, or with a very slender awn .......................................... {\b 2. odorata}
\par
5 Lemma of hermaphrodite floret with patent hairs; lemmas
\par
  of male florets densely ciliate, with a coarse awn,
\par
  rarely mucronate ................................................................................. {\b 3. hirta}
\par
4 Base of stem with very numerous greyish leaf-sheaths;
\par
  leaves pruinose; panicle ovoid
\par
6 Spikelets usually more than 120, in dense clusters ........................ {\b 4. repens}
\par
6 Spikelets usually fewer than 120, not in dense clusters ........... {\b 5. stepporum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. australis} (Schrader) Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 514 (1817). Caespitose, 30-60(-80) cm. Leaves (1·5-)3-5·5(-9) mm wide, often pruinose. Inflorescence (2·5-)3·5-7 cm, pyramidal, with (11-)20-35(-70) spikelets. Lemmas of male florets more or less deeply 2-fid, sparsely ciliate. Awn of lemma of lower male floret 0·1-0·5(-3) mm; awn of lemma of upper male floret 1-3 mm, twisted at base, geniculate. Lemma of hermaphrodite floret with appressed hairs towards apex. Facultatively apomictic. 2n = 14.{\i  Open woods. • From N.W. Russia westwards to S. Germany and N. Italy and southwards to Macedonia.} Au Bu Cz Fe Ge Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. odorata} (L.) Beauv.,{\i  Agrost.} 62, 164 (1812). Rhizomatous, (10-)25-60(-90) cm. Leaves (2·2-)3-6(-8) mm wide, green. Inflorescence pyramidal. Lemmas of male florets sparsely ciliate. Lemma of hermaphrodite floret with more or less appressed hairs towards apex.{\i  Wet meadows, fens, riversides and lake-margins. N. & C. Europe, southwards to the Alps and N. Moldavia.} Au Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Is It No Po Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b odorata}: Inflorescence (2·5-)3·5-9(-12·5) cm, with (8-)25-60(-100) spikelets. Lemmas of male florets acute, mucronate or slightly 2-fid, the midveins reaching apex of lemma or base of apical incision; hyaline margin usually 0·1-0·3 mm wide; awn, if present, up to 0·8 mm, slender. Amphimictic. 2n = 28, 42. {\i Throughout the range of the species except the Baltic region and N.W. Russia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b baltica} G.Weim.,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  124}: 141 (1971): Inflorescence (3-)4-7·5(-10) cm, with (10-)20-50(-85) spikelets. Lemmas of male florets slightly 2-fid, the midvein ending below apex of lemma or base of apical incision; hyaline margin usually 0·3-0·5 mm wide; awn almost always absent. Apomictic. 2n = 42. •{\i  Baltic region and N.W. Russia.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. hirta} (Schrank) Borbás,{\i  Balaton Növényföldr}. 315 (1900). Like {\b 2} but lemma of hermaphrodite floret with patent hairs towards apex; lemma of male florets acute or slightly 2-fid, densely ciliate, awn 0·2-1 mm, stout. Apomictic. 2n = 56. {\i Wet meadows, fens and lake-shores. Fennoscandia and N.W. Russia, extending locally south-westwards to Austria.} Au Cz Fe Ge ?It No Po Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b hirta}: 40-85(-110) cm. Inflorescence (5-)7·5-15 cm, usually with at least 9 nodes, with (19-)50-100(-140) spikelets; lower branches usually drooping. Awn of lemmas of male florets tapering, bent gradually outwards. •{\i  From} c. 64° {\i N. in Finland southwards.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b arctica} (C.Presl) G. Weim.,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  124}: 146 (1971): (20-)30-75 cm. Inflorescence (3-)4·5-8·5 cm, usually with not more than 8 nodes, with (15-)20-70(-85) spikelets; lower branches usually not drooping. Awn of lemmas of male florets not tapering, straight or slightly bent inwards.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. H. repens} (Host) Simonkai, {\i Enum. Fl. Transs.} 560 (1886). Rhizomatous, (30-)45-70(-90) cm; base of stem enclosed by numerous greyish sheaths. Leaves (5-)7-9(-11) mm wide, pruinose. Inflorescence (5-)6·5-10(-14) cm, ovoid, with (80-) 120-160(-300) densely clustered spikelets. Lemmas of male florets acute or slightly 2-fid, densely ciliate; awn (0·1-)0·2-0·5 (-0·8) mm. Lemma of hermaphrodite floret with more or less appressed hairs toward apex. Amphimictic. 2n = 28, 28+2B.{\i  Dry, open habitats. E.C. & E. Europe, northwards to} c. 56°{\i  N. in C. Russia.} Au Bu Cz Hu Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. H. stepporum} P. Smirnov,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou} ser. 2,{\b  63} ({\b 5}): 81 (1958). Like {\b 4} but spikelets usually not more than 120 (-160), not in dense clusters; hairs on lemma of hermaphrodite floret more patent.{\i  Steppes and dry, open habitats. S.E. Russia.} Rs (?C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. H. pauciflora} R. Br. in Parry,{\i  Jour. Voy. N.W. Pass., Suppl. App.} 293 (1824). Rhizomatous, (4-)7-25(-35) cm. Leaves 1-2 mm wide, more or less convolute, green. Inflorescence (0·8-)1·2-3·5(-4·5) cm, contracted, with 3-10(-15) spikelets. Lemmas of male florets acute or slightly 2-fid, very sparsely ciliate. Awn of lemmas of male florets absent or up to 1 mm. Lemma of hermaphrodite floret membranous, with sparse, patent hairs towards apex.{\i  Tundra-bogs. Arctic Ural and adjacent lowlands.} Rs (N). ({\i Arctic and subarctic Asia and America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. H. alpina} (Willd.) Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 515 (1817). Caespitose, (5-)20-35(-55) cm. Leaves 1·5-3 mm wide, often more or less convolute, green. Inflorescence (1·2-)2-5(-6) cm, usually contracted, with (3-)10-20(-35) spikelets. Lemmas of male florets deeply 2-fid, moderately ciliate. Awn on lemma of lower male floret 0·6-3·5 mm; awn on lemma of upper male floret 5·5-9(-10) mm, almost always twisted at base, geniculate. Lemma of hermaphrodite floret with appressed or patent hairs towards apex. Facultatively apomictic. 2n = 56, 64, 66, 68, 71, 72, 74-78. {\i Exposed mountain heaths and tundra. Arctic Europe.} Fe No Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 82.     Anthoxanthum}        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials, often smelling of coumarin. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a condensed panicle. Spikelets laterally compressed, of 2 sterile florets and a terminal hermaphrodite floret. Glumes membranous, very unequal, the lower 1-, the upper 3-veined. Lemma of sterile florets membranous, toothed or with 2 oblong, obtuse lobes at apex, 3-veined, with a dorsal awn. Lemma of fertile floret somewhat indurated, shorter than the sterile ones, 5- to 7-veined. Palea 1-veined. Stamens 2. Lodicules absent.
\par

\par
229}
\par