{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 spiciform. Spikelets 6-8 mm. Glumes subequal, acute, sparsely pubescent, greenish-purple. Lemma acute, glabrous or rarely pubescent.{\i  Dry grassland or rocks; usually calcicole. E. Alps, S. Carpathians and mountains of the Balkan peninsula.} Au Bu He It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. K. pyramidata} (Lam.) Beauv.,{\i  Agrost.} 84, 166 (1812) ({\i K. cristata} (L.) Pers. pro parte, {\i K. genevensis }Domin). Laxly caespitose, sometimes with long, creeping extravaginal rhizomes. Stems (30-)45-90.cm, robust, glabrous to puberulent above. Leaves of non-flowering shoots 4-23 cm × 1-3·5 mm, flat, green or glaucescent, glabrous, or with sparse, long white hairs at the margins; sheaths persistent, sparsely sericeous to densely pubescent. Panicle (50-)100-220 × 13-30 mm, pyramidal, robust, with a pubescent rhachis. Spikelets (5-)6-8 mm. Glumes unequal, acute, glabrous and smooth or scabrid, green or pale brown. Lemma acuminate to shortly aristate, glabrous, puberulent or rarely ciliate. 2n = 42, 56, 70, 84.{\i  Meadows and wood-margins. From N. Russia and the Netherlands southwards to N. Italy and Macedonia.} Au Be Bu Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) [Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from Russia and the Baltic region, with long, creeping rhizomes and hairy sheaths, have usually been considered as a separate species,{\b  K. grandis} Besser ex Gorski,{\i  Icon. Pot. Char. Cyper. Gram. Lithuan}. t. 19 (1849) ({\i K. polonica} Domin), but the correlation between these characters often breaks down.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 69.     Lophochloa}     Reichenb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By B. Jonsell. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets laterally compressed, with (1-)2-5(-10) florets. Glumes keeled, cartilaginous at the base. Lemma 2-fid, usually prominently 5-veined, keeled, with a straight or slightly curved awn inserted near the apex. Palea 2-keeled, 2-fid. Rhachilla and callus glabrous or with short hairs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Glumes subequal, with pectinately arranged hairs, the 
\par
  lower 3-veined; anthers elongate
\par
2 Awn less than 1·3 mm; keels of each pair of glumes 
\par
  parallel or slightly convergent .................................................... {\b 4. pubescens}
\par
2 Awn more than 1·3 mm; keels of each pair of glumes
\par
  divergent .................................................................................... {\b 5. salzmannii}
\par
1 Glumes unequal, glabrous or with irregularly arranged
\par
  hairs, the lower 1-veined; anthers ovoid to ellipsoid
\par
3 Panicle ovoid; awn of lower lemmas 3-5 mm ............................... {\b 2. hispida}
\par
3 Panicle oblong to pyramidal or spike-like; awn of lower
\par
  lemmas not more than 2·5 mm
\par
4 Lower glume c. ¾ as long as and much narrower than 
\par
  the upper; rhachilla-hairs not more than 0·5 mm ............................ {\b 1. cristata}
\par
4 Glumes subequal; rhachilla-hairs c. 1 mm ..................................... {\b 3. pumila}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Lophochloa}. Glumes unequal, the lower 1-veined. Anthers ovoid to ellipsoid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. cristata} (L.) Hyl.,{\i  Bot. Not. }{\b 1953}: 355 (1953) ({\i Koeleria phleoides} (Vill.) Pers.). Caespitose, with erect or geniculate, glabrous stems 5-60 cm. Leaves up to 18 cm × 8 mm; leaves and sheaths villous to pubescent, greenish when dry. Panicle 1-12 × 0·5-1(-2) cm, cylindrical and dense, or pyramidal, lax and more or less lobed. Pedicels scabridulous. Spikelets 3-7·5 mm. Glumes acute, pubescent or glabrous, the lower c. ¾ as long as the upper. Rhachilla-hairs not more than 0·5 mm. Lemma with 5 usually distinct veins, shortly 2-fid; awn 1-3 mm, arising near apex, usually straight. Anthers 0·2-0·5 mm. 2n = 26.{\i  Cultivated ground and dry, sandy grassland. Mediterranean region and S.W. Europe, extending northwards to} 47° 30' {\i N. in W. France and to E. Bulgaria.} Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. hispida} (Savi) Jonsell, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 321 (1978) ({\i Koeleria hispida} (Savi) DC.,{\i  Festuca hispida} Savi). Stems 5-30 cm, more or less geniculate, glabrous. Leaves up to 10 cm × 7 mm, acuminate; leaves and sheaths more or less villous. Panicle 1-6 × 0·7-1·5 cm, ovoid, very dense. Pedicels smooth, very rigid. Spikelets 4-5 mm. Glumes acuminate, glabrous or ciliate on the keel, the lower c. ¾ as long as and much narrower than the upper. Rhachilla glabrous. Lemma with 5 prominent veins; awn of lower lemmas 3-5 mm, arising near apex, slightly curved. Anthers 0·7-1 mm.{\i  Mediterranean region, from Sardegna to W. Greece.} Gr It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. pumila} (Desf.) Bor,{\i  Grasses Burma Ceylon India Pakist.} 445 (1960) ({\i Trisetum pumilum} (Desf.) Kunth). Caespitose, with erect or geniculate, glabrous stems 5-35 cm. Leaves up to 7 cm × 3 mm; leaves and sheaths villous to pubescent, light purplish when dry. Sheaths somewhat inflated. Panicle 1-6 × c. 0·5 cm, spike-like, tapered towards the ends. Pedicels pubescent. Spikelets 2·7-3·6 mm. Upper glume densely pubescent; lower glume ciliate on the keel, almost as long as the upper. Rhachilla-hairs c. 1 mm. Lemma with 5 distinct veins, scabridulous, acute or minutely 2-fid; awn 1·5-2·5 mm, arising slightly below apex, straight or slightly curved. Anthers c. 0·4 mm.{\i  Sandy places. C. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Aegialina} (Schultes & Schultes fil.) Jonsell. Glumes subequal, the lower 3-veined. Anthers elongate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. pubescens} (Lam.) H. Scholz, {\i Willdenowia}{\b  6}: 291 (1971) ({\i Koeleria pubescens} (Lam.) Beauv., {\i K. villosa} Pers., {\i Phalaris pubescens} Lam.). Stems 10-40 cm, geniculate to erect, sparsely pubescent to glabrous. Leaves up to 6 cm × 7 mm, tapering from the base. Leaves and sheaths densely pubescent. Panicle 5-12 × 0·5 cm, very dense, cylindrical. Spikelets 3·5-6 mm, with 1-2 florets nearly enclosed by the glumes. Lower glume as long and wide as the upper, both with pectinately arranged hairs along veins, more or less prickly between the veins. Rhachilla and callus glabrous. Lemma nearly smooth; awn usually 0·5-1 mm, straight. Anthers 1·5-2 mm.{\i  Maritime sands. Mediterranean region.} Co ?Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. salzmannii} (Boiss. & Reuter) H. Scholz, {\i op. cit.} 292 (1971) ({\i Koeleria salzmannii }Boiss. & Reuter). Like {\b 4} but leaves and sheaths with longer hairs; panicle somewhat laxer, cylindrical to narrowly pyramidal (lobed in large specimens); spikelets with 2-5 florets, not enclosed by the divaricate, often villous glumes; rhachilla and callus finely pubescent; awn 1·7-2·5 mm, straight to slightly curved.{\i  Sandy soil. S. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 70.       Trisetum}       Pers.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By B. Jonsell. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Inflorescence a panicle, sometimes spike-like. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 2 to several florets. Glumes keeled, more or less unequal, the lower 1(-3)veined, the upper 3-veined. Lemma 2-fid or with 2 setae, 5-veined, with a straight or curved, often twisted awn nearly always inserted in the distal half. Palea 2-keeled, 2-fid, not enclosed by lemma at maturity, thus making the spikelets silvery. Rhachilla and callus with short or long hairs. Anthers usually long and narrow.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: J. Chrtek & V. Jirasek, {\i Webbia}{\b  17}: 569-580 (1963). E. Paunero, {\i Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  9}: 503-582 (1950).
\par

\par
220}
\par