{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sibiricum}: Stems usually at least 50 cm. Cauline leaves usually more than 10 cm. Panicle elongate and rather lax.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b litorale} (Rupr.) Roshev.,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. URSS}{\b  21}: 90 (1922): Stems not more than 40 cm. Cauline leaves not more than 10 cm. Panicle shorter, more compact and brownish.{\i  Arctic and subarctic Russia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. T. paniceum} (Lam.) Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  1}: 97 (1805) ({\i T. neglectum} (Savi) Roemer & Schultes). Caespitose annual, with basally geniculate to erect, glabrous stems 20-45(-65) cm. Leaves flat and thin, the lower up to 15(-20) cm × 6 mm, moderately villous like the sheaths. Panicle 2-12(-17·5) cm, cylindrical, narrowly ovoid or narrowly pyramidal, usually yellowish, dense but often lobed. Spikelets 3-5·5 mm, with florets slightly exceeding or equalling the glumes. Glumes largely hyaline, villous to glabrous with scabridulous keels, the upper broadly ovate, the lower much narrower, slightly shorter. Rhachilla with very short appressed hairs. Lemma 1·3-3·7 mm, villous to smooth, acute or slightly bicuspidate; callus glabrous; awn 1·5-4 mm, inserted in upper part of lemma, straight or slightly curved, scabridulous. Anthers 0·8-1·6 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Roadsides, walls and cultivated ground. W. & C. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Bl Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. T. aureum} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  2}: 378 (1820) ({\i T. condensatum} (Link) C. Presl). Caespitose annual, with erect, spreading or geniculate glabrous stems 7-30 cm. Leaves up to 10 cm × 3 mm but usually much smaller, flat, subglabrous to villous. Sheaths somewhat inflated, glabrous to villous. Panicle 1-5 × 0·5-3 cm, pyramidal to ovoid, dense but often lobed, shining yellowish to brownish. Spikelets 2·6-3·2 mm. Glumes broadly hyaline, nearly smooth, the upper broadly ovate, the lower narrower and c. ¾ as long, Rhachilla and callus with hairs 0·3-0·4 mm. Lemma 1·6-2·7 mm, with hyaline margins, bicuspidate, glabrous or hairy, minutely scabridulous; awn 2-3·5(-6) mm, inserted somewhat above middle of lemma, slightly bent. Anthers 1-1·5 mm.{\i  Sandy ground near the sea. Mediterranean region; local. }Bl Gr It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Most plants from Malta have awns 4-6 mm (var. {\i melitense} (Steudel) Lojac.).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. T. parviflorum} (Desf.) Pers., {\i Syn. Pl.}{\b  1}: 97 (1805). Caespitose annual, with erect or geniculate glabrous stems 20-50 cm. Leaves up to 15 cm × 3 mm, flat, more or less villous like the sheaths. Panicle 4-15 × 1·5-3 cm, dense to fairly lax, rather contracted, diffuse. Spikelets 2·5-4 mm. Upper glume equalling the florets, glabrous, with aculeolate veins and margins; lower glume c. ½ as long and ¼ as wide as upper. Rhachilla minutely puberulent; callus glabrous. Lemma 1·8-3 mm, 2-fid, glabrous, with scabridulous margins. Awn 2-5 mm, inserted near apex, straight to slightly curved. Anthers 1-1·5 mm.{\i  Italy, Sardegna, Sicilia.} It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. T. scabriusculum} (Lag.) Cosson ex Willk. in Willk. & Lange,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  1}: 73 (1861). Laxly caespitose annual, with rather slender, glabrous stems 10-30 cm. Leaves rather few, up to 3 cm × 1·5 mm, villous to pubescent like the sheaths. Panicle 5-9 × c. 0·5 cm, narrowly cylindrical, contracted, somewhat reddish. Spikelets 3·2-4 mm. Glumes nearly equal, with rigid keels, hairy to subglabrous, but scabridulous. Rhachilla with hairs c. 0·3 mm. Lemma 2·5-3·3 mm, minutely 2-fid, scabridulous on the keel. Awn 0·8-2 mm, inserted near apex of lemma, nearly straight or slightly bent. Anthers c. 1 mm. •{\i  N.W., C. & S. Spain, N.E. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. T. ovatum} (Cav.) Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  1}: 98 (1805). Caespitose annual with erect or spreading, glabrous or retrorsely pubescent stems 4-50 cm. Leaves up to 4 cm × 4 mm, flat, often short but wide and narrowly triangular, moderately villous. Sheaths densely pubescent, somewhat inflated. Panicle 0·5-3 × 0·5-1·5 cm, ovoid, very dense. Spikelets c. 5 mm (excluding setae). Glumes subequal, cartilaginous, with rigid cilia on veins and margins. Rhachilla with sparse, short hairs or subglabrous; callus glabrous. Lemma villous, with 2 setae, the undivided part c. 3·5 mm, the setae 1-3 mm. Awn 3-6·5 mm, inserted slightly below the sinus, strongly curved, widening towards the base, scabridulous. Anthers c. 1·7 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry places. • N.W. & C. Spain, N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. T. loeflingianum} (L.) C. Presl,{\i  Cyper. Gram. Sic.} 30 (1820) (incl. {\i T. cavanillesii} Trin., {\i T. gaudinianum} Boiss.). More or less caespitose annual with shortly villous stems 6-25 cm. Leaves up to 4 cm × 1 mm, flat or canaliculate, pubescent. Sheaths inflated, with dense retrorse hairs. Panicle 1·5-4 × 0·5-1·5 cm, ovoid to cylindrical, dense. Spikelets c. 5 mm. Glumes largely hyaline, almost smooth, the lower c. 2/3 as long as upper and narrower. Rhachilla with dense hairs; callus-hairs c. 0·5 mm. Lemma nearly smooth, with 2 setae, glabrous or with sparse hairs; undivided part 2·5-3 mm, the setae only slightly shorter. Awn 5·5-7·5 mm, inserted slightly below the sinus, angled. Palea very short and narrow. Anthers c. 0·5 mm, broadly linear.{\i  Dry, open habitats, usually on sand or gravel. C. & S. Spain; S.W. Alps; S.E. Russia.} He Hs It Rs (E). ({\i S.W. & C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b T. cavanillesii} Trin., {\i Mém. Acad. Sci. Pétersb.} ser. 6, {\b 1}: 63 (1830), differs from typical{\b  23} only in having hairs on the rhachilla 1·5-2 mm, instead of c. 0·3 mm. Such plants constitute the entire population in the Alps, while in Spain both variants occur. The difference does not seem worthy of taxonomic recognition.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. T. macrochaetum} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 13}): 48 (1853). Like {\b 23} but stems glabrous; sheaths not inflated panicle up to 6 cm; rhachilla-hairs c. 0·5 mm; lemma scabridulous; anthers c. 1·5 mm.{\i  W.C. Spain} ({\i Navalmoral de la Mata, prov. Caceres}). Hs. ({\i N.E. Africa, Israel.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 71.         Trisetaria}     Forskål
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By B. Jonsell. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Inflorescence a contracted panicle; rhachis often tough. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 1-5 florets. Glumes more or less cartilaginous, 3-veined. Lemma usually prominently 2-setose, membranous, 5-veined, with a long, twisted awn inserted above the middle. Palea 2-keeled, 2-fid. Rhachilla and callus with short hairs. Anthers usually long and narrow.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. dufourei} (Boiss.) Paunero,{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  9}: 521 (1950) ({\i Trisetum dufourei} Boiss.). Caespitose annual 15-35 cm, with erect or geniculate, retrorsely villous or glabrous stems. Leaves up to 5 cm × 3 mm, flat, villous. Sheaths slightly inflated retrorsely villous. Panicle 2-6 × 1-2·5 cm, ovoid to cylindrical dense but sometimes lobed. Pedicels antrorsely pubescent. Spikelets (excluding setae) 4-7 mm. Glumes with narrow hyaline margin, hairy, acuminate, the upper 4·5-6·5 mm, the lower c. ¾ as long. Rhachilla with hairs c. 0·5 mm; callus-hairs very short. Lemma scabridulous, with 2 setae, the undivided part 3·2-4·4 mm, the setae c. 2/3 as long. Awn 5-6·5 mm, angled and twisted, scabridulous. Anthers c. 2 mm.{\i  Sandy soil near the sea. S. Portugal, S.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par
224}
\par