{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 2n = 14.{\i  S. & S.C. Europe.} Al Au Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. tenorii} Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 62 (1827) (incl.{\i  A. intermedia} Guss.). Like {\b 6} but panicle often wider than long, with divaricate branches; pedicels 5-8 times as long as spikelets; spikelets 1·5-3 mm; glumes obtuse, often denticulate and sometimes mucronate; lemma glabrous or with a few short hairs at base; awns present or absent; anthers 0·7-1·7 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Bl Co ?Cr Ga Gr Hs It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. provincialis} Jordan, {\i Pug. Pl. Nov.} 142 (1852). Like {\b 6} but pedicels gradually thickened at apex; spikelets c. 3·5 mm; lower floret with an awn shorter than the glumes, the upper with a shortly exserted awn. 2n = 28. •{\i   S.E. France, Corse.} Co ?Cr Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 77.      Molineriella}      Rouy        
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Molineria} Parl., non Colla)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\b Aira} but glumes shorter than florets; lemma conspicuously 5- to 7-veined throughout, obtuse or almost truncate, unawned or with a short, straight dorsal awn from above the middle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. minuta} (L.) Rouy,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  14}: 102 (1913) ({\i Molineria minuta }(L.) Parl.,{\i  Airopsis minuta} (L.) Desv.). Stems 3-20 cm, slender, smooth, shining. Leaves up to 8 cm × 2 mm, scabrid on the margin, otherwise smooth, flat or longitudinally folded; sheaths smooth, the upper somewhat inflated; ligule up to 2·5 mm, often lacerate. Panicle up to 7 × 7 cm, very lax; pedicels 1-5 times as long as spikelets, gradually thickened towards the apex. Spikelets 1-1·5 mm, usually violet, shining. Glumes ovate to ovate-lanceolate, smooth, the lower 1-veined, the upper 3-veined, with the lateral veins short and obscure. Lemma ovate, scarious at apex, unawned; hairs at base of lemma c. 2/3 as long as lemma. Anthers 0·9-1 mm.{\i  Dry, open habitats. S. Europe}. Al Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. laevis} (Brot.) Rouy,{\i  op. cit. }103 (1913) ({\i Molineria laevis} (Brot.) Hackel,{\i  Aira lendigera} Lag.). Like {\b 1} but stems up to 35 cm; spikelets c. 2 mm; lemma oblong, with a short, straight dorsal awn from above the middle; hairs at base of lemma up to 1/5 as long as lemma. 2n = 8.{\i  Dry, open habitats. Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   An old record from Krym requires confirmation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 78.       Airopsis}      Desv.     
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\b Aira} but glumes broadly ovate, ventricose; lemma obscurely 3-veined, 3-dentate at apex, unawned; grain suborbicular, rounded on the abaxial face, flat on the adaxial face.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. tenella} (Cav.) Ascherson & Graebner,{\i  Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 298 (1899) ({\i A. globosa }(Thore) Desv.). Stems 3-20(-30) cm, very slender. Leaves up to 6 cm × 1·5 mm, scabridulous, convolute; sheaths weakly scabridulous, the uppermost somewhat inflated; ligule up to 2 mm, obtuse, more or less lacerate. Panicle up to 5 × 1 cm, usually less, oblong or linear-lanceolate, sometimes spicate, rather dense; pedicels about as long as spikelets, clavate at apex. Spikelets 1·2-1·5 mm. Glumes smooth and shining, longer than the florets. Lemma ovate, puberulent outside. Anthers c. 0·3 mm. 2n = 8.{\i  Open, sandy habitats. S.W. Europe, extending eastwards to Sicilia.} Co Ga Hs It Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 79.        Periballia}      Trin.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\b Aira} but lower 1-3 whorls of panicle-branches almost or entirely without spikelets; glumes herbaceous; lemma weakly 3-veined, rarely with a dorsal awn; grain truncate at base, puberulent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. involucrata} (Cav.) Janka,{\i  Term. Füz.}{\b  1}: 97 (1877) ({\i P. hispanica} Trin.). Stems usually 15-40 cm, slender. Leaves convolute, scabrid; sheaths scabrid, not inflated; ligule up to 4 mm. Panicle up to 15 × 10 cm, lax; most or all branches in the lower 1-3 whorls short, slender, without spikelets; pedicels 1-2(-5) times as long as spikelets, clavate at apex. Spikelets c. 3 mm, greenish-brown. Lower glume lanceolate, the upper ovate, both slightly shorter than florets. Lemma obscurely 3-veined, hairy at base, usually unawned. Rhachilla hairy. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry, sandy places. • W. & C. Spain, E. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 80.         Antinoria}       Parl.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\b Aira} but sometimes perennial; upper floret distinctly stipitate; lemma 3-veined, widest near apex, truncate, shallowly 3-dentate, unawned; grain obovoid-pyriform, rounded on the abaxial face, flat on the adaxial face.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Usually perennial; glumes 1·5-2 mm; anthers c. 1 mm ............... {\b 1. agrostidea} 
\par
Annual; glumes c. 1 mm; anthers c. 0·5 mm .................................. {\b 2. insularis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. agrostidea} (DC.) Parl.,{\i  Fl. Palerm. }{\b 1}: 95 (1845) ({\i Airopsis agrostidea} (DC.) DC.). Stems 5-30 cm, slender, procumbent and rooting at the nodes below when perennial, ascending when annual. Leaves up to 12 cm × 2·5 mm, scabrid above and on margin, flat; sheaths smooth, the upper somewhat inflated; ligule up to 3 mm, usually lacerate. Panicle up to 10 × 7 cm; branches divaricate; pedicels mostly longer than spikelets, clavate at apex. Spikelets 1·5-2 mm, green and violet, shining. Glumes ovate, subobtuse, scabridulous on the keel, 3-veined, longer than the florets. Lemma and rhachilla glabrous. Anthers c. 1 mm.{\i  Damp places. Portugal, C. & N.W. Spain, C. & N.W. France.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    An aquatic variant with long stems and floating leaves occurs in N.C. Portugal and C. Spain (Serra da Estrêla to Sierra de Guadarrama). It has been called subsp. {\b natans} (Hackel) Rivas Martínez, {\i Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  21}: 295 (1963), but its taxonomic rank requires further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. insularis} Parl.,{\i  Fl. Palerm.}{\b  1}: 94 (1845) ({\i Airopsis insularis} (Parl.) Nyman). Like {\b 1} but always annual; spikelets c. 1 mm; anthers c. 0·5 mm.{\i  Seasonally wet places. W.C. Mediterranean region; Kriti.} Co Cr It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 81.     Hierochloë}       R.Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By G. Weimarck 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials, smelling of coumarin. Leaves flat or more or less convolute, those on the flowering stem with a short lamina; ligule truncate, obtuse or acute. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 2 male florets and 1 terminal hermaphrodite floret. Glumes membranous, subequal, ovate, about as long as the florets, obscurely 3-veined. Lemmas of male florets membranous, obscurely 3- to 5-veined, obtuse, mucronate or awned. Palea shorter than lemma, membranous, 2-veined. Lemma of hermaphrodite floret obscurely 5-veined, hard and shiny in fruit (except in{\b  6}), hairy towards apex. Palea shorter than lemma, membranous, 1-veined. Stamens 3 in male florets, 2 in hermaphrodite floret.
\par

\par
228}
\par