{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 4 Spikelets 3-4(-4·5) mm; glumes shortly acute ................................. {\b 6. stricta}
\par
4 Spikelets 4·5-6 mm; glumes acuminate .......................................... {\b 7. scotica}
\par
2 Palea about as long as lemma; awn stout, geniculate or twisted
\par
5 Leaves on flowering stems not more than 3 cm; plant 
\par
  small and slender ............................................................. {\b 9. deschampsioides}
\par
5 Leaves on flowering stems more than 3 cm; plant relatively
\par
  tall and robust
\par
6 Callus-hairs not more than half as long as lemma
\par
7 Upper surface of leaves with long hairs ..................................... {\b 14. obtusata}
\par
7 Upper surface of leaves scabrid, without hairs .................... {\b 11. arundinacea}
\par
6 Callus-hairs at least half as long as lemma
\par
8 Glumes lanceolate-acuminate, weakly scabrid, golden to
\par
  reddish-brown, shining; anthers with viable pollen ......................... {\b 12. varia}
\par
8 Glumes ovate-lanceolate, strongly scabrid, usually dull
\par
  purple; anthers without pollen .................................................. {\b 13. chalybaea}
\par
1 Lemma usually smooth, not longer than callus-hairs 
\par
9 Lemma usually 3-veined; glumes narrowly lanceolate,
\par
  long-acuminate
\par
10 Panicle nodding; glumes distinctly unequal in length;
\par
   awn exceeding lemma by c. 3 mm ............................... {\b 2. pseudophragmites}
\par
10 Panicle erect; glumes usually equal in length; awn 
\par
   exceeding lemma by less than 2 mm ............................................ {\b 1. epigejos}
\par
9  Lemma usually 5-veined, the veins sometimes obscure;
\par
   glumes ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate-acuminate
\par
11 Stems with 2-3 nodes ............................................................. {\b 10. lapponica}
\par
11 Stems with 4 or more nodes
\par
12 Stems unbranched; lemma deeply 2-fid; awn arising from
\par
   about middle of lemma ................................................................... {\b 3. villosa}
\par
12 Stems often branched; lemma irregularly notched at 
\par
   apex; awn arising from apical 1/3 of lemma
\par
13 Leaves glabrous above; ligule (4-)6-10 mm; anthers 
\par
   without pollen ............................................................................. {\b 5. purpurea}
\par
13 Leaves with sometimes sparse, white hairs on upper 
\par
   surface; ligule 1-4 mm; anthers with viable pollen ................... {\b 4. canescens}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CALAMAGROSTIS. Glumes ovate-lanceolate to narrowly lanceolate. Lemma hyaline, smooth, 1/2-2/3 as long as glumes. Palea 2/3 as long as lemma. Callus-hairs at least as long as lemma. Rhachilla usually not prolonged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. epigejos} (L.) Roth,{\i  Tent. Fl. Germ.}{\b  1}: 34 (1788) ({\i C. gigantea} Roshev.). Caespitose, with creeping rhizomes; stems 60-200 cm, erect, usually rather stout, with 2-4 nodes, usually rough beneath panicle, smooth elsewhere. Leaves 4-20 mm wide, flat or weakly convolute; upper surface scabrid, with close-set veins; ligule 4-12 mm, acute, becoming lacerate. Panicle 15-30 × 3-6 cm, erect, dense or more or less patent; branches aculeolate. Spikelets 4-10 mm, silvery-grey to brownish-purple. Glumes subequal or the lower slightly the longer, narrowly lanceolate, aculeolate on keel. Lemma 3-veined, 2-fid; awn short, but exceeding lemma, arising from middle of lemma or above. 2n = 28, 42, 56. {\i Damp places and disturbed ground. Most of Europe, but rare in the south-west.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Lu Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   An amphimictic polyploid complex of which some variants have been recognized as subspecies in the U.S.S.R. These are distinguished on the density of the panicle, smoothness of the stem under the panicle and the degree of inequality in glume length. As intermediates are frequent, the variants do not seem to merit subspecific status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. epigejos} hybridizes readily with other amphimictic species; the following are the most frequent hybrids: {\b 1} × {\b 6} ({\i C}. × {\i strigosa} (Wahlenb.) Hartman), {\b 1} × {\b 4} ({\i C}. × {\i rigens} Lindgren) which are more or less intermediate between their parents, and {\b 1} × {\b 11} ({\i C}. ×{\i  acutiflora} (Schrader) Reichenb.) which is like {\b 12} but has stiff, glaucous leaves. It also hybridizes with {\i Ammophila} ( × {\i Ammocalamagrostis}, p. 236).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. pseudophragmites} (Haller fil.) Koeler, {\i Descr. Gram. }106 (1802) ({\i C. littorea} DC., {\i C. glauca} (Bieb.) Trin.). Caespitose, with creeping rhizomes; stems 50-150 cm, rather stout, with 2-3 nodes, scabrid beneath panicle, smooth elsewhere. Leaves up to 10 mm wide, flat or slightly convolute, the upper surface scabrid, with prominent, close-set veins; ligule 4-10 mm, acute or lacerate. Panicle 10-40 cm, soon nodding, often rather lax; branches aculeolate. Spikelets 5-9 mm, brownish-purple or rarely light green. Glumes distinctly unequal, the lower distinctly the longer, narrowly lanceolate, smooth or weakly aculeolate on keel only. Lemma 3-veined, 2-fid at apex; awn arising from near apex of lemma, exceeding lemma by c. 3 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Damp places. C. & S.E. Europe, extending to S.E. France, C. Italy and E.C. Russia.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Ho ?Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. villosa} (Chaix) J. F. Gmelin,{\i  Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 171 (1791). Laxly caespitose, with long rhizomes; stems 50-150 cm, slender, with 4-5 nodes, smooth, unbranched, geniculate at base. Leaves 3-8 mm wide, flat or convolute, the upper surface scabrid and with scattered hairs, the veins relatively prominent but close-set, ligule 3-5 mm, lacerate. Panicle 8-20 × up to 6 cm, rather lax, flexuous or nodding after anthesis; branches weakly aculeolate. Spikelets 4-6 mm, dull brown or purplish. Glumes subequal, lanceolate, weakly scabrid. Lemma 5-veined, 2-fid; awn arising from middle of lemma or a little above, at least as long as lemma. 2n = 56. {\i Mountain heaths and woods. C. Europe, extending to the S.W. Alps and Bulgaria}. Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm Rs.(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. canescens} (Weber) Roth, {\i Tent. Fl. Germ.}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 93 (1789) ({\i C. lanceolata} Roth). Laxly caespitose, with rhizomes; stems 50-150 cm, erect, rather slender, with 4-6 nodes, smooth, often branched. Leaves 3-8 mm wide, flat or convolute, the upper surface with scattered, sometimes sparse, white hairs, the veins slender, close-set; ligule 1-4 mm, obtuse and lacerate. Panicle 5-20 × up to 7 cm, rather lax, flexuous or nodding after anthesis; branches smooth or weakly aculeolate. Spikelets 4-6(-7) mm, dull brown or purplish. Glumes subequal, lanceolate-acuminate, slightly scabrid. Lemma 5-veined, notched at the apex; awn usually very short and slender, arising from the apex or slightly below. Callus-hairs about as long as lemma. Anthers usually purple, with well-developed pollen; thecae separating at maturity. 2n = 28.{\i  Marshes and fens. Europe southwards to N. Spain, N. Italy and Bulgaria.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b canescens}: Awn slender, very short, arising from or near the notch in apex of lemma. Rhachilla-prolongation absent or minute.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b vilnensis} (Besser) H. Scholz,{\i  Ber. Deutsch. Bot. Ges. }{\b 77}: 145 (1964) ({\i C. vilnensis} Besser ex Schultes & Schultes fil.): Awn robust, longer, arising distinctly below the apex of lemma. Rhachilla-prolongation present.{\i  Germany and Baltic region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    The name {\i C. vilnensis} has sometimes been applied to the hybrid{\b  4} × {\b 6} ({\i C}. × {\i gracilescens} (Blytt) Blytt), which is intermediate between its parents in glume-shape, awn-length and the relative lengths of callus-hairs and lemma.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4} × {\b 11} ({\i C}. × {\i hartmaniana} Fries) is rather like {\b 11}, but has unbranched stems, long leaves with white hairs on the upper surface, callus-hairs nearly as long as the lemma and a straight awn.
\par

\par
237}
\par