{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 at base of floret 1/6-1/4 as long as lemma. 2n = 14.{\i  W. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Co Ga Hs Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A record from Kriti is almost certainly an error.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. macrantherus} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i op. cit.} 124 (1852). Like {\b 2} but panicle-branches branched below the middle and with spikelets throughout most of their length; spikelets 4·5-5 mm; hairs at base of lemma not more than ¼ as long as lemma; anthers c. 1·5 mm. {\i S.W. Spain, S. Portugal}. Hs Lu. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 85.       Avellinia}     Parl.        
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat or involute. Inflorescence a panicle, contracted after anthesis. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 2-4 rather distant florets. Glumes very unequal, persistent, membranous, the lower 1-veined, the upper 3-veined and almost as long as the florets. Lemma obscurely 3-veined, membranous, 2-fid at apex, with a short awn from the sinus. Palea shorter than lemma, deeply 2-fid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. michelii} (Savi) Parl.,{\i  Pl. Nov}. 61 (1842) ({\i Koeleria michelii} (Savi) Cosson & Durieu, {\i Vulpia michelii }(Savi) Reichenb.). Stems 7-30 cm, usually numerous, erect or geniculate-ascending, retrorsely puberulent. Leaves up to 5 cm, mostly near the base of the stem, puberulent; sheaths puberulent; ligules less than 1 mm, truncate, hairy on the abaxial surface. Panicle 2-7 cm. Spikelets 3-5 mm. Lower glume c. ¼ as long as upper, linear-lanceolate with subulate apex, the upper lanceolate, mucronate. Lemma linear-lanceolate. Anthers c. 0·5 mm.{\i  Dry, open habitats, usually near the sea. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. tenuicula} (Boiss. & Reuter) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 815 (1882) ({\i Vulpia tenuicula} Boiss. & Reuter) is said to be like {\b 1} but dwarf, the spikelets with subequal glumes and the lemma of the lower floret scarcely awned. It appears to have been collected once only, in C. Spain (near Aranjuez), and requires further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 86.      Triplachne}       Link       
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a dense, cylindrical to ovoid panicle. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 1 floret. Glumes subequal, membranous, longer than the floret, 1-veined. Lemma obscurely 5-veined, scarious, with a geniculate dorsal awn from near the base and the 2 outer veins excurrent at the truncate apex. Palea about as long as lemma.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. nitens} (Guss.) Link,{\i  Hort. Berol.}{\b  2}: 241 (1833). Stems 5-20(-30) cm, geniculate-ascending, usually branched below. Leaves 1-2(-5) cm × 2-3 mm, long-acute, scabrid; sheaths somewhat inflated; nodes blackish; ligule up to 3 mm, obtuse, scabrid. Panicle 1-5 cm. Spikelets 3·5-4 mm. Glumes lanceolate, acute, shiny, scabrid on the keel. Lemma 1·3-1·5 mm, ovate, denticulate at apex, with long appressed hairs; awn c. 4 mm, dark brown below, hyaline above; apical setae about as long as lemma. Anthers c. 0·5 mm.{\i  Sandy and rocky places near the sea. S. half of Iberian peninsula; islands of Mediterranean region.} Bl Cr Gr Hs Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 87.       Agrostis}        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials or annuals. Leaves flat or setaceous. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 1 floret. Glumes subequal to somewhat unequal, membranous, longer than the floret, usually 1-veined. Lemma membranous or scarious, truncate, 3- to 5-veined, often with the lateral veins excurrent, sometimes with a dorsal, geniculate awn. Palea shorter than the lemma, often very small. Rhachilla prolonged or not. Callus usually hairy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Hybrids are of rather frequent occurrence; they are usually intermediate between the parents and wholly or largely sterile. Some reproduce vegetatively and may occur in the absence of one or both parents. Probably the commonest of these are {\b 19} × {\b 20} and {\b 19} × {\b 22}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: S.O. Björkman,{\i  Symb. Bot. Upsal.}{\b  17}({\b 1}): 1-112 (1960). E. Paunero, {\i Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  7}: 561-644 (1948). W. R. Philipson, {\i Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 51}: 73-151 (1937). K.-G. Widen,{\i  Fl. Fenn.}{\b  5}: 1-209 (1971).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Palea more than 2/5 as long as lemma
\par
2 Rhizomes with more than 3 scale-leaves present; panicle
\par
  usually lax and not contracted after anthesis
\par
3 Ligules on non-flowering shoots usually shorter than 
\par
  wide; panicle-branches smooth or nearly so; clavate 
\par
  apex of pedicels smooth ............................................................. {\b 19. capillaris}
\par
3 Ligules on non-flowering shoots usually longer than 
\par
  wide; panicle-branches strongly aculeolate; clavate 
\par
  apex of pedicels aculeolate in lower part
\par
4 Leaves (1·5-)2-6(-8) mm wide, usually flat; panicle 
\par
  usually not contracted after anthesis ........................................... {\b 20. gigantea}
\par
4 Leaves 0·5-2 mm wide, usually involute; panicle 
\par
  contracted after anthesis .................................................................... {\b 21. salsa}
\par
2 Rhizomes absent or short and usually with not more 
\par
  than 3 scale-leaves
\par
5 Pedicels mostly about as long as spikelets; panicle 
\par
  usually contracted after anthesis
\par
6 Most panicle-branches branched 2-3 times and without 
\par
  spikelets in the lower 1/2; palea 1/2-3/5 as long as lemma ...... {\b 25. castellana}
\par
6 Most panicle-branches branched 1-2 times and with 
\par
  spikelets in the lower 1/2; palea 3/5-4/5 as long as lemma
\par
7 Lemma unawned or rarely with a short, subapical awn;
\par
  plant up to 100(-150) cm, stoloniferous .................................. {\b 22. stolonifera}
\par
7 Lemma usually awned in the lower 1/5-1/2; plant up to 
\par
  35 cm, not stoloniferous
\par
8 Panicle dense, spicate; all branches with spikelets in 
\par
  the lower 1/2; lemma awned in the lower 1/4-1/3 ............... {\b 23. congestiflora}
\par
8 Panicle lax at anthesis; lowest branches sometimes 
\par
  without spikelets in the lower 1/2; lemma awned in the
\par
  lower 1/5 .................................................................................. {\b 24. gracililaxa}
\par
5 Pedicels mostly at least twice as long as spikelets;
\par
  panicle very lax, the branches patent to erecto-patent
\par
  at and after anthesis
\par
9 Glumes entirely smooth
\par
10 Leaves involute when dry; ligule longer than wide, acute ..... {\b 16. delicatula}
\par
10 Leaves flat when dry; ligule as long as wide, truncate .............. {\b 17. durieui}
\par
9  Glumes aculeolate, at least on the keel
\par
11 Annual; ligule not more than 5 mm; glumes obtuse ................ {\b 15. nebulosa}
\par
11 Perennial; ligule up to 10 mm; glumes acute .............................. {\b 18. reuteri}
\par
1 Palea less than 1/5 as long as lemma
\par
12 Annual
\par
13 Panicle dense, with short, erect branches; glumes puberulent .... {\b 14. juressi}
\par
13 Panicle lax, with long, patent to erecto-patent branches;
\par
   glumes glabrous, but often aculeolate on the keel
\par
14 Spikelets less than 1 mm ........................................................ {\b 13. tenerrima}
\par
14 Spikelets more than 1 mm
\par
15 Leaves not more than 2 mm wide; lemma awned; anthers
\par
   more than ½ as long as lemma ................................................ {\b 12. pourretii}
\par
15 Leaves up to 7 mm wide; lemma unawned; anthers less 
\par
   than ½ as long as lemma ............................................................ {\b 10. clavata} 
\par
12 Perennial; panicle often with ± erect branches, at 
\par
   least after anthesis
\par

\par
232}
\par