{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 glumes usually villous, both awned, the upper with an awn 1·5-6 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  S. Europe.} Gr Hs It
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b setiglumis}: Panicle usually with 70-500 spikelets; glumes 3-4 mm; awn of upper glume 1·5-3 mm.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b duriensis} P. Silva,{\i  Agron. Lusit.}{\b  18}: 11 (1956): Panicle with c. 100 spikelets; glumes 5(-6) mm; awn of upper glume 4-6 mm. •{\i  N.E. Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. notarisii} Nyman, {\i Syll.} 411 (1855). Like {\b 1} but glumes awned, the awn of the upper at least 1·5 mm; lemma of upper floret with a long-exserted, geniculate awn. •{\i  N.W. Italy} ({\i near Genova}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. H. mollis} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1305 (1759). Rhizomatous perennial; stems 20-100(-150) cm, usually decumbent, bearded at the nodes. Leaves 3-12(-16) mm wide; sheaths glabrous or hairy; ligule 1-5 mm. Panicle 4-12(-20) × 1-5 cm, dense to rather lax, whitish to purplish. Spikelets 4-6(-7) mm. Glumes shortly ciliate on veins, scabrid, acute, the lower lanceolate, the upper ovate, the lateral veins usually nearer the keel than the margin. Lemma of upper floret with an exserted awn 3·5-5 mm, from just below the apex. 2n = 14, 28, 35 (42, 49).{\i  Grassland, scrub and open woods; calcifuge except in the north. Most of Europe, but only as a casual in parts of the north.} All except Bl Cr Is Rs (N, K, E) Sa Sb Si; doubtfully native in Az, and only naturalized in Fe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable. The pentaploid seems to be the commonest, at least in W. Europe; it is sterile but spreads vegetatively very effectively. The hybrid {\b 1} ×{\b  4} (2n = 21 ) occurs where the parents grow together; it closely resembles {\b 4} and is sterile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b mollis}: Stems not thickened and tuberous at base. Panicle usually rather lax and brownish or purplish.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b reuteri} (Boiss.) Tutin,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 363 (1978) ({\i H. reuteri} Boiss.): Stems thickened and tuberous at base. Panicle usually strict, whitish.{\i  Wet places. • N.W. & C. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. H. rigidus} Hochst. in Seub.,{\i  Fl. Azor.} 17 (1844). Like {\b 4} but leaves usually short, distichous, rigid, patent; sheaths and nodes glabrous; glumes very shortly ciliate on keel, the lateral veins of the upper glume usually nearer the margin than the keel. •{\i  Açores. }Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. H. gayanus} Boiss.,{\i  Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 637 (1842). Slender annual; stems 10-25 cm, with glabrous nodes. Leaves c. 1 mm wide, pubescent; sheaths pubescent, somewhat inflated; ligule c. 2 mm. Panicle 1·5-4 × 1-2 cm, lax, whitish. Spikelets 3-4 mm. Glumes long-acuminate, scabrid on the keel, glabrous, the upper 3-veined throughout its length. Lemma of upper floret with an exserted awn 3-4 mm, from just below the apex. 2n = 8.{\i  Mountain rocks. • N.W. & C. Spain, N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. H. grandiflorus} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus }119 (1852). Shortly rhizomatous perennial; stems up to 75 cm, glabrous. Leaves up to 7 mm wide, glabrous but sometimes ciliate; sheaths glabrous; ligule 1-2 mm. Panicle 5-15 × 1-3 cm, rather lax, greenish-brown. Spikelets 7-8 mm. Glumes ovate, long-acuminate, ciliolate on the veins, glabrous or sparsely puberulent, the upper 3-veined in the lower 1/3. Lemma of both florets with a geniculate awn about as long as the glumes, arising from near the middle.{\i  Dry, open woods. • S.W. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. H. caespitosus} Boiss.,{\i  Biblioth. Univ. Genève} ser. 2, {\b 13}: 410 (1838). Like {\b 7} but densely caespitose; stems usually 8-25 cm; leaves c. 1·5 mm wide, greyish-glaucous, velutinous; sheaths puberulent to subglabrous, inflated; panicle 1·5-2 × 0·7-1·5 cm; spikelets c. 4 mm; glumes acute; awn arising above the middle of the lemma. 2n = 14.{\i  Stony slopes,} 2900-3100{\i  m. • S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 84.     Corynephorus}     Beauv.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials or annuals. Leaves flat or setaceous. Inflorescence a lax panicle. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 2 florets. Glumes subequal, membranous, longer than the florets, the lower 1-veined, the upper 3-veined at base. Lemma 1-veined, scarious, with a dorsal awn from near the base; awn articulated near the middle, with a ring of short hairs at the joint, dark brown below, whitish above, clavate. Palea shorter than lemma. Rhachilla prolonged, with sericeous hairs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All species are found mainly on sandy soils.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perennial with numerous non-flowering shoots; hairs at 
\par
  base of lower floret not more than 1/6 as long as lemma ........... {\b 1. canescens} 
\par
1 Annual without non-flowering shoots; hairs at base of 
\par
  lower floret at least ¼ as long as lemma
\par
2 Panicle-branches with spikelets throughout most of 
\par
  their length; anthers 1·5 mm ................................................. {\b 4. macrantherus}
\par
2 Panicle-branches with spikelets in the distal ½ or 
\par
  less; anthers c.0·5 mm
\par
3 Spikelets c. 3 mm; awn usually as long as glumes,
\par
  scarcely enlarged at apex; hairs at base of floret 1/6-
\par
  1/4 as long as lemma ............................................................... {\b 3. fasciculatus}
\par
3 Spikelets c. 4 mm; awn distinctly shorter than glumes,
\par
  strongly enlarged at apex; hairs at base of floret ¼-½
\par
  as long as lemma ....................................................................... {\b 2. divaricatus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. canescens} (L.) Beauv., {\i Agrost. }90, 159 (1812) ({\i Weingaertneria canescens} (L.) Bernh.). Caespitose, very glaucous perennial; stems 10-60 cm, slender, often geniculate. Leaves involute, setaceous, rigid, scabrid; sheaths often purplish; nodes blackish; ligule 2-4 mm, acute. Panicle 1·5-10 cm; branches patent at anthesis, appressed before and after. Spikelets 3·5-4 mm. Glumes lanceolate, acute, slightly scabrid on the keel. Lemma scabrid; awn a little shorter than glumes, gradually enlarged at apex. Anthers c. 1·5 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Calcifuge. From England, S. Norway and Latvia southwards to S. Portugal, N. Italy and C. Ukraine, but very local in the eastern part of its range.} Au Be Br ?Co Cz Da Ga Ge Ho Hs Hu It Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. divaricatus} (Pourret) Breistr., {\i Procés-Verb. Soc. Dauph. Étud. Biol.} ({\i Grenoble}) ser. 3, 17: 3 (1950) ({\i C. articulatus} (Desf.) Beauv.). Glabrous annual, not or scarcely glaucous; stems 20-60 cm. Leaves convolute, scabrid; sheaths often purplish; nodes blackish; ligule up to 8 mm, subacute. Panicle up to 20 cm; branches patent or erecto-patent, branched above the middle and with spikelets in the distal half or less. Spikelets 3·5-4 mm. Glumes lanceolate, acute, scabrid on the keel. Lemma shortly 2-lobed at apex; lobes oblong, subobtuse; awn distinctly shorter than glumes, strongly enlarged at apex; hairs at base of floret ¼-½ as long as lemma. Anthers c. 0·5 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Mediterranean region, extending to N.W. Spain.} Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. fasciculatus} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 123 (1852). Like {\b 2} but spikelets c. 3 mm; lobes at apex of lemma setaceous; awn usually about as long as glumes, scarcely enlarged at apex; hairs
\par

\par
231}
\par