{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 16 Callus with hairs c. ½ as long as lemma ............................... {\b 9. agrostiflora} 
\par
16 Callus glabrous or with hairs not more than 1/5 as 
\par
   long as lemma
\par
17 Most basal leaves less than 0·3 mm wide ..................................... {\b 3. curtisii}
\par
17 Most basal leaves more than 0·5 mm wide
\par
18 Awn arising near the base of the lemma, always present;
\par
   spikelets at least 3 mm
\par
19 Panicle-branches smooth; lateral veins of lemma excurrent
\par
   for not more than 0·1 mm; callus glabrous or with hairs
\par
   not more than 0·1 mm .................................................................. {\b 7. rupestris}
\par
19 Panicle-branches aculeolate; lateral veins of lemma
\par
   excurrent for c. 0·3 mm; callus with hairs c. 0·3 mm
\par
20 Panicle-branches erecto-patent during and after anthesis;
\par
   spikelets dark, reddish-brown .......................................................... {\b 5. alpina}
\par
20 Panicle-branches ± erect; spikelets pale, yellowish
\par
   grey to silvery-violet ................................................................ {\b 6. schleicheri}
\par
18 Awn arising near the middle of the lemma, or sometimes
\par
   absent; spikelets usually less than 3 mm
\par
21 Anthers less than 1 mm and less than ½ as long as lemma
\par
22 Glumes subequal; panicle not more than 10 cm ....................... {\b 4. mertensii}
\par
22 Glumes unequal; panicle usually more than 10 cm ..................... {\b 11. scabra}
\par
21 Anthers at least 1 mm and more than ½ as long as lemma
\par
23 Basal leaves setaceous, very rigid ......................................... {\b 8. nevadensis}
\par
23 Basal leaves mostly flat, at least when young, soft
\par
24 Rhizomes absent; stolons often present ........................................ {\b 1. canina}
\par
24 Rhizomes present; stolons absent ............................................... {\b 2. vinealis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. canina} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 62 (1753) ({\i A. canina} subsp.{\i  fascicularis} (Curtis) Hyl.). Laxly caespitose perennial; stems 10-70 cm, smooth, often rooting at the nodes and producing short, leafy axillary stolons. Leaves usually 1-2 mm wide, flat or sometimes involute, widest at the base, soft, usually scabrid; ligule (1-)1·5-4·5 mm, acute to acuminate. Panicle 2-20 cm, lax; branches patent at anthesis, usually erect afterwards, more or less scabrid. Spikelets 1·6-2·5 mm, brownish. Glumes lanceolate, acute, subequal, somewhat scabrid on the keel. Lemma c. 2/3 as long as glumes, the lateral veins shortly excurrent; awn up to 4·5 mm, arising slightly below the middle, sometimes absent; callus with very short hairs. Palea very short. Anthers 1-1·5 mm, more than ½ as long as the lemma. 2n = 14 (16, 28). {\i Damp habitats. Most of Europe.} All except Az Bl Cr Rs (E) Sa Sb Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. vinealis} Schreber, {\i Spicil. Fl. Lips}. 47 (1771) ({\i A. canina} subsp.{\i  montana} (Hartman) Hartman, {\i A. tenuifolia} Bieb., non Curtis). Like {\b 1} but often densely caespitose; subterranean scaly rhizomes present; stolons absent; stems never producing short, leafy axillary shoots; ligule acute to obtuse; panicle often dense; anthers 1-1·8 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Usually in dry habitats. N.W. & C. Europe; perhaps elsewhere but distribution imperfectly known through confusion with}{\b  1}. Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Ho Hu Ju No Po Rm Rs (C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. curtisii} Kerguélen, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  123}: 318 (1976) ({\i A. setacea} Curtis, non Vill.). Densely caespitose perennial; stems 10-60 cm, scabrid near the nodes and below the panicle. Leaves 0·2-0·3 mm wide, grooved above, often greyish-green, scabridulous; ligule 2-4 mm, acute. Panicle 3-10 cm; branches short, erect before and after anthesis. Spikelets 3-4 mm. Glumes lanceolate, acute, scabridulous, the upper ¾ as long to nearly as long as the lower. Lemma c. 2/3 as long as the glumes, the marginal veins shortly excurrent; awn up to 5 mm, arising near the base; callus with hairs c. 0·5 mm. Palea very small. Anthers 1·5-2 mm, more than ½ as long as the lemma. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry, sandy or peaty heaths. • W. Europe, northwards to S. England.} Br Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. mertensii} Trin.,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  10}: 302 (1836) ({\i A. borealis} Hartman). Caespitose perennial; stems (5-)10-30(-50) cm, smooth. Leaves 1-3(-5) mm wide, more or less scabrid; ligule 1·2-3(-4) mm, obtuse or truncate. Panicle 3-10 cm; branches usually erecto-patent after anthesis. Spikelets 2·5-3·5 mm, dark brown or purplish. Glumes ovate-lanceolate, acute, smooth or ciliate on the keel, subequal. Lemma 2/3-3/4 as long as glumes, the marginal veins shortly excurrent; awn 3-4 mm, arising near the middle; callus with very short hairs. Palea very small. Anthers 0·5-0·8 mm, less than 2/5 as long as the lemma. 2n = 56.{\i  N. & W. Fennoscandia, arctic Russia, N. & C. Ural.} Fe No Rs (N, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. alpina} Scop., {\i Fl. Carn.} ed. 2,{\b 1}: 60 (1771). Caespitose, shortly rhizomatous perennial; stems 10-30 cm, smooth. Leaves of non-flowering shoots setaceous, scabrid; cauline leaves up to 1·5 mm wide, flat; ligule up to 4 mm, lanceolate, acute. Panicle 1-6 cm; branches erecto-patent during and after anthesis, aculeolate. Spikelets 3-5 mm, dark,reddish-brown. Glumes lanceolate, long-acute, the upper c. 2/3 as long as lower glume, the marginal veins shortly excurrent; awn c. 5 mm, arising near the base; callus with hairs c. 0·3 mm. Palea very small. Anthers 1·5-2 mm. 2n = 14. •{\i  Mountains of Europe, from the Alps and Carpathians southwards to C. Spain, N. Appennini and C. Jugoslavia.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. schleicheri} Jordan & Verlot in F. W. Schultz,{\i  Arch. Fl. Fr. Allem.} 347 (1855). Like {\b 5} but panicle-branches more or less erect; spikelets pale, yellowish-grey to silvery-violet. 2n = 42.{\i  Mountains of W.C. & S.W. Europe.} Au Ga Ge He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. rupestris} All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem.}{\b  2}: 237 (1785). Like {\b 5} but panicle branches smooth; glumes subequal; callus with hairs c. 0·1 mm, or glabrous. 2n = 14+0-3B, 21, 28.{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    The sterile hybrid between {\b 7} and {\b 9} ({\i A. rubra} auct. gall., non L.) occurs in the Alps.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. nevadensis} Boiss., {\i Elenchus} 87 (1838). Like {\b 5} but densely caespitose, not rhizomatous; stems up to 50 cm, scabrid; leaves very rigid, glaucous, all setaceous; ligule scabrid; spikelets 2-3 mm; glumes subequal, usually glabrous, aculeolate on the keel; awn arising near the middle; callus with very short hairs; anthers 1-1·5 mm. 2n = 42+0-10B. {\i Mountains of S.E. Spain, usually above }2000{\i  m.} Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. agrostiflora} (G. Beck) Rauschert,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 73}: 49 (1966) ({\i Calamagrostis agrostiflora} G. Beck, {\i C. tenella }(Schrader) Link, non Host). Caespitose, shortly rhizomatous perennial; stems 30-70 cm, smooth. Leaves flat, up to 5 mm wide, more or less scabrid, convolute when young; ligule up to 3 mm. Panicle up to 15 cm; branches usually short, erect to erecto-patent, scabrid-puberulent. Spikelets 2·5-3·5 mm. Glumes lanceolate, subequal, smooth. Lemma c. 2/3 as long as the lower glume, denticulate and unawned, or with an awn less than 1 mm arising near the apex; callus with hairs c. ½ as long as the lemma. Palea c. ¼ as long as lemma. Anthers c. 1·5 mm. 2n = 28. •{\i  Alps, N. Appennini,} ?{\i Pyrenees}. Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. clavata} Trin. in Sprengel,{\i  Neue Entdeck.}{\b  2}: 55 (1820). Usually annual; stems 30-70 cm, smooth. Leaves flat, up to 4(-7) mm wide, scabrid; ligule 1·5-3 mm. Panicle 8-25 cm; branches long, patent to erecto-patent, scabrid; pedicels clavate. Spikelets 1·6-2·8 mm. Glumes lanceolate, subequal, somewhat aculeolate on the keel. Lemma c. 2/3 as long as glumes, smooth, unawned; callus with few, very short hairs. Palea very small or absent. Anthers 0·3-0·5 mm and less than ½ as long as lemma. 2n = 42.{\i  Disturbed ground. Sweden, Finland, N. Russia.} Fe Rs (N, C) Su.
\par

\par
233}
\par