{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. boissieri} Orph., {\i Atti Congr. Int. Bot. Firenze}{\b  1874}: 31 (1876). Corm with underground stolons; tunic reddish-brown, papery. Leaves 2(-3), 6-22 cm × 2-12 mm at maturity, developing after anthesis, linear, obtuse, the dorsal surface occasionally pubescent at the base; margin sometimes ciliate. Flowers 1(-3); perianth-segments 20-35(-45) × 5-11 mm, bright lilac-pink, oblong-elliptical to linear-elliptical, obtuse to acute. Filaments up to 18 mm; anthers 4-8 mm, yellow; pollen yellow. Styles straight or slightly curved; stigmas punctiform. Capsule 15-20 mm, oblong. Flowering September to December.{\i  Stony ground and scrub. S. Greece}. Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. pinatziorum }Rech. fil., {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  80}: 433 (1961), described from S.C. Greece (Evvoia), is doubtfully distinct from {\b 7} and is said to differ only in its smaller, more slender flowers and slightly shorter anthers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. parlatoris} Orph.,{\i  Atti Congr. Int. Bot. Firenze}{\b  1874}: 32 (1876). Corm 2-4 × 1·5-2 cm, ovoid; tunic dark brown, coriaceous, with a long neck. Leaves (4-)6-8(-10), 7-10 cm × 1-4 mm, developing after anthesis, linear to narrowly linear, acute, glabrous. Flowers 1(-2); perianth-segments 8-25(-50) × 4-8(-12) mm, pinkish-purple to pale lilac, narrowly elliptical, obtuse. Filaments 10-25 mm; anthers 4-6 mm, yellow; pollen yellow. Styles straight; stigmas punctiform. Capsule 8-10 mm, ovoid-oblong. Flowering August to November. •{\i  S. Greece} ({\i Peloponnisos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. arenarium} Waldst. & Kit., {\i Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  2}: 195 (1805). Corm 2-2·5 × 1-1·5 cm, ovoid; tunic reddish- to dark brown, membranous or subcoriaceous, with a long neck. Leaves 3-5, 8-20 cm × 4-17 mm, developing after anthesis, ligulate to linear-lanceolate, obtuse, glabrous. Flowers 1-4; perianth-segments 25-40 × 3-10 mm, purplish-pink, oblong to narrowly elliptical, obtuse to acute. Filaments 4-10(-16) mm; anthers 4-6 mm, yellow; pollen yellow. Styles straight; stigmas punctiform. Capsule 15-20(-30) mm, oblong-ovoid. Flowering September to October. 2n = 36,54.{\i  Sandy fields. • E.C.Europe}. Cz Hu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. alpinum} DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  3}: 195 (1805). Corm 1-2·5 × 1-1·5 cm, subglobose; tunic membranous or subcoriaceous, reddish-brown, with a long neck. Leaves 2(-3), 8-12(-15) cm × 2-10(-14) mm, developing after anthesis, ligulate to linear-lanceolate, obtuse to subacute, glabrous. Flowers 1(-3); perianth-segments 17-30 × 4-6(-10) mm, purplish-pink (rarely white), oblong to narrowly elliptical, obtuse. Filaments 2-6(-9) mm; anthers 2-3 mm, yellow; pollen yellow. Styles straight; stigmas punctiform. Capsule 15-20 mm, oblong-elliptical. Flowering August to September. 2n = 54, 56.{\i  Mountain meadows. S. Alps, Appennini, mountains of Corse, Sardegna and Sicilia.} Co Ga He It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C. pieperanum} Markgraf, {\i Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) 328 (1931), described from N.C. Albania (Deja), is like {\b 10} but has decurrent stigmas and is twice as large in all its parts.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Hybrids between {\b 10} and {\b 14} have been reported from the French Alps with chromosome counts of 2n = 46, 47. They are said to be intermediate in characters of perianth-segments, anthers and stigmas.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. corsicum} Baker,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 17}: 431 (1879). Corm up to 3 × 2 cm, ovoid to subglobose; tunic brown, membranous, with a long neck. Leaves 3-4, up to 8 cm × 3-9(-18) mm, developing after anthesis, linear-lanceolate, obtuse, glabrous. Flowers 1-2(-3); perianth-segments 20-27(-40) × 2-5 mm, pink to lilac-pink, linear to oblong-elliptical, obtuse. Filaments 2-4(-8) mm; anthers 2-5 mm, yellow; pollen yellow. Styles straight, shortly curved at the apex; stigma shortly decurrent. Capsule c. 30 mm, oblong. Flowering September. •{\i  S. Corse.} Co ?Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. micranthum} Boiss., {\i Fl. Or.}{\b  5}: 162 (1882). Corm up to 1·5 × 1 cm, ovoid to subglobose; tunic reddish-brown, membranous, with a short neck. Leaves (2)3, 10-15(-20) cm × 3-10 mm, developing after anthesis, linear, obtuse, glabrous. Flowers 1-2 (rarely more); perianth-segments 10-20(-30) × 3-4(-10) mm, pale pink to white, obtuse. Filaments up to 9 mm; anthers 3-4 mm, yellow; pollen yellow. Styles straight, shortly curved at the apex; stigmas decurrent. Capsule c. 25 mm, ovoid-oblong. Flowering September to October. {\i Dry, rocky places. Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i N. of Istanbul}). Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Two poorly known taxa perhaps belong here:{\b  C. macedonicum} Kosanin, {\i Glas Srpske Kray. Akad.}{\b  85}: 232 (1911), described from calcareous alpine pastures over 2000 m. in N.W. Macedonia (Jakupica), is said to flower in June; it has 2n = 54. Material of flowering specimens has sometimes been gathered with the previous season's foliage and fruits, which may account for some authors relating it to {\i C. davidovii} Stefanov and to {\i C. szovitsii} Fischer & C. A. Meyer from the Caucasus, which flower with leaves partially developed. {\i C. macedonicum} clearly lacks foliage at anthesis, and differs from {\b 12} in its punctiform stigma and wider, sometimes oblanceolate leaves. {\b C. borisii} Stefanov, {\i Sborn. Balg. Akad. Nauk.}{\b  22}: 63 (1926) described from calcareous soils in S. Bulgaria (Rodopi Pl.), flowers in August and differs from {\b 12} only in the slightly larger flowers and proportionately wider, more or less glaucous leaves. Further collections are required before their status can be determined.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. C. umbrosum} Steven, {\i Nouv. Mém. Soc. Nat. Moscou }{\b 1}: 264 (1829). Corm 1·5-2·5 × 1-1·5 cm, ovoid to subglobose; tunic dark brown, subcoriaceous to coriaceous, with a long neck. Leaves 3-5, 8-12 cm × 13-20 mm, developing after anthesis, ligulate, obtuse, glabrous. Flowers (1-)2-6; perianth-segments 16-30 × 2-6 mm, linear-elliptical, obtuse. Filaments up to 6 mm; anthers 2-3 mm, yellow; pollen yellow. Styles straight, shortly curved at apex; stigmas shortly decurrent. Capsule up to 20 mm, elliptic-oblong. Flowering August to September. {\i Woods and wet meadows. Krym}. Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus, Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. laetum} Steven, {\i op. cit.} 262 (1829), from S.E. Russia, differs from {\b 13} chiefly in its shortly decurrent stigmas, but in the size of its perianth-segments and in its leaf-characters it approaches {\b 14. C. fominii} Bordzil., {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  40}: 373 (1936), from S.W. Ukraine and S.E. Romania, is said to differ from {\b 13} in its oblong to oblong-ovoid corms and slightly larger flowers. The status of both these taxa requires further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 14-18}). {\b C. autumnale} group. Corm 2·5-4(-6) × 2-3(-4) cm, ovoid to subglobose, tunic dark brown, coriaceous or membranous, with a long neck. Leaves developing after anthesis, obtuse to subacute, glabrous. Flowers 1-6(-10); perianth-segments obtuse to acute, pinkish- to lilac-purple, rarely white, sometimes tessellated, narrowly elliptical to oblong-elliptical. Filaments 10-16 mm; anthers 5-8 mm; pollen yellow. Styles curved at apex; stigmas long-decurrent. Capsule (20-)30-60 mm, oblong.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A confusing group, poorly understood and in need of critical study over the whole range.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Anthers blackish-purple to pale purplish-pink, rarely 
\par
  yellow; flowers lightly tessellated ............................................ {\b 16. lusitanum} 
\par
1 Anthers yellow; flowers not or very obscurely tessellated
\par

\par
23}
\par