{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: H. Teppner,{\i  Phyton} ({\i Austria}) {\b 13}: 305-312 (1969); {\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 118}: 280-292 (1970).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perennial, with non-flowering shoots at anthesis  
\par
2 Leaves 6-15 mm wide; stems often tuberous at base;
\par
  spikelets 10-13 mm ....................................................................... {\b 3. amarum}
\par
2 Leaves 2-8 mm wide; stems not tuberous at base;
\par
  spikelets 5·5-9 mm  
\par
3 Stems leafless for some distance below the inflorescence
\par
  at anthesis; spikelets 7-9 mm ...................................................... {\b 1. odoratum}
\par
3 Stems leafy almost up to the inflorescence;
\par
   spikelets 5·5-6 mm ................................................................. {\b 2. pauciflorum}
\par
1 Annual, without non-flowering shoots at anthesis  
\par
4 Spikelets 10-12 mm ........................................................................ {\b 6. gracile}
\par
4 Spikelets (4-)6-8 mm  
\par
5 Inflorescence lax, usually lobed, tapering at base; awn of 
\par
  upper sterile floret usually exserted; lower sterile 
\par
  lemma  widened conspicuously near apex or middle .................. {\b 4. aristatum}
\par
5 Inflorescence dense, unlobed, truncate at base; awn of
\par
  upper sterile floret not exserted; lower sterile lemma
\par
  parallel-sided .................................................................................. {\b 5. ovatum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. odoratum} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }28 (1753). Caespitose perennial (10-)15-50(-100) cm. Leaves 2-8 mm wide, glabrous to sparsely hairy; sheaths smooth, glabrous or pubescent; ligule up to c. 4 mm, truncate. Inflorescence 1-9 cm, cylindrical, dense, very rarely with obvious branches. Spikelets 7-9 mm. Glumes hyaline, with green keel, the upper exceeding the florets and enfolding them. Lemma of sterile florets with brown, sericeous hairs in the lower part; awn of upper sterile floret about as long as or slightly longer than the upper glume. Lemma of fertile floret suborbicular. 2n = 10, 20.{\i  Throughout Europe.} All except Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Diploids, known as {\b A. alpinum} Á. & D. Löve, {\i Rep. Dept. Agric. Univ. Inst. Appl. Sci.} ({\i Reykjavik}) ser. B.,{\b  3}: 105 (1948), occur mainly in the N. part of the range of the species and on high mountains. In Scandinavia they can often be recognized by the glabrous leaves and glumes, but in the Alps no clear morphological distinction between diploids and tetraploids appears to exist. It therefore seems impossible to recognize subspecies within {\i A. odoratum.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. pauciflorum} Adamovic,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math. Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 74}: 116 (1904). Like {\b 1} but stems not more than 10 cm, leafy nearly up to the inflorescence; leaves 3-3·5 mm wide; inflorescence 0·8-1·2 cm; spikelets 5·5-6 mm. • {\i S. Jugoslavia} ({\i Babuna Planina}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   An inadequately known plant which may, perhaps, be an extreme variant of {\b 1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. amarum} Brot.,{\i  Phyt. Lusit.} n. 3 (1800). Like {\b 1} but stems up to 90 cm, often tuberous at base; leaves 6-15 mm wide, glabrous but ciliate; spikelets 10-13 mm; awn of upper sterile floret long-exserted. 2n = 90.{\i  Damp places. • N.W. Spain, N. & C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. aristatum} Boiss.,{\i  Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 638 (1842). Annual. Stems 5-60 cm, often freely branched. Leaves 1-5 mm wide, glabrous or hairy, scabrid; sheaths smooth, often somewhat inflated; ligule 1-2 mm, acute. Inflorescence 1-4 cm, usually lax and lobed, tapering at base. Spikelets (4-)6-7 mm, usually 10 or more. Glumes hyaline, with green keel, the upper exceeding the florets and enfolding them. Lemma of sterile florets with sericeous hairs in lower part; awn of upper sterile floret somewhat longer than the floret. Lemma of fertile floret suborbicular, glabrous.{\i  Dry, open habitats. S. Europe; a frequent casual further north, mainly as a cornfield weed, and locally naturalized.} Al Az Bl Bu Co Ga Hs It Ju Lu Sa [Be Br Da Ge Ho Po Rs (B)].  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b aristatum}: Awn long-exserted; lower sterile lemma widest near the denticulate and more or less deeply 2-fid apex. 2n = 10+0-2B.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.  
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b macranthum} Valdés, {\i Lagascalia}{\b  3}: 130 (1973): Awn not or scarcely exserted; lower sterile lemma widest at or below the middle, with denticulate but scarcely 2-fid apex. 2n = 10+0-1B.{\i  S.W. Spain; Italy.}  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. ovatum} Lag.,{\i  Elench. Hort. Matrit.} 2 (1816). Like {\b 4} but stems usually simple; leaves usually 5-10 mm wide; inflorescence dense, ovoid-cylindrical, truncate at base, spikelets 7-8·5 mm; awn of upper sterile floret not exserted. 2n = 10.{\i  Dry, open habitats. Mediterranean region.} Co Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si Tu.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. gracile} Biv.,{\i  Stirp. Rar. Sic. Descr.}{\b  1}: t. 1, fig. 1 (1813). Like {\b 4} but stems simple or branched near the base; inflorescence lax, usually with 4-8 spikelets; spikelets 10-12 mm; awn of upper sterile floret nearly twice as long as spikelet.{\i  Dry, open habitats. C. & E. Mediterranean region}. Al Cr Gr It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 83.        Holcus}       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials or annuals. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 2-3 florets, the lower hermaphrodite, the upper usually male. Glumes subequal, membranous, longer than the florets, strongly keeled, the lower 1-veined, the upper 3-veined. Lemma obscurely 3- to 5-veined, coriaceous, shiny, the upper or both usually with a dorsal awn. Palea membranous, slightly shorter than the lemma. Rhachilla shortly prolonged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lemma of both florets awned 
\par
2 Stem usually 60-70 cm; spikelets 7-8 mm ............................. {\b 7. grandiflorus}
\par
2 Stem usually 8-25 cm; spikelets c. 4 mm ................................ {\b 8. caespitosus}
\par
1 Lemma of lower floret not awned 
\par
3 Awn of lemma uncinate or recurved 
\par
4 Perennial; awn of lemma not exserted; glumes not or 
\par
  very shortly awned ......................................................................... {\b 1. nanatus}
\par
4 Annual; awn of lemma exserted; glumes awned ...................... {\b 2. setiglumis} 
\par
3 Awn of lemma not uncinate or recurved 
\par
5 Glumes awned, the upper with an awn at least 1·5 mm ............... {\b 3. notarisii}
\par
5 Glumes unawned 
\par
6 Nodes bearded ................................................................................. {\b 4. mollis}
\par
6 Nodes glabrous   
\par
7 Perennial; glumes 4-5 mm .............................................................. {\b 5. rigidus} 
\par
7 Annual; glumes 7-8 mm ............................................................... {\b 6. gayanus} 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. lanatus} L.{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1048 (1753). Softly hairy caespitose perennial, often short-lived; stems 20-100 cm, erect or ascending. Leaves 3-10 mm wide; ligule 1-4 mm. Panicle 3-20 × 1-8 cm, rather lax to very dense, whitish to dark purple. Spikelets 4-6 mm. Glumes lanceolate, acute, ciliate on keel and veins, scabrid or puberulent to villous on the surface, the upper usually somewhat longer and wider than the lower, often with an awn up to 1 mm. Lemma of upper floret with a strongly hooked awn c. 2 mm from just below the apex. 2n = 14+0-2B.{\i  Europe, except the north-east and extreme north, where it is only casual}. All except Rs (N) Sb; naturalized in Fe and Is.     
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. setiglumis} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Diagn. Pl. Nov. Hisp.} 27 (1842) ({\i H. setosus} Trin.). Like {\b 1} but annual; leaves 1-4 mm wide, 
\par

\par
230}
\par