{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 keel, minutely scabrid elsewhere. Lemma irregularly truncate at apex; awn slightly bent and twisted, about as long as lemma, arising from lower 1/3 of lemma. Callus-hairs about as long as lemma. 2n = 28, 42-112.{\i  Tundra, dry heaths and woods. N. Europe, southwards to C. Ural and to} c. 62°{\i  N. in Norway}. Fe No Rs (N, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. arundinacea} (L.) Roth,{\i  Tent. Fl. Germ.}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 89 (1789). Caespitose, with short rhizomes; stems 60-150 cm, erect, rather stout, with 2-3 nodes, smooth. Leaves up to 50 cm × 4-12 mm, flat, hairy at junction of lamina and sheath, the upper surface scabrid, with widely spaced veins; ligule 2-4 mm, obtuse or truncate. Panicle 10-25 × up to 5 cm, often rather dense; branches scabrid or weakly aculeolate. Spikelets 4-6 mm, light brown to purplish. Glumes subequal, lanceolate, scabridulous. Lemma 2-fid at apex; awn bent and twisted, about twice as long as and arising from near base of lemma. Callus-hairs not more than ½ as long as lemma. 2n = 28+0-2B.{\i  Open woods and marshes. Most of Europe except the islands, the extreme north and much of the south-west.} Au Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C,W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. varia} (Schrader) Host,{\i  Gram. Austr.}{\b  4}: 27 (1809) ({\i C. montana} Host). Caespitose, with short rhizomes; stems 30-120 cm, rather slender, with 3 nodes, smooth. Leaves 10-25 cm × 4-9 mm, flat, rarely hairy at junction of sheath and lamina, the upper surface smooth, with scarcely raised veins; ligule 2-4 mm, obtuse, lacerate at apex. Panicle 5-20 cm, rather dense; branches weakly scabrid. Spikelets 4-6 mm, golden to reddish-brown. Glumes subequal, lanceolate, acuminate, more or less smooth and shining, smooth or sometimes weakly aculeolate on keel. Lemma 2-fid at apex; awn twisted and bent, up to 1½ times as long as lemma, arising from near base. Callus-hairs ½-¾ as long as lemma. Anthers with thecae separating at maturity; pollen viable.{\i  Open woods and mountain grassland; somewhat calcicole. C. & S. Europe; Gotland.} Au †Be Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W) Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b varia}: Spikelets 4-5 mm. Callus-hairs nearly as long as lemma. 2n = 28.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except Corse}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b corsica} (Hackel) Rouy,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  14}: 88 (1913): Spikelets 5-6 mm. Callus-hairs half as long as lemma. 2n = 28. •{\i  Corse}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. C. chalybaea} (Laest.) Fries in Hartman,{\i  Handb. Skand. Fl.} ed. 4, 26 (1843). Caespitose, with short rhizomes; stems 60-150 cm, rather slender, usually with 4 nodes, weakly scabrid beneath panicle, smooth elsewhere. Leaves 20-30 cm × 5-12 mm, flat, hairy at junction of sheath and lamina, the upper surface scabrid; veins widely spaced, not prominent; ligule 3-5 mm, lacerate. Panicle 10-25 cm; branches rather short, aculeolate. Spikelets 3-4 mm, purplish. Glumes subequal, ovate-lanceolate, strongly scabrid and aculeolate on keel. Lemma 2-fid at apex; awn twisted and bent, about as long as lemma, arising from near base. Callus-hairs c. ¾ as long as lemma. Anthers with thecae not separating at maturity; pollen absent. 2n = 42. {\i Open woods and marshes. C. Sweden and C. Norway; N. Russia.} No Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sometimes considered to be the hybrid{\b  4} × {\b 14}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. C. obtusata} Trin.,{\i  Gram. Unifl.} 225 (1824). Like {\b 13} but rhizome long, branched; leaves up to 7 mm wide, with long hairs on the upper surface; glumes weakly scabrid; lemma irregularly toothed at apex; callus-hairs up to ½ as long as lemma.{\i  N. & E. Russia.} Rs (N, C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 92.       Chaetopogon}      Janchen
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Chaeturus} Link, non Willd.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves setaceous or flat. Inflorescence a narrow panicle. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 1 floret. Glumes subequal, the lower 1-veined, awned, longer than the lemma, the upper 3-veined, unawned. Lemma hyaline, 1-veined. Palea c. ½ as long as lemma, without apparent veins.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. fasciculatus} (Link) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan. }{\b 3}: 335 (1933). Stems up to 20 cm, slender, ascending. Leaves up to 1 mm wide; ligule up to 5 mm, acute. Panicle 0·5-12 cm. Spikelets c. 3 mm (excl. awn), often in groups of 2-3; pedicels short, stout. Glumes lanceolate-subulate, scabrid; awn 1-3 times as long as glume. Lemma somewhat shorter than the glumes. 2n = 14. {\i Sandy places. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Hs It Ju Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Subsp.{\b  prostratus} (Hackel & Lange) Laínz,{\i  Anal. Inst. Forest. Invest. Exper.} ({\i Madrid}){\b  10}: 327 (1966) ({\i Chaeturus prostratus} Hackel & Lange), from Portugal and N.W. Spain, is a variant with stems up to 5 cm and awns about as long as the glumes, which does not seem to be clearly distinguishable from {\b 1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 93.         Phleum}         L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.J. Humphries. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a dense spike-like, ovoid or cylindrical panicle. Spikelets strongly compressed laterally, with 1 floret. Glumes membranous, subequal, longer than the lemma, keeled, shortly awned, 3-veined, with the margins overlapping along most of their length. Lemma membranous, truncate or obtuse, 1- to 7-veined, unawned, glabrous to densely ciliate. Palea equalling or almost equalling the lemma, ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, 2-veined. Stamens 2-3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Literature: H. Nordenskiöld, {\i Acta Agric. Suec.}{\b  1}: 1-138 (1945). H. Horn af Rantzien,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1946}: 364-386 (1946).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Annual, without non-flowering shoots 
\par
2 Glumes gradually tapered to apex
\par
3 Spikelets oblong-ovate; glumes semi-elliptical, often 
\par
  over-lapping at apex; keel usually glabrous ............................. {\b 11. subulatum}
\par
3 Spikelets oblong-lanceolate; glumes linear-lanceolate,
\par
  parallel or diverging at apex; keel densely ciliate
\par
4 Panicle narrowed at base; anthers 0·3-1·2 mm .......................... {\b 8. arenarium}
\par
4 Panicle cylindrical; anthers 1·5-2 mm ......................................... {\b 9. graecum}
\par
2 Glumes truncate at apex
\par
5 Stamens 2; lemma 1-veined .................................................... {\b 10. crypsoides}
\par
5 Stamens 3; lemma 5- to 7-veined
\par
6 Glumes flat at apex, with straight keel; awns 2·5-7 mm ........... {\b 3. echinatum}
\par
6 Glumes swollen towards apex, with curved keel; awns
\par
  0·3-0·6 mm .............................................................................. {\b 7. paniculatum}
\par
1 Perennial, with non-flowering shoots at anthesis 
\par
7 Glumes gradually tapered at apex
\par
8 Glumes scabrid or shortly ciliate on the keel;
\par
  spikelets 2-3·5(-3·7) mm ............................................................. {\b 4. phleoides}
\par
8 Glumes long-ciliate on the keel; spikelets 3·5-6(-10) mm
\par
9 Glumes pubescent on the surface; panicle lax and often
\par
  interrupted below .......................................................................... {\b 6. hirsutum}
\par
9 Glumes hairy only on the keel; panicle compact ...................... {\b 5. montanum} 
\par
7 Glumes truncate or obliquely tapered at apex
\par
10 Panicle broadly cylindrical or ovoid; awns usually 
\par
   more than 2 mm ............................................................................ {\b 2. alpinum}
\par
10 Panicle usually cylindrical; awns 2 mm or less
\par

\par
239}
\par