{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 to 6 mm; panicle up to 5(-7) cm, often purple-tinged; glumes 2-fid, long-ciliate; lemma unawned. 2n = 14, 28.{\i  Damp places, especially near the sea. Mediterranean region and W. Europe, northwards to N.W. France; S.E. Russia and W. Kazakhstan.} Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b maritimus}: Callus about as long as wide; glumes not strongly indurate at base at maturity; hairs on the back of the glumes towards the base not strongly inflated, acute.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b subspathaceus} (Req.) Bonnier & Layens,{\i  Fl. Fr.} 356 (1894) ({\i P. subspathaceus} Req.): Callus 3-4 times as long as wide; glumes strongly indurate at base at maturity; hairs on the back of the glumes towards the base strongly inflated, subobtuse. 2n = 14.{\i  Mediterranean region, mainly on the islands}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. viridis} (Gouan) Breistr., {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  110} (Sess. Extr.): 56 (1966) ({\i P. semiverticillatus} (Forskål) Hyl.). Stoloniferous perennial; stems up to 100 cm, smooth. Leaves scabrid on both surfaces; ligule up to 5 mm. Panicle up to 15 cm, pyramidal, lobed. Spikelets 2-2·5 mm. Glumes obtuse, unawned, scabrid on the back. Lemma c. 1 mm, denticulate, unawned. Anthers 0·5-0·7 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Damp places. S. Europe; casual and sometimes naturalized further north.} Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b P. adscendens} Guss. ex Bertol.,{\i  Fl. Ital.}{\b  2}: 777 (1836), a rare plant described from S. Italy (near Napoli) and recently found in Kriti, is the hybrid {\b 1} × {\b 3}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ×{\b  Agropogon}      P. Fourn.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Agrostis} × {\i Polypogon})
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\b  Polypogon} but spikelets persistent; glumes acute, not emarginate, with an apical awn. Sterile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1}.× {\b A. littoralis} (Sm.) C.E.Hubbard,{\i  Jour. Ecol.}{\b  33}: 333 (1946) ({\i Polypogon littoralis} Sm.; {\i Agrostis stolonifera} × {\i Polypogon monspeliensis}). Perennial; stems 8-50 cm. Leaves scabrid; ligule up to 5 mm, obtuse. Panicle up to 12 cm, rather dense, usually lobed. Spikelets 2-3 mm. Glumes acute, not emarginate, scabrid-hairy; awn about as long as the glume. Lemma c. 1·5 mm, denticulate and with an awn arising just below the apex. Anthers c. 1 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Damp, often saline habitats. S. & W. Europe, northwards to England}. Br Ga ?Gr Hs It Rm Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 90.        Ammophila}        Host
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subglabrous, rhizomatous perennials. Leaves convolute. Inflorescence a dense, cylindrical panicle. Spikelets strongly compressed laterally, with 1 floret. Glumes equalling or exceeding the lemma, with wide scarious margin, keeled, persistent, the lower 1-, the upper 3-veined. Lemma linear-lanceolate, coriaceous, 3- to 5-veined, shortly 2-fid at apex, with very short, stout subterminal awn and with hairs less than ½ as long as lemma at base. Palea about as long as lemma, subcoriaceous, the 2 keels close together. Rhachilla prolonged, disarticulating above the glumes. Ovary glabrous; styles short.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. arenaria} (L.) Link, {\i Hort. Berol.}{\b  1}: 105 (1827). Stems 60-120 cm, stout; rhizome far-creeping. Leaves up to c. 5 mm wide, rigid, pungent, strongly ribbed and puberulent above, smooth and shiny beneath; sheaths ribbed; ligule 10-30 mm, deeply 2-fid. Panicle 7-20(-30) cm, erect, stramineous. Spikelets 12-14 mm. Glumes somewhat unequal, linear-lanceolate. Lemma 10-14 mm. 2n = 14, 28, 56. {\i Sand-dunes. Coasts of Europe, northwards to} c. 62°{\i  N. in Norway}. Al Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Da Fa *Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b arenaria}: Glumes distinctly exceeding lemma. Hairs at base of lemma c. 2 mm.{\i  N. & W. Europe, southwards to N.W. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b arundinacea} H. Lindb. fil., {\i Acta Soc. Sci. Fenn}. ser. nov., B,{\b  1}({\b 2}): 10 (1932) ({\i Psamma australis} Mabille, {\i A. arenaria }var.{\i  australis} (Mabille) Hayek): Glumes about equalling lemma. Hairs at base of lemma 4-5 mm.{\i  Coasts of S. Europe, from Romania to N. Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  × {\b Ammocalamagrostis}     P. Fourn.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Ammophila} × {\i Calamagrostis})
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Ammophila} but leaves more or less flat in the living state; panicle less dense; lemma with a slender awn up to 2 mm; hairs at base of lemma from half as long to as long as lemma. Sterile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: M.Westergaard, {\i Kong. Danske Vid. Selsk. Biol. Skr.}{\b  2}({\b 4}): 1-66 (1943).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1}. × {\b A. baltica} (Flügge ex Schrader) P. Fourn., {\i Monde Pl.}{\b  35}: 28 (1934) ({\i Ammophila arenaria} × {\i Calamagrostis epigejos}). Stems usually 74-130 cm, stout; rhizome far-creeping. Leaves up to c. 6 mm wide, ribbed on both surfaces, puberulent above; sheaths weakly ribbed; ligule 5-15 mm, shallowly lobed. Panicle 17-22 cm, erect, purplish. Spikelets 12-14 mm. Glumes somewhat unequal, linear-lanceolate, distinctly longer than lemma. Lemma 4·5-9 mm. Palea somewhat shorter than to about as long as lemma. 2n = 28, 42.{\i  Usually on old sand-dunes. Coasts of the Baltic and North Seas, from E. England to Estonia, northwards to} c. 59° 30';{\i  isolated stations in N. France and N.W. Scotland.} Br Da Ga Ge Ho No Po Rs (B) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\i Ammophila arenaria} × {\i Calamagrostis arundinacea} was known from one locality in Sweden, where it is now extinct.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 91.      Calamagrostis}    Adanson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By G.C.S. Clarke. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Leaves flat or convolute; ligule membranous. Spikelets narrow, with 1 floret, in dense to rather lax panicles. Lemma membranous, 3- to 5-veined, shorter than the glumes, surrounded by usually long callus-hairs, with an awn arising from the back or apex. Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Interspecific hybridization is common in this genus and large numbers of supposed hybrids have been recognized, using morphological characters. There seem to be few sterility barriers between the amphimictic species. Interspecific hybridization and subsequent polyploidy has apparently given rise to a number of apomictic species, notably {\b 5}, {\b 10} and{\b  13}. Because of this it is sometimes difficult to classify the material into clear-cut species, and although the cytology of this genus and its effects on speciation have been the subject of a series of papers by Nygren there is still much to be learnt about the status of many of the morphological variants which are traditionally recognized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: A. Nygren,{\i  Hereditas}{\b  32}: 131-262 (1946);{\i  Symb. Bot. Upsal.}{\b  17}({\b 3}): 1-105 (1962).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lemma scabridulous, longer than callus-hairs
\par
2 Palea about 2/3 as long as lemma; awn often slender, straight
\par
3 Glumes smooth or weakly scabrid on keel only ............................. {\b 8. holmii}
\par
3 Glumes aculeolate on keel, scabrid elsewhere
\par

\par
236}
\par