{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. scabra} Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  1}: 370 (1797) ({\i A. hyemalis} auct., non (Walter) Britton, Sterns & Poggenb.). Like {\b 10} but perennial; spikelets 2-3·5 mm; glumes unequal; lemma scabrid, often with a dorsal awn; anthers up to 0·8 mm.{\i  Naturalized in C. Europe and a frequent casual elsewhere.} [Au Ge.] ({\i Greenland, North America, N.E. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. pourretii} Willd., {\i Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin Mag.}{\b  2}: 290 (1808) ({\i A. pallida }DC., non With.). Annual; stems 10-50 cm, smooth. Leaves flat, up to 2 mm wide, scabrid; ligule 1·5-4 mm. Panicle up to 13 cm; branches erecto-patent to patent during and after anthesis, aculeolate. Spikelets 2-2·5 mm, usually greenish. Glumes lanceolate, the lower c. 1 mm longer than the upper, scabrid on the keel. Lemma less than ½ as long as the lower glume, with long-excurrent lateral veins; awn c. 3 mm, arising above the middle; callus with very short hairs. Palea very small. Anthers c. 1 mm and more than ½ as long as lemma. 2n = 14+0-2B, 16, 18, 19, 21. {\i W. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. A. tenerrima} Trin.,{\i  Gram. Unifl.} 205 (1824) ({\i A. elegans} Thore ex Loisel., non (Walter) Salisb.). Annual; stems 10-30 cm, scabrid. Leaves flat, up to 1·5 mm wide, scabrid; ligule c. 2 mm, obtuse to truncate. Panicle up to 15 cm; branches 2-5 at each node, slender, patent, scabridulous, the pedicels longer than the spikelets, clavate, flexuous, almost smooth. Spikelets c. 0·8 mm, purplish. Glumes ovate-lanceolate, subobtuse, subequal, scabrid on the keel. Lemma a little shorter than the glumes, denticulate, unawned; callus glabrous. Palea very small. Anthers c. 0·3 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. litigans} Steudel, {\i Syn. Pl. Glum.}{\b  1}: 162 (1854), described from S. Portugal (Serra da Arrabida), is probably a variant of {\b 13}. It appears to have been collected once only.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. juressi} Link in Schrader,{\i  Jour. für die Bot.}{\b  1799}({\b 2}): 312 (1800). Annual; stems 40-80 cm, soft, smooth. Leaves flat, 3-8 mm wide, long-acute, smooth, except at margin; ligule c. 0·5 mm, truncate. Panicle 3-13 cm, dense, lobed; branches short, erect, hairy, with crowded spikelets for most of their length, the pedicels much shorter than the spikelets, not clavate. Spikelets c. 3 mm, green. Glumes lanceolate, subobtuse, subequal, puberulent. Lemma little shorter than the glumes, frequently mucronate or shortly awned; callus glabrous. Palea very small. Anthers c. 1 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Damp, shady places. Portugal, W. Spain. }Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. A. nebulosa} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Nov. Hisp.} 26 (1842). Annual; stems 6-40(-80) cm, smooth. Leaves flat, 1-4 mm wide, aculeolate on margin and veins; ligule 2-5 mm. Panicle 3-30 cm, very lax; branches 10 or more at each node, slender, erecto-patent at and after anthesis, aculeolate, the pedicels much longer than the spikelets, clavate. Spikelets c. 1·5 mm usually purplish. Glumes lanceolate, obtuse, subequal, denticulate at apex, aculeolate at least on the keel. Lemma usually 1/4-1/3 as long as glumes, denticulate, unawned or rarely with a short awn from near the base; callus very small, glabrous. Palea about as long as lemma. Anthers c. 1 mm.{\i  Dry, open habitats. C., E. & S. Spain, S.E. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. A. delicatula} Pourret ex Lapeyr., {\i Hist. Abr. Pyr., Suppl. }12 (1818) ({\i A. truncatula} Parl.). Caespitose perennial; stems 20-40 cm. Leaves involute, at least when dry, glaucous; ligule longer than wide, acute. Panicle with smooth, patent branches, the pedicels longer than the spikelets, the clavate portion twice as long as wide. Spikelets c. 1·2 mm. Glumes lanceolate, obtuse, subequal, entirely smooth. Lemma c. 2/5 as long as glumes, with 5 teeth not more than 1/8 as long as the lemma, unawned. Palea c. ½ as long as lemma. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry places. S.W. Europe,from the Pyrenees to E.C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. A. durieui} Boiss. & Reuter ex Willk.,{\i  Suppl. Prodr. Fl. Hisp.} 15 (1893). Like {\b 16} but leaves flat, even when dry; ligule about as long as wide, truncate; clavate portion of pedicels 3 times as long as wide; spikelets c. 1·7 mm; teeth of lemma c. ¼ as long as the lemma.{\i  Dry, base-poor habitats. • W. Pyrenees; mountains of N.W. Spain and N. Portugal.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. A. reuteri} Boiss.,{\i  Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 645 (1844). Like {\b 16} but stoloniferous perennial up to 100 cm; ligule up to 10 mm; glumes acute; lemma c. 2/3 as long as glumes; palea almost as long as lemma. 2n = 14.{\i  Damp, often shady places. C. & S. Portugal, S. Spain, Açores.} Az Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. A. capillaris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 62 (1753) ({\i A. tenuis} Sibth., {\i A. vulgaris} With.). Perennial, with rhizomes bearing more than 3 scale-leaves; stems 10-70 cm, smooth. Leaves up to 4 mm wide, flat or involute, long-acute; ligule 0·5-2 mm, usually wider than long. Panicle 1-20 cm; branches patent at and after anthesis, smooth or somewhat aculeolate, subequal, without spikelets in the lower half; clavate apex of pedicels smooth. Spikelets 2-3·5 mm, greenish- to purplish-brown. Glumes lanceolate, acute, equal or subequal, sparsely aculeolate on the keel distally. Lemma 2/3-3/4 as long as glumes, rarely with a short dorsal awn; callus with very short hairs. Palea 1/2-2/3 as long as lemma. Anthers 1-1·5 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Almost throughout Europe.} All except Az Bl Cr Sa Sb Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. A. gigantea} Roth,{\i  Tent. Fl. Germ.}{\b  1}: 31 (1788). Like {\b 19} but up to 150 cm; leaves up to 6(-8) mm wide, usually flat; ligules on non-flowering shoots usually longer than wide; panicle-branches strongly aculeolate; clavate apex of pedicels aculeolate in lower part. 2n = 42+0-4B. {\i Most of Europe.} Al Au Be Br Bu ?Cr Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho ?Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b gigantea}: Stems 30-150 cm; panicle-branches usually patent to erecto-patent after anthesis; lemma aculeolate only in the distal part.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b maeotica} (Klokov) Tzvelev,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  8}: 57 (1971): Stems 30-65 cm; panicle-branches erect to erecto-patent after anthesis; lemma aculeolate all over. {\i S. Ukraine}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. A. salsa} Korsh., {\i Trudy Peterb. Obsc. Estestv.}{\b  28}({\b 1}): 8 (1897). Like {\b 19} but leaves 0·5-2 mm wide, usually involute; ligules on non-flowering shoots usually longer than wide; panicle usually contracted after anthesis, the branches strongly aculeolate; clavate apex of pedicels aculeolate in the lower part.{\i  E. Russia.} Rs (C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. A. stolonifera} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 62 (1753) ({\i A. alba} auct., non L.; incl. {\i A. maritima }Lam.,{\i  A. filifolia }Link). Stoloniferous perennial, sometimes with short rhizomes bearing up to 3 scale-leaves; stolons up to 200 cm; stems (5-)15-100(-150) cm, smooth. Leaves flat or involute, long-acute, smooth to scabrid; ligule 1·5-7 mm. Panicle 1-30 cm; branches patent only at anthesis, usually aculeolate, very unequal, often bearing spikelets in the lower ½. Spikelets 2-3 mm, greenish to purplish. Glumes lanceolate, acute, usually aculeolate on the keel. Lemma 2/3-3/4 as long as glumes, rarely with a short awn near the apex; callus with very short hairs. Palea 1/2-2/3 as long as lemma. Anthers 1-1·5 mm. 2n = 28, 30, 32, 35, 42, 44, 46. {\i Throughout Europe}. All except Sb.
\par

\par
234}
\par