{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable, but at present no correlation between morphology and chromosome number has been demonstrated, and it does not seem possible to recognize subspecies. Tetraploid plants appear to be much the commonest. Paunero has recognized, but not named, five groups of variants from Spain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. A. congestiflora} Tutin & E. F. Warburg, {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 70}: 43 (1932). Slender perennial, without stolons; stems 5-35 cm, rough or smooth. Leaves flat or involute, scabridulous; ligule 0·5-5 mm. Panicle 2-6(-8·5) cm; branches erecto-patent at anthesis, suberect afterwards, aculeolate, 1-2 times branched, short and unequal; pedicels densely aculeolate. Spikelets 2-3 mm, greenish to purplish. Glumes lanceolate. Lemma c. 2/3 as long as glumes, the lateral veins more or less raised in the distal 1/3-1/2; awn up to 4 mm, arising in the lower 1/3-1/2, rarely absent; callus with hairs c. 0·3 mm or almost absent. Palea 3/5 4/5 as long as lemma. Anthers 0·6-1 mm. •{\i  Açores.} Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b congestiflora}: Glumes acute and mucronate, scabridulous. Lemma scabridulous, sometimes hairy, the raised veins excurrent for up to 0·3 mm.{\i  Dry, open or rocky places up to }500 {\i m. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b oreophila} Franco,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 336 (1978): Glumes subacute to subobtuse, not mucronate, smooth. Lemma smooth and glabrous, the faint veins not excurrent, or excurrent for not more than 0·15 mm.{\i  Mountains,} 600-2340{\i  m. C. & W. parts of the range of the species.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. A. gracililaxa} Franco,{\i  loc. cit. }(1978). Like {\b 23}({\b a}) but stems up to 20 cm, very slender; ligule 0·5-1·5(-2) mm; panicle 1·5-4·5 cm, very lax at anthesis, more or less contracted afterwards, the lowest branches sometimes without spikelets for more than ½ their length; pedicels nearly smooth; awn arising near base of lemma; anthers 1-1·2 mm.{\i  Dry, open rocky places,} 250-500 {\i m. • Açores }({\i Flores and Terceira}). Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. A. castellana} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Diagn. Pl. Nov. Hisp.} 26 (1842). Perennial, with short rhizomes and sometimes stolons; stems 20-80 cm, usually smooth. Leaves flat or involute, nearly always aculeolate on the ribs; ligule 1-3 mm. Panicle (6-)8-16 (-25) cm; branches patent at anthesis, rarely afterwards, aculeolate, very unequal, branched 2-3 times. Spikelets 2·5-4 mm, greenish-yellow to purplish. Glumes lanceolate, long-acute, aculeolate on the keel, at least distally, sometimes with appressed hairs. Lemma c. 2/3 as long as the glumes, almost always with few to many, usually long hairs, the lateral veins raised in the distal ½-¾ and excurrent for 0·2-0·5 mm, but glabrous and without excurrent veins when unawned; awn up to 5 mm, arising near the base; callus with hairs up to 0·5 mm. Palea 1/2-3/5 as long as lemma. Anthers 1-1·5 mm. 2n = 28+0-4B, 42+0-3B.{\i  S. Europe; more or less naturalized locally in W. & C. Europe.} Al Az Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A variable species whose limits are further obscured by probable hybridization with {\b 19}, {\b 20} and {\b 22}. A number of variants have been given specific rank, among them{\b  A. olivetorum} Godron in Gren. & Godron,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  3}: 483 (1856), which differs from the typical variant in lacking an awn.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. parlatorei} Breistr.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  110} (Sess. Extr.): 56 (1966) ({\i A. frondosa} Ten. ex Sprengel, non Poiret), from S. Italy and some other parts of the Mediterranean region, probably belongs here. It resembles {\b A. moldavica} Dobrescu & Beldie,{\i  Anal. Sti. Univ. Al. I. Cuza Iasi}({\i Biol.}) {\b 16}: 131 (1970), from E. Romania, in having leaves 3-7 mm wide, scabrid-hairy glumes and growing in damp habitats, but the two differ in the length of the spikelet, which is said to be 2-3 mm in the former and 1·2-1·5 mm in the latter. They may, perhaps, be derived from hybrids between {\b 25} and {\i Polypogon viridis}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    A biosystematic investigation of the whole complex and of its relationships with {\b 19-22} is greatly needed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 88.       Gastridium}       Beauv.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a narrow, cylindrical panicle, rarely lobed, usually tapering towards the apex. Spikelets strongly compressed laterally, with 1 floret. Glumes somewhat unequal, longer than the floret, shiny, swollen and coriaceous below, membranous above, 1-veined. Lemma much shorter than the glumes, elliptical, truncate and more or less dentate at apex, 5-veined, the middle vein usually excurrent as an awn. Palea membranous, 2-keeled. Rhachilla very shortly prolonged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. ventricosum} (Gouan) Schinz & Thell., {\i Viert. Naturf. Ges. Zürich}{\b  58}: 39 (1913) ({\i G. lendigerum} (L.) Desv.; incl. {\i G. scabrum }C. Presl). Stems 10-60 cm, erect or ascending, simple or branched, smooth. Leaves glabrous; ligule 1-3 mm, acute. Panicle 2-12 cm; branches erecto-patent at anthesis, usually appressed before and after. Spikelets (2-)3-4(-5) mm. Glumes scabrid on the keel, constricted above the swollen base, usually with a long, subulate apex. Lemma c. 1 mm, usually hirsute; awn slender, geniculate, rarely absent. Anthers c. 1 mm. 2n = 14. {\i Grassy places and cultivated fields. S. & W. Europe, northwards to S. England.} Al Az Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  G. laxum} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 126 (1852), is a variant of{\b  1} with a lax panicle and spikelets 2-3 mm: it occurs with typical {\i G. ventricosum} in S.W. Spain and Portugal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  G. phleoides} (Nees & Meyen) C. E. Hubbard,{\i  Kew Bull}.{\b  9}: 375 (1954), native of S.W. Asia and N.E. Africa, has once been recorded from Turkey-in-Europe (near Luleburgaz) and S. Portugal but probably only as a casual. It is like {\b 1} but the panicle is always very dense, the spikelets are 6-8 mm and the awn 6-8 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 89.        Polypogon}   Desf.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a dense panicle. Spikelets somewhat compressed laterally, with 1 floret. Glumes subequal, 1-veined, chartaceous, scabrid, longer than the floret, usually with an apical awn. Lemma 5-veined, hyaline, truncate. Palea hyaline. Rhachilla not prolonged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perennial; glumes unawned ............................................................. {\b 3. viridis}
\par
1 Annual; glumes awned
\par
2 Glumes emarginate, shortly ciliate; lemma awned ............. {\b 1. monspeliensis}
\par
2 Glumes 2-fid, long-ciliate; lemma unawned ............................. {\b 2. maritimus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. monspeliensis} (L.) Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  1}: 67 (1798). Annual; stems (1·5-)10-90 cm, smooth and glabrous. Leaves scabrid on both surfaces; ligule up to 10 mm. Panicle up to 16 cm, cylindrical or more or less lobed, greenish. Spikelets c. 2 mm. Glumes emarginate, shortly ciliate with short, stout hairs on the back in the proximal part; awn 5-7 mm, arising from the sinus. Lemma c. 1 mm, denticulate and with an awn 1-1·5 mm at apex. Anthers c. 0·4 mm. 2n = 28. {\i Damp places, especially near the sea. S. & W. Europe, northwards to S. England.} Al Az Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si Tu [Cz Rs (W, ?K)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. maritimus} Willd.,{\i  Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin Neue Schr.}{\b  3}: 442 (1801) ({\i Chaetopogon creticus} (Coust. & Gand.) Hayek). Like {\b 1} but usually smaller; stems up to 25 cm; ligule up
\par

\par
235}
\par