{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. purpurea} (Trin.) Trin., {\i Gram. Unifl.} 219 (1824). Laxly caespitose, rhizomatous; stems 50-200 cm, rather slender to stout, with (4-)6-8 nodes, often branched. Leaves 3-12 mm wide, flat or sometimes convolute, the upper surface glabrous or weakly scabrid, with rather prominent veins; ligule (4-)6-10 mm. Panicle 5-35 cm, nodding at maturity, often rather dense; branches scabrid to aculeolate. Spikelets 2·5-8 mm, greyish to violet-brown. Glumes subequal, ovate-lanceolate to narrowly lanceolate-acuminate, scabrid. Lemma 5-veined, notched at apex; awn arising from back of lemma, rarely from apex, exceeding or equalling lemma. Callus-hairs at least as long as lemma. Rhachilla sometimes prolonged. Anthers yellow, without pollen; thecae not separating at maturity. 2n = 28, 56-91.{\i  Marshes and fens. N.C. & E. Europe, southwards to N. Switzerland and S.C. Russia, and extending westwards to E. Belgium.} Be Cz Fe Ga Ge He No ?Po Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A complex of apomicts which has arisen from the amphimictic species {\b 4} by autopolyploidy or by hybridization with other species, notably {\b 1}. Morphologically, plants belonging to this complex are extremely variable and their treatment by different authors has varied correspondingly. Although there are intermediates, the following seem to represent the best-delimited series of taxa, which have sometimes been recognized as species, sometimes as subspecies and sometimes as varieties of a single species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The exact distribution of some subspecies in this group is very  imperfectly known.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Callus-hairs distinctly longer than lemma; glumes weakly
\par
  scabrid; rhachilla scarcely prolonged  
\par
2 Glumes 6-8 mm, narrowly lanceolate-acuminate; awn 
\par
  arising from notch at apex of lemma ..................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b pseudopurpurea}
\par
2 Glumes 4-6(-7) mm, broadly lanceolate-acuminate; awn
\par
  arising from back of lemma ..................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b phragmitoides}
\par
1 Callus-hairs about as long as lemma; glumes strongly 
\par
  scabrid; rhachilla distinctly prolonged  
\par
3 Plant slender; glumes ovate-lanceolate, violet; leaves green 
\par
  ............................................................................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b purpurea}
\par
3 Plant robust; glumes lanceolate, greenish; leaves glaucous
\par
  ........................................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b langsdorfii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b purpurea}: Stems up to 100 cm, slender, with 6-8 nodes; rhizomes short. Leaves 3-4 mm wide, green; ligule more than 10 mm. Spikelets 2·5-4 mm, violet. Glumes ovate-lanceolate, densely scabridulous; awn arising from upper half of lemma, exceeding lemma by 1-1·5 mm. Callus-hairs about as long as lemma. Rhachilla distinctly prolonged.{\i  E. Russia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b phragmitoides} (Hartman) Tzvelev,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 1965}: 36 (1965) ({\i C. phragmitoides} Hartman, C. elata Blytt): Stems usually more than 100 cm, rather stout, with 5-8 nodes; rhizomes long. Leaves 5-10(-15) mm wide, green; ligule 7-10(-13) mm. Spikelets 4-7 mm, brownish-green. Glumes lanceolate-acuminate, sparsely scabridulous. Awn arising from apical 1/3 of lemma, scarcely exceeding lemma. Callus-hairs distinctly longer than lemma. Rhachilla scarcely prolonged.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b langsdorfii} (Link) Tzvelev,{\i  op. cit. }34 (1965) ({\i C. langsdorfii}(Link) Trin.): Stems usually more than 100 cm, rather stout, with (4-)5-7 nodes; rhizomes long. Leaves 6-12 mm wide, glaucous; ligule 7-10 mm. Spikelets 4-7 mm, greenish or glaucous. Glumes lanceolate-acuminate, scabrid. Awn arising from middle or lower part of lemma, exceeding lemma by 1-1·5 mm. Callus-hairs about as long as lemma. Rhachilla distinctly prolonged.{\i  N.E. Russia.} ({\i N. Asia, North America}.)     
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b pseudopurpurea} (Gerstlauer ex R. Heine) G.C.S. Clarke, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 361 (1978) ({\i C. pseudopurpurea} Gerstlauer ex R. Heine): Stems 100-170 cm, robust, with 6-8 nodes; rhizomes long. Leaves 8-12 mm wide, green; ligule 4-6 mm. Spikelets 6-8 mm, greenish-brown. Glumes linear-lanceolate, long-acuminate, slightly scabrid. Awns very slender, arising from notch at apex of lemma or very slightly below. Callus-hairs distinctly longer than lemma Rhachilla-prolongation minute. •{\i  E. Germany} ({\i S.W. of Dresden}).   
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. DEYEUXIA (Clarion) Beauv. Glumes ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate. Lemma membranous, scabrid, at least 3/4 as long as glumes. Palea at least 2/3 as long as lemma. Callus-hairs usually considerably shorter than lemma. Rhachilla prolonged.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. stricta} (Timm) Koeler,{\i  Descr. Gram.} 105 (1802) ({\i C. neglecta} auct., non (Ehrh.) Beauv.). Laxly caespitose, with long rhizomes; stems 10-100 cm, erect, rather slender, with 2-3 nodes, smooth or slightly rough below panicle. Leaves 10-40(-60) cm × 1·5-5 mm, convolute or flat, the upper surface strongly scabrid; veins close-set, prominent; ligule 1-4 mm, obtuse. Panicle 5-20 cm, cylindrical, dense; branches aculeolate. Spikelets 3-4(-4·5) mm, greyish-brown or purplish. Glumes subequal, ovate-lanceolate, scabrid; keel aculeolate. Lemma 2-fid at apex; awn straight, scarcely exceeding lemma, arising from middle of lemma or slightly below. Callus-hairs 2/3-3/4 as long as lemma, rather sparse. 2n = 28.{\i  Marshes and fens. N. & C. Europe; U.S.S.R., except the south}. Br Cz Da Fe †Ga Ge Hb †He Ho Hu Is No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Sb Su.   
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from arctic Russia, which have stems up to 40 cm and glumes that are weakly scabrid, have sometimes been separated as{\b  C. groenlandica }(Schrank) Kunth,{\i  Révis. Gram.}{\b  1}: 75 (1829), but do not seem to merit specific status.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. scotica} (Druce) Druce,{\i  Brit. Pl. List} ed. 2, 127 (1928). Like {\b 6} but spikelets 4·5-6 mm; glumes lanceolate, acuminate.{\i  Bogs. • N.E. Scotland.} Br.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. holmii} Lange in Holm,{\i  Nov.-Zentl. Veg.} 20 (1885). Like {\b 6} but stems less than 40 cm; ligule c. 1 mm; panicle 3-7 cm; branches almost smooth; spikelets purplish-black when young; glumes lanceolate, glabrous or very weakly scabrid on keel only.{\i  Arctic Russia.} Rs (N). ({\i Arctic and subarctic Asia}.)  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. deschampsioides} Trin.{\i  Sp. Gram. Icon. Descr.}{\b  3}: t. 354 (1836). Stems 15-30(-45) cm solitary; rhizomes slender, with 2-3 nodes, smooth. Leaves up to 8 cm (not more than 3 cm on flowering stems), 2-3 mm wide, linear, convolute, the upper surface scabrid, with prominent veins; ligule 1-2 mm, truncate. Panicle 2-7 cm, pyramidal; branches more or less smooth. Spikelets 3-4·5 mm, dull purplish-brown. Glumes subequal, ovate-lanceolate, smooth. Lemma 2-fid at apex; awn slightly twisted and bent, slightly exceeding lemma, arising from middle of lemma or below. Callus-hairs up to half as long as lemma.{\i  Marshes and wet meadows. Arctic Russia}. Rs (N). ({\i Arctic Asia and America}.)  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. lapponica} (Wahlenb.) Hartman,{\i  Handb. Skand. Fl.} 46 (1820). Laxly caespitose, with long rhizomes; stems 30-130 cm, erect, rather slender, with 2(-3) nodes, scabrid below panicle, smooth elsewhere. Leaves 10-30 cm × 2-6 mm, flat or involute, the upper surface weakly scabrid, often with short hairs; veins prominent but widely spaced; ligule 2-3(-6) mm, obtuse or lacerate. Panicle 5-15 cm, narrow, but often rather lax; branches aculeolate. Spikelets 4-8 mm, purplish or greenish-brown. Glumes subequal, ovate-lanceolate, weakly aculeolate on the. 
\par

\par
238}
\par