{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i soils. Most of Europe, except for some islands.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Gr Lu Sa Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. vernale} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 53 (1808). Annual. Stems 10-50 cm, smooth or scabrid at the nodes, usually with 2 nodes in the lower half. Leaves usually 0·5-4 cm × 1-3 mm, glabrous, scabrid; sheaths scabrid, often purplish, with a wide scarious margin; ligule 2-4 mm, acute. Panicle 1·5-8(-10) cm; branches erect to erecto-patent. Spikelets 2·5-3·5 mm. Glumes ovate, acute, scabrid. Anthers 1·5-1·8 mm. 2n = 8. {\i Sandy and other light soils, damp in winter. W. & S. Europe.} Be Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Ho Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Variable, especially in the branching of the panicle. The following may merit subspecific rank:{\b  M. scabrum} L. C. M. Richard in Merlet,{\i  Herbor. Maine-et-Loire} 131, 220 (1809), from W. Europe, and{\b  M. vernale} subsp.{\b  montianum} (Parl.) Jahandiez & Maire,{\i  Cat. Pl. Maroc}{\b  1}: 36 (1931) ({\i M. montianum }Parl.), from Sicilia and the Aegean region, but further investigation is needed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 103.         Zingeria}      P. Smirnov
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat or convolute. Inflorescence a lax panicle. Spikelets slightly compressed dorsally, with 1 floret. Glumes subequal, membranous, as long as the floret, the lower 1-veined, the upper 3-veined. Lemma 3-veined, with short, clavate hairs on the dorsal surface, becoming chartaceous in. fruit. Palea like the lemma, but 2-veined. Lodicules very small. Rhachilla not prolonged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Leaves usually convolute; pedicels 4-16 mm; spikelets
\par
   1·2-1·5 mm ......................................................................... {\b 1. biebersteiniana} 
\par
Leaves flat; pedicels 1·5-6 mm; spikelets 1·8-2 mm ........................ {\b 2. pisidica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. Z. biebersteiniana} (Claus) P. Smirnov,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou} ser. 2, {\b 51}({\b 2}): 67 (1946) ({\i Agrostis biebersteiniana} Claus). Stems 10-35 cm, slender. Leaves up to 7 cm × 1·5 mm, usually convolute; ligule up to 2 mm, obtuse. Panicle 3-12 cm wide, very lax; branches erecto-patent, slender, smooth; pedicels 4-16 mm. Spikelets 1·2-1·5 mm. Glumes ovate, subobtuse, glabrous. Anthers c. 0·8 mm. Grain 0·3 mm. 2n = 4. {\i Damp, grassy places. Krym and S.E. Russia.} Rs (K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. Z. pisidica} (Boiss.) Tutin,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 365 (1978) ({\i Agrostis pisidica} Boiss.). Like {\b 1} but leaves 1-3 mm wide, flat; panicle 2-6 cm wide, not so lax; pedicels 1·5-6 mm; spikelets 1·8-2 mm; anthers 0·5-0·7 mm; grain 1·7 mm.{\i  Damp, grassy places. S. Romania.} Rm. ({\i Anatolia and Caucasian region.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe     {\b  Stipeae}     Dumort.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves setaceous to linear, usually convolute or plicate; silica-bodies elliptical or weakly crescentic, oblong, cross- or dumb-bell-shaped; 2-celled micro-hairs probably absent; ligule membranous to scarious. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets all hermaphrodite, somewhat compressed laterally or terete, with 1 floret. Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes. Glumes longer than the floret, membranous or hyaline. Lemma terete, enclosing the palea and strongly indurate in fruit, with a dorsal or terminal, usually 1- to 2-geniculate awn. Palea 2-veined, usually hyaline. Lodicules (2-)3. Stamens 3. Ovary glabrous; styles 2. Grain with linear hilum as long as the grain; embryo small; starch-grains compound. Chromosomes small; basic number 9, 11-17.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 104.      Piptatherum}        Beauv.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Oryzopsis} auct. eur., non Michx)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Leaves flat or involute. Inflorescence a lax panicle. Spikelets somewhat compressed dorsally, with 1 floret. Glumes equal, the lower 5-veined, the upper 3- to 5-veined. Lemma obscurely 3- to 5-veined, coriaceous, with a caducous terminal awn. Palea about as long as lemma, coriaceous. Callus very small. Rhachilla not prolonged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: H. Freitag,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  33}: 341-408 (1975).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Panicle-branches 4-8(-20) at a node; spikelets not more
\par
  than 4 mm; lemma glabrous ...................................................... {\b 1. miliaceum} 
\par
1 Panicle-branches 1-3(-4) at a node; spikelets (3-)4-9 mm;
\par
  lemma ± hairy
\par
2 Ligule not more than 0·5 mm
\par
3 Spikelets 3-4(-5) mm; pedicel several times as long as
\par
  spikelet ......................................................................................... {\b 2. virescens}
\par
3 Spikelets 7-8 mm; pedicel about as long as spikelet ............... {\b 3. paradoxum}
\par
2 Ligule 6-11 mm
\par
4 Leaves not more than 2·5 mm wide; awn not or scarcely
\par
  exceeding the glumes ............................................................. {\b 4. coerulescens}
\par
4 Leaves 5-9 mm wide; awn much exceeding the glumes .......... {\b 5. holciforme}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. miliaceum} (L.) Cosson,{\i  Not. Pl. Crit.} 129 (1851) ({\i P. multiflorum} (Cav.) Beauv., {\i Oryzopsis miliacea} (L.) Bentham & Hooker ex Ascherson & Graebner). Stems 60-150 cm, erect or ascending, smooth and glabrous. Leaves up to 5 mm wide, scabrid above; ligule c. 1 mm, truncate. Panicle up to 40 cm; branches 4-8(-20) at each node, erecto-patent, slender, with spikelets in the distal half, those of the lower nodes sometimes without spikelets. Spikelets 3-4 mm. Glumes ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma c. 2·3 mm, obtuse, glabrous; awn 3-5 mm. Anthers c. 1·5 mm.{\i  Dry, open habitats. S. Europe.} Al Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  P. thomasii} (Duby) Kunth, {\i Enum. Pl.}{\b  1}: 177 (1833), recorded from a few localities in S. & S.W. Europe, is doubtfully worth specific rank. It is like {\b 1} but has 20-50 short branches at the lowest node of the panicle; these are sterile or have only a single spikelet.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. virescens} (Trin.) Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  5}: 507 (1884) ({\i Oryzopsis virescens} (Trin.) G. Beck). Stems up to 120 cm, erect. Leaves up to 10 mm wide, scabrid above; ligule not more than 0·5 mm, truncate. Panicle up to 20 cm; branches 1-3 at each node, erecto-patent, slender, flexuous, with few, long-pedicellate spikelets. Spikelets 3-4(-5) mm. Glumes ovate-lanceolate, acute. Lemma 2·5-3 mm, hairy; awn 8-12 mm. Anthers c. 1·5 mm.{\i  Scrub and open woods. E.C. & S.E. Europe; some scattered stations in C. Italy and S.C. France.} Au Bu Cz Ga Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. paradoxum} (L.) Beauv.,{\i  Agrost.} 18, 173 (1812) ({\i Oryzopsis paradoxa} (L.) Nutt.). Stems up to 120 cm, erect. Leaves up to 8 mm wide, smooth except for the scabrid margin; ligule not more than 0·5 mm, truncate. Panicle up to 20 cm; branches 2-3 at each node, suberect, with spikelets in the distal quarter only; pedicels about as long as the spikelet. Spikelets 6-7 mm. Glumes lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 4-4·5 mm, usually hairy; awn 10-12 mm. Anthers c. 2·5 mm. 2n = 24. {\i Dry places. S.W. Europe}. Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. coerulescens} (Desf.) Beauv.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1812) ({\i Oryzopsis coerulescens} (Desf.) Hackel). Stems 30-70 cm, erect. Leaves up
\par

\par
246}
\par