{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. pycnantha} (Hackel) C. E. Hubbard,{\i  loc. cit.} (1946). Like {\b 3} but often taller; spikes usually with 15-30 spikelets; spikelets mostly more than 1½ times as long as internodes; glumes 6-9 mm, not winged on the keel; anthers 3·2-4 mm. {\i Salt-marshes; rarely on damp, clay soils inland. Mediterranean region; distribution probably incompletely known.} Ga Gr Hs It ?Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 98.        Hainardia}      W. Greuter 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat or convolute; ligule membranous. Spikelets sunk in cavities in the rhachis, dorsally compressed, with 1 floret. Glumes 2 in the terminal spikelet, 1 (the upper) in lateral spikelets, covering the cavity except at anthesis, strongly veined, coriaceous. Lemma with its back towards the rhachis, membranous, 3-veined, the lateral veins very short. Rhachis disarticulating at maturity below each spikelet.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. cylindrica} (Willd.) W. Greuter,{\i  Boissiera}{\b  13}: 177 (1967) ({\i Monerma cylindrica} (Willd.) Cosson & Durieu,{\i  Lepturus cylindricus} (Willd.) Trin.). Stems 5-35 cm, erect or ascending, smooth and glabrous. Leaves up to c. 7 cm × 2·5 mm, scabrid above; ligule up to c. 0·5 mm, truncate, denticulate; uppermost sheath distinctly inflated. Spike up to 25 cm, straight or somewhat curved, rigid. Spikelets 5-8 mm, somewhat longer than the internodes. Glumes ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Anthers 2·5-3·5 mm. Chasmogamous. 2n = 26.{\i  Saline or gypsaceous soils. S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe         {\b  Phalarideae}       Kunth
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves linear; silica-bodies oblong; 2-celled micro-hairs absent; ligule membranous. Inflorescence a panicle, usually dense and cylindrical to ovoid. Spikelets strongly compressed laterally, with usually 3 florets, the lower 2 reduced to the small lemma or 1 or both absent. Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes but not between the florets. Sometimes spikelets in groups of 5-7, one fertile and sessile, the remainder sterile and pedicellate, the group falling entire. Glumes longer than the florets. Fertile lemma indurate at maturity, unawned. Lodicules 2. Stamens 3. Ovary glabrous; styles 2. Grain with short, oblong hilum; starch-grains compound. Chromosomes large; basic number 5, 6, 7.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 99.           Phalaris}            L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  (incl. {\i Digraphis} Trin., {\i Typhoides} Moench)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Leaves flat. Inflorescence an ovoid to cylindrical panicle, usually dense and unlobed. Spikelets strongly compressed laterally, With 2-3 florets, the lower (1-)2 reduced to lemmas, the uppermost hermaphrodite. Glumes subequal, chartaceous, longer than the florets, 3- to 5-veined, often winged on the keel. Lower lemmas small, linear to lanceolate; upper lemma 5-veined, coriaceous. Palea coriaceous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spikelets in groups of 5-7, one hermaphrodite, the rest 
\par
  male or sterile falling as a group at maturity
\par
2 Annual; pedicels hairy; wing of glumes with 1 prominent
\par
  tooth near apex ............................................................................. {\b 7. paradoxa}
\par
2 Perennial, with tuberous stem-bases; pedicels glabrous;
\par
  wing of glumes with several small teeth near apex ............... {\b 8. coerulescens} 
\par
1 Spikelets all hermaphrodite (except sometimes the basal),
\par
  persistent
\par
3 Perennial with non-flowering shoots at anthesis
\par
4 Rhizomes long; panicle usually lobed, the branches
\par
  patent at anthesis; glumes not winged ..................................... {\b 1. arundinacea}
\par
4 Rhizomes short; panicle not lobed, the branches not 
\par
  patent at anthesis; glumes winged on the keel
\par
5 Glumes subobtuse; wing obliquely truncate, stem-base
\par
  not tuberous .................................................................................... {\b 2. truncata}
\par
5 Glumes acute; wing tapering to apex; stem-base often tuberous . {\b 3. aquatica}
\par
3 Annual, without non-flowering shoots at anthesis
\par
6 Glumes with a toothed wing ............................................................ {\b 5. minor}
\par
6 Glumes with an entire wing
\par
7 Sterile lemmas at least ½ as long as the fertile ........................ {\b 4. canariensis}
\par
7 Sterile lemmas not more than 1/5 as long as the fertile ......... {\b 6. brachystachys}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. arundinacea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 55 (1753) ({\i Digraphis arundinacea} (L.) Trin., {\i Typhoides arundinacea} (L.) Moench). Rhizomatous perennial. Stems up to 200 cm, stout, erect, smooth. Leaves 10-35 cm × 6-18 mm, long-acute; sheaths smooth, not inflated; ligule 6-10 mm, lacerate. Panicle 5-25 cm, lanceolate to oblong, lobed, often purplish; branches scabrid, patent at anthesis. Spikelets 5-6·5 mm, very shortly pedicellate. Glumes narrowly lanceolate, 3-veined, keeled but not winged. Sterile lemmas 1-1·5 mm, shortly hairy; upper lemma 3-4 mm, broadly lanceolate, acute, hairy above. Anthers c. 3 mm.{\i  Wet places and in shallow water. Most of Europe except the extreme south.} All except Az Bl Cr Is Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b arundinacea}: Plant robust, dark green. Panicle usually 10-25 cm, with distinct branches, usually lobed. Glumes glabrous. 2n = 28, 42+6B. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b rotgesii} (Fouc. & Mandon ex Husnot) Kerguélen, {\i Lejeunia} nov. ser., {\b 75}: 226 (1975): Plant slender, pale green. Panicle usually less than 8 cm, with very short branches, usually cylindrical. Glumes often hairy. 2n = 14. {\i S.W. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. truncata} Guss. ex Bertol.,{\i  Fl. Ital.}{\b  2}: 777 (1836). Shortly rhizomatous perennial. Stems up to 150 cm, not tuberous at base, erect or ascending, smooth. Leaves up to 20 cm × 5 mm, long-acute; sheaths smooth, scarcely inflated; ligule c. 3 mm truncate. Panicle 2·5-8 cm, oblong-cylindrical, not lobed, sometimes purplish; branches smooth. Spikelets c. 7 mm. Glumes obovate, subobtuse, winged in the distal 2/3; wing entire, obliquely truncate. Sterile lemmas c. 1/10 as long as the upper; upper lemma c. 4 mm, broadly lanceolate, acute, densely appressed-hairy. Anthers c. 3 mm.{\i  Damp places. Mediterranean region.} ?Cr Hs It Sa Si Tu [*Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. aquatica} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl.}{\b  1}: 4 (1755) ({\i P. tuberosa} L.,{\i  P. bulbosa} auct., non L.,{\i  P. nodosa} L.). Like {\b 2} but stem-base often tuberous; glumes acute, winged in the distal 3/4, the wing tapering to the apex; lowest lemma minute or absent. 2n = 28.{\i  Ditches grassland, roadsides and cultivated fields. S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. canariensis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 54 (1753). Annual. Stems 20-120 cm, usually branched, rigid, smooth. Leaves up to 20 cm × 10 mm, long-acute; sheaths slightly scabrid, the upper inflated; ligule 3-8 mm. Panicle 2-5 cm, ovoid to ovoid-oblong, not lobed. Spikelets 7-9 mm. Glumes oblanceolate, acute, winged for most of their length. Sterile lemmas 3-4·5 mm, acute; upper lemma 5-6 mm, hairy. Anthers 3-4 mm. 2n = 12.{\i  Dry, open habitats. Cultivated in parts of S. Europe for bird-seed; widely naturalized in the Mediterranean region; a frequent casual and locally naturalized elsewhere.} [Al Au Az Bl Bu Co ?Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He *Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.] ({\i Islas Canarias, N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. minor} Retz.,{\i  Obs. Bot.}{\b  3}: 8 (1783). Like {\b 4} but spikelets 4·5-5·5 mm; glumes with a toothed wing; lowest lemma minute,
\par

\par
244}
\par