{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 24 Adaxial leaf-surface hairy
\par
25 Abaxial leaf-surface smooth
\par
26 Stems hairy below the nodes; adaxial leaf-surface very
\par
   sparsely hairy; leaves with a tuft of hairs at apex ..................... {\b 8. endotricha}
\par
26 Stems glabrous below the nodes; adaxial leaf-surface 
\par
   densely hairy; leaves without a tuft of hairs at apex ..................... {\b 9. cretacea}
\par
25 Abaxial leaf-surface ± scabrid, at least in the lower part
\par
27 Adaxial leaf-surface with long hairs which protrude between
\par
    the margins of the convolute leaf; sheaths usually reddish-
\par
   violet when young; leaf 1-1·5 mm in diameter
\par
   (C. & E. Europe) ................................................... ({\b 16-19}). {\b dasyphylla} group
\par
27 Adaxial leaf-surface with short hairs not protruding 
\par
   between the margins of the convolute leaf; leaf 
\par
   0·3-0·85 mm in diameter (Mediterranean region)
\par
28 Sides of ribs with dense, regularly arranged hairs or
\par
   pricklets c. 0·03 mm ............................................................. {\b 14. austroitalica}
\par
28 Sides of ribs glabrous, though sometimes with conical
\par
   papillae c. 0·01 mm
\par
29 Adaxial leaf-surface with sparse long hairs; leaf up 
\par
   to 0·85 mm in diameter; lemma 2-fid at apex ......................... {\b 13. rechingeri}
\par
29 Adaxial leaf-surface with dense short hairs; leaf
\par
   0·5 mm in diameter; lemma not 2-fid at apex ............................... {\b 11. iberica} 
\par
24 Adaxial leaf-surface glabrous
\par
30 Sides of ribs glabrous, though sometimes with minute
\par
   papillae scarcely 0·01-0·015 mm
\par
31 Apex of leaf shortly hairy; column scabrid and with
\par
   scattered soft hairs ................................................................... {\b 12. apertifolia}
\par
31 Apex of leaf and column glabrous
\par
32 Lemma c. 15 mm; sheaths densely setulose .............................. {\b 15. novakii}
\par
32 Lemma 18-26 mm; sheaths glabrous or hairy only at the mouth
\par
33 Leaves strongly scabrid; lemma 21-26 mm; awn 34-40 cm  {\b 5. crassiculmis}
\par
33 Leaves almost smooth; lemma c. 20 mm; awn 26-31 cm ............ {\b 7. epilosa}
\par
30 Sides of ribs with dense, regularly arranged hairs
\par
   0·04(-0·08) mm
\par
34 Abaxial leaf-surface glabrous and smooth; column irregularly
\par
   bent, whitish; lemma (13-)15-20 mm; awn (10-)20-28(-30) cm .. {\b 1. pennata}
\par
34 Abaxial leaf-surface scabrid to aculeolate; column 
\par
   straight, brown when mature; lemma (18-)21-24(-27) mm;
\par
   awn (25-)30-35(-39) cm
\par
35 Leaf-sheaths glabrous, except for the margin ...................... {\b 2. pulcherrima}
\par
35 Leaf-sheaths densely hairy above
\par
36 Lemma (19-)20-22(-23·5) mm; awn (23-)28-33(-35) cm;
\par
   palea glabrous ....................................................................... {\b 4. dasyvaginata}
\par
36 Lemma 17-19·5 mm; awn (23-)24-27(-28·5) cm; palea hairy ..... {\b 3. mayeri}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. pennata} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 78 (1753). Stems 25-40 cm, sometimes puberulent. Leaves glabrous and smooth on the abaxial surface, usually puberulent only on the sides of the ribs on the adaxial surface; basal sheaths usually puberulent above; ligule c. 4 mm. Panicle c. 10 cm, contracted. Glumes c. 50 mm. Lemma (13-)15-20 mm, the dorsal line of hairs always shorter than the subdorsal lines; awn (16-)20-28(-30) cm, the column pale, often irregularly bent, the seta plumose.{\i  S. & C. Europe.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge ?Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ventral line of hairs ending up to 4 mm below base of awn
\par
2 Ventral line of hairs often interrupted; lemma with 
\par
  prominent auricles at the insertion of the awn; column
\par
  glabrous and smooth ......................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b pennnata}
\par
2 Ventral line of hairs not interrupted; auricles absent;
\par
  column scabrid ...................................................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b kiemii} 
\par
1 Ventral line of hairs reaching base of awn
\par
3 Lemma usually 15-16 mm; awn usually (19-)21-24 cm . ({\b a}) subsp. {\b austriaca}
\par
3 Lemma usually 18-19 mm; awn usually 26-28 cm
\par
4 Column scabrid .............................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b lithophila}
\par
4 Column smooth .............................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b eriocaulis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b austriaca} (G. Beck) Martinovský & Skalický{\i  Preslia}{\b  41}: 331 (1969): Lemma usually 15-16 mm, the ventral line of hairs reaching the base of the awn; awn usually (19-)21-24 cm, the column smooth. •{\i  C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lithophila} (P. Smirnov) Martinovský, {\i Preslia}{\b  44}: 18 (1972) ({\i S. lithophila} P. Smirnov): Lemma usually 18-19 mm, the ventral line of hairs reaching the base of the awn; awn usually 26-28 cm, the column scabrid. •{\i  Krym}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b eriocaulis} (Borbás) Martinovský & Skalický,{\i  Preslia }{\b 41}: 331 (1969): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but the column smooth. 2n = 44.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b pennata}: Lemma usually 18-19 mm, with prominent auricles at the insertion of the awn, the ventral line of hairs ending up to 4 mm below the base of the awn, often interrupted; awn usually 23-28 cm, the column glabrous and smooth. •{\i  France and Germany}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b kiemii} Martinovský, {\i Preslia}{\b  44}: 14 (1972): Like subsp. ({\b d}) but lemma without auricles at the insertion of the awn, the ventral line of hairs not interrupted; column scabrid. •{\i  Adriatic region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. pulcherrima} C. Koch,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  21}: 440 (1848) ({\i S. pennata} subsp.{\i  mediterranea} (Trin. & Rupr.) Ascherson & Graebner). Stems up to 100 cm, glabrous. Leaves scabrid on the abaxial surface, usually with dense hairs 0·04 mm on the sides of the ribs on the adaxial surface, the basal 1(-1·5) mm in diameter; sheaths ciliate, smooth, shining; ligule on non-flowering shoots 0·7-2 mm, on flowering stems 5-7(-9) mm, shortly ciliate. Panicle 10-15 cm, contracted. Glumes 60-80 mm, long-attenuate. Lemma (18-)20-23(-25) mm, the ventral line of hairs reaching the base of the awn; awn up to 50 cm, the column glabrous, the seta plumose, with hairs c. 7 mm. Palea usually hairy on the keels. 2n = 44.{\i  Europe, northwards to W.C. France, N. Germany and C. Russia, but not in the Iberian peninsula.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr Hu It Ju ?Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. mayen} Martinovský,{\i  Acta Bot. Croat.}{\b  30}: 145 (1971). Like {\b 2} but stems softly hairy below the panicle and nodes; leaves strongly scabrid on both surfaces; sheaths densely hairy, with hairs 0,1-0,3 mm; ligule with hairs up to 1 mm on back and margin; lemma 17-19·5 mm; awn (23-)24-27(-28·5) cm, the seta with hairs 3-4 mm. •{\i  S.W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. dasyvaginata} Martinovský, {\i Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  27}: 61 (1970). Stems up to 50 cm, appressed-setose below the panicle and nodes. Leaves strongly scabrid on the abaxial surface, shortly and densely hairy on the sides of the ribs on the adaxial surface; upper part of sheaths shortly and densely hairy; ligule of basal leaves 2·5-5 mm, ciliate. Panicle contracted. Glumes 45-70 mm. Lemma (19-)20-22(-23·5) mm, the ventral line of hairs reaching the base of the awn; awn c. 34 cm, the column glabrous, the seta plumose. Palea glabrous.{\i  S. Spain }({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. crassiculmis} P. Smirnov, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  22}: 375 (1926). Stems 3-4 mm in diameter, glabrous below, hairy near the
\par

\par
248}
\par