{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 2 Leaves linear-lanceolate to broadly lanceolate, erect or erecto-patent
\par
3 Leaves 3-4, 14-26 cm × 10-30(-40) mm, 6-12 times as 
\par
  long as wide, linear-lanceolate ............................................ {\b 15. neapolitanum}
\par
3 Leaves (3-)4(-5), up to 35 cm × 20-50(-70) mm, c. 5 
\par
  times as long as wide, broadly lanceolate ................................ {\b 14. autumnale}
\par
2 Leaves oblong-elliptical or ligulate, arcuate or patent
\par
4 Leaves not more than 15 cm × 10-20 mm, frequently undulate,
\par
  appressed to the ground; corm-tunic subcoriaceous ................ {\b 17. lingulatum}
\par
4 Leaves up to 23 cm × 55 mm, not undulate, arcuate; corm
\par
  tunic papery ........................................................................... {\b 18. parnassicum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. C. autumnale} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }341 (1753) (incl.{\i  C. haynaldii} Heuffel). Leaves (3-)4(-5), 15-35 cm × 20-50(-70) mm, broadly lanceolate. Perianth-segments usually 40-60 × 10-15 mm, rarely smaller. Anthers yellow. Flowering August to October. 2n = 38.{\i  S., W. & C. Europe, extending eastwards to White Russia and N.W. Ukraine.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr *Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) [Da Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. rhodopaeum} Kovatschev,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 1965}: 87 (1965), from S. Bulgaria (C. Rodopi Pl.), appears from the description to be closely related to {\b 14}, although compared by Kovatschev to {\i C. borisii} Stefanov ({\i vide} {\b 12}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. C. neapolitanum} (Ten.) Ten.,{\i  Fl. Neap. Prodr. App. Quinta} 11 (1826) (incl. {\i C. longifolium} Cast., {\i C. kochii} Parl.). Leaves (2-)3-4, 14-26 cm × 10-30(-40) mm, linear-lanceolate. Perianth-segments usually 30-45 × 7-12 mm. Anthers yellow. Flowering August to September (-October). 2n = 140.{\i  Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. C. lusitanum} Brot., {\i Phyt. Lusit.}{\b  2}: 211 (1827). Leaves 4-5, 18-35 cm × 20-40 mm, linear-lanceolate. Perianth-segments 40-60 × 6-14 mm. Anthers blackish-purple to pale purplish-pink or yellow. Flowering September to November. 2n = 106.{\i  S.W. Europe, extending to C. Italy.} ?Bl Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. C. lingulatum} Boiss. & Spruner in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 5}): 66 (1844). Corm 2-5(-6) × 1·5-4 cm, ovoid-oblong; tunic dark brown, coriaceous, with a long neck. Leaves 4-6, up to 15 cm × 10-20 mm, developing after anthesis, oblong-lanceolate to ligulate, undulate, appressed to the ground, obtuse to subacute, glabrous. Flowers (1-)2-5(-10); perianth-segments 20-40 × 3-10(-15) mm, pinkish-lilac, (? sometimes obscurely tessellated), oblong or linear-elliptical, obtuse to subacute. Filaments up to 11 mm; anthers 5-8 mm, yellow (rarely purplish); pollen yellow. Styles straight; stigmas long-decurrent. Capsule up to 25 mm, ovoid-oblong. Flowering September to October (-November).{\i  Cultivated ground and open, stony habitats. From C. Albania to S.E. Greece. }Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. C. parnassicum} Sart., Orph. & Heldr. ex Boiss.,{\i  op. cit.}{\b  3}({\b 4}): 122 (1859). Like {\b 17} but tunics thinner, membranous; leaves up to 23 cm × 55 mm, not undulate at the margin, arcuate; flowers usually fewer and larger. •{\i  C. & S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. C. turcicum} Janka, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  23}: 242 (1873). Corm up to 3 × 2 cm, ovoid; tunic dark brown, coriaceous, with a long neck. Leaves 5-9, up to 15 cm × 6-25 mm, developing after anthesis, linear-lanceolate, obtuse to subacute, glaucous margins somewhat undulate, ciliate (sometimes obscurely so). Flowers 3-8; perianth-segments 30-40 × 4-13 mm, deep crimson-purple, occasionally paler, oblong to linear-elliptical, obtuse to subacute. Filaments up to 15 mm; anthers 4-7 mm, yellow (occasionally purplish); pollen yellow. Styles straight, slightly curved at apex; stigmas long-decurrent. Capsule 20-30 mm oblong. Flowering August to October.{\i  Meadows. E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. drenowskii} Degen & Rech. fil. ex Kitanov, {\i Bull. Inst. Bot.} ({\i Sofia}) {\b 1}: 378 (1950), is apparently based on flowers and foliage from different species growing together in C. Bulgaria. It is compared with {\b 19} and {\b 14} by Kitanov.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. C. callicymbium} Stearn & Stefanov,{\i  Jour. Bot}. ({\i London}){\b  72}: 343 (1934). Corm 3-4 × 3-3·5 cm, subglobose; tunic dark brown, subeoriaceous, with a long neck. Leaves 3-5, 25-40 cm × 10-50 mm, developing after anthesis, linear or narrowly linear. Flowers 2-4; perianth-segments up to 35 × 8-13 mm, purplish-lilac, slightly darker at base, oblanceolate to narrowly elliptical, obtuse. Filaments up to 12 mm; anthers 4·5-6 mm, black; pollen yellow. Styles straight, curved at the apex; stigmas long decurrent. Capsule 20-30 mm, narrowly ovoid. Flowering September. •{\i  S.W. Bulgaria.} Bu ?Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Described from garden-grown specimens originating from S.W. Bulgaria and possibly also from E. Greece; it has never been seen in the wild.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. C. macrophyllum} B. L. Burtt,{\i  Kew Bull.}{\b  5}: 433 (1951). Corm 5-6 × 4-5 cm; tunic dark brown, coriaceous, with a long neck. Leaves 3-4, up to 35 cm × 140 mm, developing after anthesis, strongly plicate, ovate to elliptic-ovate, acute to acuminate, glabrous. Flowers 1-4, infundibuliform; perianth-segments up to 45 × 22 mm, tessellated, lilac-purple, often paler or white at the base, oblong-elliptical, acute. Filaments up to 20 mm; anthers 8-10 mm, purple; pollen green. Styles shortly curved at apex; stigmas decurrent. Capsule up to 50 mm, ovoid. Flowering September to October.{\i  Kriti.} Cr. ({\i Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. C. variegatum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 342 (1753). Corm 2-2·5 × 2 cm, ovoid; tunic dark brown, coriaceous, with a long neck. Leaves 3-4, 10-15 cm × 7-18 mm, developing after anthesis, patent, linear-lanceolate, obtuse or subacute, glabrous; margin cartilaginous, undulate. Flowers 1-3; perianth-segments 45-70 × 8-15 mm, strongly tessellated, deep red or violet-purple, sometimes paler or white at the base, lanceolate-elliptical, acute. Filaments 20-35 mm; anthers 6-8 mm, purplish-black; pollen yellow. Styles curved at the apex; stigmas decurrent. Capsule c. 20 mm, oblong. Flowering September to December.{\i  S. Greece.} Gr. ({\i Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. agrippinum} hort. ex Baker, {\i Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot}.) {\b 17}: 425 (1879), is possibly a hybrid between {\b 22} and {\b 14} stated to be naturalized in some places in Britain. It resembles {\b 22}, but is distinguished by its upright leaves with only slightly undulate margins, subobtuse narrower-based perianth-segments and less pronounced tessellation
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. C. bivonae} Guss.,{\i  Cat. Pl. Boccad.} 72 (1821) (incl. {\i C. visianii} Parl., {\i C. latifolium} Sibth. & Sm.). Corm 2·5-5 × 2·5-4 cm, ovoid; tunic dark brown, coriaceous or subcoriaceous, with a long neck. Leaves (4-)5-9, up to 25 cm × 8-13 mm, developing after anthesis, linear-lanceolate to broadly lanceolate, subacute to obtuse, glabrous. Flowers 1-6; perianth-segments (40-)55-65 × 8-20 mm, strongly tessellated, pale to deep pinkish-purple, sometimes white at the base, oblong to broadly elliptical, obtuse to acute. Filaments 10-30 mm; anthers (5-)7-8(-11) mm, purplish-black or -brown; pollen yellow. Styles curved at the apex; stigmas long-decurrent. Capsule c. 40 mm, oblong. Flowering August to October (-November). 2n = 36, 54, 90.{\i  C. Mediterranean region and S. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par
24}
\par