{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Hybrids with {\b 1} occur frequently in the Baltic region.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Most plants of this species from Portugal are less robust than typical {\i A. arundinaceus} and have previously been referred to {\b A. brachystachyus} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3}: 56 (1819). Plants with larger spikelets have been called {\b A. lasiostachyus} Link, {\i Hort. Berol.}{\b  1}: 71 (1827), but there seems to be no clear distinction between these and {\b 2}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. geniculatus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 60 (1753). Perennial; stems 10-45 cm, decumbent, rooting at nodes. Leaves 4-8 mm wide; sheaths scarcely inflated; ligule 2-5 mm, obtuse. Inflorescence 2-6·5 × 0·4-0·5 cm, narrowly cylindrical. Spikelets 2-3·5 mm. Glumes obtuse, parallel and hyaline at apex, connate only at base, hairy on keel and veins. Lemma truncate; margins free; awn exserted. Anthers 3-4 times as long as wide, brown at maturity. 2n = 28.{\i  Marshes and damp meadows. Most of Europe, but rare in the extreme south.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Si Su ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A}. × {\b brachystylus} Peterm., {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 27}: 230 (1844) ({\i A}. × {\i hybridus} Wimmer), a hybrid between {\b 1} and {\b 3}, has been recorded widely in N.W. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. aequalis} Sobol., {\i Fl. Petrop.} 16 (1799) ({\i A. fulvus} Sm.). Like {\b 3} but annual or short-lived perennial; spikelets 1·5-3 mm; margins of glumes with narrow hyaline band; lemma obtuse, the margins connate for 1/3 to 1/2 their length; awn not or only slightly exserted; anthers twice as long as wide, orange at maturity. 2n = 14.{\i  Most of Europe, but absent from most of the islands}. Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. bulbosus} Gouan, {\i Hort. Monsp.} 37 (1762). Like {\b 3} but caespitose; stems erect, bulbous at base, not rooting at nodes; glumes acute; anthers not more than 3 times as long as wide. 2n = 14.{\i  Salt-marshes. Coasts of W. & S. Europe, eastwards to N.W. Jugoslavia}. Be Br Co Ga Ge Ho Hs It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. himalaicus} Hooker fil.,{\i  Fl. Brit. Ind.}{\b  7}: 238 (1896) ({\i A. brachystachyus} auct. bulg., non Bieb.). Perennial; stems 30-80 cm, erect from short rhizomes. Leaves 3-6 mm wide; upper sheath distinctly inflated; ligule 2-3 mm, obtuse. Inflorescence 1·5-3·2 × 0·8-1·2 cm, ovoid-cylindrical, dense. Spikelets 3-5 mm; glumes densely covered with white hairs up to 3 mm long at apex of keel, contracted into long, slightly divergent apices, connate only at extreme base. Lemma broadly acute, shorter than glumes, margins connate for 1/3 to 1/2 their length; awn exserted by 5-8 mm. Anthers 3 times as long as wide.{\i  Mountains of Bulgaria.} Bu. ({\i Himalaya and S.C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. alpinus} Sm. in Sowerby,{\i  Engl. Bot.}{\b  16}: t. 1126 (1803). Perennial; stems 10-60 cm, laxly caespitose. Leaves 2·5-7 mm wide; sheaths scarcely inflated; ligule 1-2 mm, truncate. Inflorescence 1-3 × 0·8-1·4 cm, ovoid or broadly cylindrical, conspicuously hairy. Spikelets 3-5 mm. Glumes broadly acute, more or less parallel at apex, covered with greyish hairs especially on keel, connate at base only. Lemma obtuse; margins connate at extreme base; awn exserted or included, sometimes absent. Anthers 3-4 times as long as wide.{\i  Svalbard, arctic Russia and Ural; Scotland and N. England.} Br Rs (N, C) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alpinus}: stems up to 40 cm but often shorter Leaves green. Inflorescence usually ovoid; awn included or exserted by up to 1 mm. 2n = 100, 117, c. 120.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except S. Ural}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b glaucus} (Less.) Hultén, {\i Ark. Bot.} ser. 2,{\b  7}: 10 (1968) ({\i A. glaucus} Less.): Stems 20-60 cm. Leaves glaucous-green. Inflorescence usually broadly cylindrical; awn exserted by more than 2 mm.{\i  S. Ural}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. utriculatus} Solander in A. Russell,{\i  Nat. Hist. Aleppo} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 243 (1794) ({\i A. anthoxanthoides} Boiss.). Annual; stems 10-40 cm, erect, slender. Leaves 2-4 mm wide; upper sheaths distinctly inflated; ligule 3-4 mm, broadly acute. Inflorescence 1·5-2·8 × 0·5-1 cm, ovate to broadly cylindrical, lax. Spikelets 4-7 mm, in groups of 3-4 per branchlet. Glumes acute, connate for 1/3 their length, parallel or converging at apex; keel and veins sparsely hairy above. Lemma acute, equalling or shorter than glumes; margins connate for 1/3 their length; awn exserted by up to twice the length of the spikelet.{\i  Kikladhes} ({\i Siros}). Gr. ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. setarioides} Gren.,{\i  Fl. Massil. Adv.} 43 (1857). Like {\b 8} but spikelets 3-4 mm, solitary on branchlets.{\i  Macedonia and Thrace}. Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. PSEUDOPHALARIS Tzvelev. Annual. Inflorescence narrowly cylindrical; glumes glabrous, connate for more than 1/3 their length; keel winged; palea absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. myosuroides} Hudson, {\i Fl. Angl.} 23 (1 762) ({\i A. agrestis} L.). Stems 20-85 cm, several, erect. Leaves 2-9 mm wide; upper sheaths somewhat inflated; ligule 2-5 mm, obtuse. Inflorescence 2·5-10(-12) × 0·4-0·7 cm, tapering towards apex. Spikelets 4·5-7·5 mm. Glumes acute, convergent at apex, connate for 1/3 to 1/2 their length. Lemma acute, margins connate for 1/3-1/2 their length; awn exserted. Anthers 4-5 times as long as wide. 2n = 14.{\i  Cultivated or disturbed ground. S.& W. Europe; widely naturalized elsewhere as a weed of cultivation, but only casual in the north-east and extreme north.} Al Be Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Ho Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K, E) Si Tu [Au Cz Da *Ge He Hu No Po Rs (B, C, W) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. creticus} Trin. in Sprengel,{\i  Neue Entdeck.}{\b  2}: 45 (1820). Like {\b 10} but not more than 30 cm; leaves 1·5-3 mm wide; inflorescence 1-2·5 cm; spikelets 3-4·5 mm; glumes obtuse, divergent and mucronate at apex, connate for 1/2 to 1/3 their length; lemma truncate. 2n = 14.{\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula, Kriti.} Bu Cr Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b A. thracicus} Penev & Kozuharov,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  28}: 187 (1968), described from S.E. Bulgaria, is taller than typical {\i A. creticus} but does not seem to warrant specific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. TOZZEITIA (Savi) Endl. Annual. Inflorescence ovoid; glumes abruptly narrowed in the upper half; palea absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. rendlei} Eig, {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}){\b  75}: 187 (1937) ({\i A. utriculatus} auct., non Solander). Stems 10-40 cm. Upper leaf-sheaths strongly inflated. Inflorescence 1-2·3 × 0·5-0·9 cm. Spikelets 5-7 mm. Glumes acute, slightly divergent at apex, with stiff hairs only in the lower half, connate for 1/4 to 1/3 their length; awn exserted. 2n = 14.{\i  Wet meadows, roadsides and waste places. S. & W. Europe, northwards to Belgium}. Al *Be Bu Cr Ga Ge Gr *He Hs It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. COLOBACHNE (Beauv.) Trin. Perennial. Lamina of uppermost leaf short or absent. Inflorescence ovoid; glumes gradually narrowed into long points; palea present.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. A. gerardii} Vill. in L., {\i Syst. Pl. Eur.}{\b  1}, {\i Fl. Delph.} 5 (1786). Stems 12-40 cm, erect from a very stout rhizome. Leaves flat, the upper with inflated sheath and short lamina; ligule 1-2 mm, truncate. Inflorescence 0·9-1·9 × 0·7-1·1 cm. Spikelets 4·5-8·5
\par

\par
242}
\par