{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 to 2·5 mm wide, scabrid on both surfaces; ligule 6-9 mm, acute; lower sheaths nearly always black when dead. Panicle up to 20 cm; branches 1-2 at each node, patent at anthesis, with spikelets in the distal ¼-½; pedicels mostly shorter than the spikelets. Spikelets 6-8 mm. Glumes ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma 3·5-4 mm, lanceolate, glabrous; awn c. 3 mm. Anthers c. 3 mm. {\i Dry, stony places. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Bl ?Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It ?Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. holciforme} (Bieb.) Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 328 (1817) ({\i Oryzopsis holciformis} (Bieb.) Hackel). Stems up to 100 cm, erect. Leaves up to 9 mm wide, smooth; ligule up to 10 mm, acute. Panicle up to 30 cm; branches 1-4 at each node, erecto-patent, with spikelets in the distal quarter only; pedicels much longer than the spikelets. Spikelets 8-9 mm. Glumes lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma c. 5 mm, oblong-lanceolate, hairy; awn c. 10 mm. Anthers c. 5 mm.{\i  Dry grassland and rocky hillsides. S.E. Europe.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 105.         Stipa}        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.O. Martinovsky. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Caespitose perennials, rarely annuals. Leaves usually plicate or convolute, at least when dry, with prominent ribs on the adaxial surface. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets somewhat compressed laterally, with 1 floret. Glumes usually subequal, hyaline or membranous, much longer than the lemma, 1- to 3-veined. Lemma usually coriaceous, convolute, terete, entire or shortly 2-fid at apex, hairy, awned from apex or sinus; hairs usually confined to the veins and margins, those of the overlapping margins forming a single line (the{\i  ventral line}). Callus bearded, usually long and pungent; awn usually with a thick, twisted lower part ({\i column}) and a thinner, straight upper part ({\i seta}), glabrous or hairy, usually 2-geniculate. Palea hyaline, 2-veined, usually enclosed by the lemma. Rhachilla not prolonged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All species occur in dry, more or less open habitats.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In the following descriptions the plant is perennial, the glumes subequal, and the lemma coriaceous, entire at the apex and with a 2-geniculate awn, unless the contrary is stated.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Several other species, mainly from South America and Australia, occur from time to time, particularly in the Mediterranean region. The two commonest of these are {\b S. hyalina} Nees, {\i Agrost. Brasil. }378 (1829), and{\b  S. neesiana} Trin. & Rupr., {\i Mém. Acad. Sci. Pétersb.} ser. 6, {\b 7}({\b 2}): 27 (1843), both from South America. They have a small membranous corona below the insertion of the awn; the former has a callus shorter than or as long as the width of the lemma and the latter a callus much longer than the width of the lemma.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: M. Cynowa-Gieldon,{\i  Rozpr. Uniw. Mik. Kopernika} ({\i Torun}) 1-99 (1975). J. O. Martinovsky, {\i Webbia}{\b  20}: 711-736 (1965); {\i Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  27}: 55-84 (1970); {\i Preslia}{\b  44}: 7-23 (1972);{\b  47}: 249-261 (1975). H. Scholz, {\i Willdenovia}{\b  4}: 299-315 (1958). P. A. Smirnov, {\i Acta Horti Petrop.}{\b  4}({\b 2}): 98-118 (1928); {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  36}: 264-271 (1929);{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  45}: 104-118 (1936). N. N. Tzvelev, {\i Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  11}: 4-21 (1974).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lemma 2 mm, obovate ........................................................... {\b 42. trichotoma}
\par
1 Lemma at least 4 mm, lanceolate
\par
2 Seta glabrous or with hairs not more than 1 mm
\par
3 Awn not geniculate; callus very small, obtuse ....................... {\b 41. bromoides}
\par
3 Awn geniculate; callus well-developed, acute
\par
4 Lemma membranous, deeply 2-fid
\par
5 Panicle compact; column hairy ............................................ {\b 39. tenacissima}
\par
5 Panicle very lax; column glabrous ............................................ {\b 40. gigantea}
\par
4 Lemma coriaceous, entire, or very shortly 2-fid
\par
6 Awn glabrous to the naked eye
\par
7 Abaxial leaf-surface glabrous, the adaxial hairy;
\par
  sheaths of lower cauline leaves distinctly longer than
\par
  the internodes .............................................................................. {\b 31. capillata}
\par
7 Abaxial leaf-surface setulose, the adaxial glabrous;
\par
  sheaths of lower cauline leaves shorter than the internodes ..... {\b 32. sareptana}
\par
6 Awn shortly hairy to the naked eye
\par
8 Glumes unequal, the lower 12-15 mm, the upper 7-10 mm .... {\b 38. parviflora}
\par
8 Glumes ± equal
\par
9 Ligule of basal leaves at least 3·5 mm, acute; mature 
\par
  lemma brownish ............................................................................ {\b 36. offneri}
\par
9 Ligule of basal leaves not more than 1 mm, truncate;
\par
  mature lemma stramineous
\par
10 Lemma 5-9 mm; awn 6-12 cm
\par
11 Column with hairs c. 0·8 mm; seta scabrid .............................. {\b 27. capensis}
\par
11 Awn hairy throughout, the column with shorter hairs 
\par
   than the seta .......................................................................... {\b 37. korshinskyi}
\par
10 Lemma 14-17 mm; awn 18-25 cm
\par
12 Hairs on seta shorter than those on column; column hairy
\par
   nearly all round; anthers with a tuft of hairs at apex ............... {\b 33. fontanesii}
\par
12 Hairs on seta longer than those on column; column 
\par
   hairy only on the angles; anthers glabrous 
\par
13 Sheaths shortly and densely hairy; leaf ± orbicular in section  {\b 34. lagascae} 
\par
13 Sheaths glabrous; leaf ± elliptical in section ..................... {\b 35. celakovskyi}
\par
2  Seta with hairs 2-7 mm
\par
14 Column densely and uniformly hairy
\par
15 Leaves glabrous on both surfaces; awn at least 20 cm,
\par
   with hairs at least 4 mm
\par
16 Ventral line of hairs reaching base of awn ................... {\b 10. syreistschikovii}
\par
16 Ventral line of hairs ending well below base of awn ({\b 20-24}). {\b joannis} group
\par
15 Leaves hairy, at least on the adaxial surface; awn 
\par
   less than 20 cm, with hairs at most 2 mm
\par
17 Awn not more than 5 cm; seta with much longer hairs 
\par
   near base than near apex ........................................................... {\b 30. orientalis}
\par
17 Awn at least 8 cm; seta with hairs the same length throughout
\par
18 Ligule up to 1·2(-3) mm; lemma usually c. 12 mm;
\par
   awn (13-)13·5-19 cm .................................................................... {\b 28. barbata}
\par
18 Ligule (0·3-)2-5 mm; lemma usually c. 10 mm; awn 
\par
   (11·5-)13-15(-16·5) cm ................................................................ {\b 29. arabica}
\par
14 Column glabrous or with scattered soft hairs
\par
19 Lemma with hairs not in distinct lines ................................. {\b 26. lessingiana}
\par
19 Lemma with (5)7 lines of hairs at least in lower part
\par
20 Leaf with a setaceous apex ............................................................. {\b 25. tirsa}
\par
20 Leaf with an obtuse or acute apex
\par
21 Abaxial leaf-surface hairy
\par
22 Lower part of basal and lower cauline leaves with 
\par
   dense hairs 0·15-0·3 mm on both surfaces; sides of 
\par
   ribs on adaxial leaf-surfaces with numerous, regularly
\par
   arranged hairs c. 0·08 mm ............................................................ {\b 6. bavarica}
\par
22 Basal and lower cauline leaves with hairs 0·4-1·2 mm 
\par
   throughout their length; sides of ribs on adaxial leaf-
\par
   surface with at most sparse, irregularly arranged hairs
\par
   ............................................................................... ({\b 16-19}). {\b dasyphylla} group
\par
21 Abaxial leaf-surface glabrous
\par
23 Dorsal line of hairs always conspicuously exceeding 
\par
   the neighbouring subdorsal lines; ventral line of hairs
\par
   usually ending 3-4 mm below the insertion of the awn
\par
   ..................................................................................... ({\b 20-24}).{\b  joannis} group
\par
23 Dorsal line of hairs absent or shorter than (rarely 
\par
   slightly exceeding) the neighbouring subdorsal lines;
\par
   ventral line of hairs reaching the insertion of the 
\par
   awn, rarely ending 1(-2) mm below it
\par

\par
247}
\par