{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 11 Panicle-branches almost completely adnate to the rhachis ........ {\b 1. pratense}
\par
11 Panicle-branches free
\par
12 Glumes with glabrous, scabrid or shortly ciliate keel .............. {\b 4. phleoides}
\par
12 Glumes with long-ciliate keel ................................................. {\b 5. montanum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. PHLEUM. Panicle-branches almost completely adnate to the rhachis. Rhachilla not prolonged. Glumes not winged on the keel. Lemma 3- to 7-veined. Stamens 3. Grain ovoid-oblong, terete.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. pratense} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 59 (1753). Laxly or densely caespitose perennial 6-150 cm; stems with 1-6 nodes; lower nodes sometimes swollen and tuberous. Leaves up to 45 cm × 10 mm, acuminate, scabrid on both surfaces or at least towards the apex and margins; ligule 1-6 mm; sheath slightly inflated above. Panicle (1-)2-11(-30) × 0·4-1·2 cm, cylindrical, green, often tinged with purple. Spikelets 2-5·5 mm, oblong. Glumes truncate, ciliate on the keel; awn 0·2-2 mm; lower glume softly hairy on the margin. Lemma 2/3-3/4 as long as glumes, minutely hairy. Palea as long as the lemma.{\i  Grassland; commonly cultivated as a fodder plant and widely naturalized.} All except Bl Cr Sb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pratense}: Stems 20-150 cm. Ligule obtuse. Panicle 6-11(-30) cm × 0·6-0·8 cm. Awn 1-2 mm. 2n = 42 (21, 35, 36, 49, 56, 63, 70, 84).{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b bertolonii} (DC.) Bornm.,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  61}, {\i Beibl.}{\b  140}: 157 (1928): Stems 6-70(-100) cm. Ligule acute. Panicle 1-8 (-10) × 0·3-0·5 cm. Awn 0·2-1·2 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, but rare in the north}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. alpinum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 59 (1753). Laxly caespitose perennial 5-50 cm, sometimes shortly rhizomatous; stems with 2-4 nodes. Leaves up to 17 cm × 8 mm, acute, the upper very short; ligule up to 2 mm; leaf-sheaths somewhat inflated above. Panicle 1-5(-6) × (0·3-)0·7-1·5 cm, broadly cylindrical to ovoid, usually purplish. Spikelets 5·5-8·5 mm, oblong. Glumes truncate, ciliate on the keel and scabrid at the margin; awn (1-)1·5-4 mm, glabrous or ciliate; lower glume softly hairy on the margin. Lemma c. 2/3 as long as glumes, minutely hairy on the veins. Palea slightly shorter than lemma.{\i  Mountains of Europe, and at low altitudes in the north.} Al Au Br Bu Co Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alpinum} ({\i P. commutatum} Gaudin, {\i P. alpinum} subsp. {\i commutatum} (Gaudin) K. Richter): Awn scabrid. 2n = 28.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b rhaeticum} Humphries, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 339 (1978): Awn ciliate. 2n = 14. •{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. echinatum} Host, {\i Gram. Austr. }{\b 3}: 8 (1805). Laxly caespitose annual 4-35(-45) cm; stems with 1-4 nodes. Leaves up to 14 cm × 7 mm, acuminate; ligule up to 2 mm. Panicle 0·4-3·5 × 0·6-1·6 cm, shortly cylindrical or ovoid, pale or whitish-green. Spikelets 4-10·5 mm (including awn), oblong. Glumes truncate, ciliate on the keel awn 2·5-7 mm; lower glume softly hairy on the margin. Lemma 2/3 as long as glumes, glabrous or minutely hairy on the veins. Palea slightly shorter than lemma. 2n = 10.{\i  Calcicole. Mediterranean region, westwards to Sicilia.} Al ?Cr Gr It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CHILOCHLOA. (Beauv.) Griseb. Panicle-branches free. Rhachilla prolonged. Glumes not winged on the keel. Lemma 3- to 7-veined. Stamens 3. Grain ovoid-oblong, terete. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. phleoides} (L.) Karsten,{\i  Deutsche Fl.} 374 (1881) ({\i P. boehmeri} Wibel, {\i P. phalaroides} Koeler). Densely caespitose perennial 6-90 cm; stems with 2-3 nodes, often purple. Leaves up to 20 cm × 6 mm, sometimes convolute, scabrid, acuminate; ligule up to 2 mm. Panicle 3-14(-17) × 0·4-1 cm, narrowly cylindrical, tapered towards the apex, green or purplish. Spikelets 2-3·7 mm, oblong-lanceolate. Glumes abruptly narrowed into a very short awn, with glabrous, scabrid or somewhat irregularly ciliate keel. Lemma 2/3-3/4 as long as glumes, minutely pubescent or glabrous. Palea as long as lemma. 2n = 14,28+1-5B.{\i  Dry grassland; somewhat calcicole. Most of Europe except the north-east, much of Fennoscandia and the extreme south.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Su.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. montanum} C. Koch,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  21}: 383 (1848). Like {\b 4} but the glumes gradually tapered to a very short awn and pectinate-ciliate on the keel.{\i  Dry mountain grassland. S.E. Europe, S. & E. Carpathians.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (W, K).   
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A very variable species, in need of further investigation, intermediate in most characters between {\b 4} and {\b 6}. Variants with the keel of the glumes shortly ciliate occurring in Greece, called{\b  P. serrulatum} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 4}): 125 (1859), are closely allied to {\b 4}. Plants from the Carpathians with narrow leaves, long spikelets and densely ciliate glumes approach variants of{\b  6} from S. Italy and Sicilia which have been referred to {\b 5} and have also been called{\b  P. ambiguum} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  2}: 377 (1820).  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. hirsutum} Honckeny, {\i Vollst. Syst. Verz.} 183 (1782) ({\i P. ambiguum} Ten., {\i P. michelii} All.). Laxly to densely caespitose perennial 20-90 cm, sometimes shortly rhizomatous; stems with 1-4 nodes. Leaves up to 21 cm × 2-8 mm, acuminate, scabrid on the margin and veins, sometimes glaucous; ligule up to 5 mm. Panicle 2-16 × 0·4-1·6 cm, broadly cylindrical, pale green to purple. Spikelets 3·5-6(-10) mm, lanceolate. Glumes gradually narrowed into a short awn, densely ciliate on the keel; lower glume softly hairy on the margin. Lemma 2/3-3/4 as long as glumes, glabrous to pubescent. Palea as long as the lemma. 2n = 14.{\i  Grassland, open woods and stony slopes, usually above }1000 {\i m; calcicole. Mountains of C. & S. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He It Ju Po Rm Rs (W) Si.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. paniculatum} Hudson, {\i Fl. Angl.} 23 (1762) ({\i P. asperum} Jacq.). Annual 5-30(-55) cm; stems erect, with 1-6 nodes. Leaves up to 19 cm × 7 mm, obtuse, shortly hairy on the margin; ligule up to 7 mm. Leaf-sheaths slightly inflated; panicle 1-12 × 0·35-0·7 cm, pale green. Spikelets 1·5-2·8 mm, oblanceolate. Glumes truncate, swollen at apex, narrowed at base, scabrid, sometimes slightly ciliate on the keel; lower glume softly hairy on the margin; awn 0·3-0·6 mm. Lemma 2/3 as long as glumes, pubescent. Palea slightly shorter than lemma. 2n = 28.{\i  Dry places. S. & S.C. Europe.} Al Au Bu Co ?Cr Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm ?Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. P. arenarium} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 60 (1753). Annual. 2-35 cm. Stems with 1-4 nodes. Leaves up to 7 cm × 5 mm, acute, scabrid on the veins; ligule up to 7 mm; leaf-sheaths inflated above. Panicle 0·5-5·5 × 0·3-0·7 cm, narrowly cylindrical to ovoid, tapering at the base, pale to whitish-green, sometimes tinged with purple. Spikelets 2·2-4·4 mm, oblong-lanceolate. Glumes gradually narrowed into a short awn, ciliate on the keel; awn 0·3-1 mm. Lemma 1/3 as long as glumes, glabrous or pubescent. Anthers 0·3-1 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Maritime sands and shingle; rarely on sandy soil inland. S. & W. Europe, extending north-eastwards to Gotland; casual in E. & C. Europe.} Be Br Co Da Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs It Ju Lu No Rs (?K) Si Su Tu. 
\par

\par
240}
\par