{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr11\min26}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr11\min27}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords971}{\nofchars5540}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 the second c. 1 mm, the upper 3 mm; anthers c. 1 mm. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  Dry, open habitats. Mediterranean region and W. Europe, northwards to N.W. France.}{\fs28  ?Al Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Rs (K)].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. P. brachystachys}{\fs28  Link in Schrader, }{\i\fs28 Neues Jour. Bot.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 ): 134 (1806). Like }{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28  but sterile lemmas c. 0\'b775 mm, the lowest with long hairs on the margin, the second glabrous. 2n = 12.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated fields and roadsides. Mediterranean region and S.W. Europe.}{\fs28  Al Az Bl Co ?Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 7. P. paradoxa}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  ed. 2, 1665 (1763). Annual. Stems 25-65(-85) cm, usually branched at the base, smooth. Leaves up to 15 cm \'d7 7 mm, long-acute; sheaths smooth or slightly scabrid, the upper inflated; ligule 3-4 mm. Panicle 3-6(-9) cm, widest near the apex. Pedicels (2-)3-4(-5) mm, hairy. Spikelets in groups of 5-7, the central one hermaphrodite and sessile, the rest male or abortive, pedicellate, each group falling entire. Fertile spikelets 6-8 mm; glumes scabrid, with a spinose apex 1-3\'b75 mm and a wing 0\'b72-0\'b75 mm wide at the widest part, projecting from the middle of the keel, with 1 prominent tooth near its apex. Sterile lemmas c. 0\'b73 mm; upper lemma c. 3 mm, with sparse long hairs. Anthers c. 2 mm. 2n = 14.}{\i\fs28  Roadsides and cultivated ground. Mediterranean region and S.W. Europe.}{\fs28  Al Bl Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 8. P. coerulescens}{\fs28  Desf.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Atl.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 56 (1798). Like }{\b\fs28 7}{\fs28  but perennial, with tuberous stem-bases; stems 70-120 cm; ligule 4 6 mm; panicle (3-)6-12 cm; pedicels 4-7 mm, glabrous; glumes of fertile spikelets smooth, with a mucro 0\'b73-0\'b77(-1) mm, the wing 0\'b75-1 mm wide at the widest part, with several small irregular teeth near the apex. 2n = 14, 42.}{\i\fs28  Roadsides and cultivated ground. Mediterranean region, Portugal.}{\fs28  Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  Tribe       }{\b\fs28 Coleantheae}{\fs28      Ascherson & Graebner
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Leaves linear, flat; sheaths closed at base; silica-bodies absent; 2-celled micro-hairs absent; ligule membranous. Spikelets in small, dense fascicles or whorls on axis and branches of small panicles, somewhat compressed laterally, with 1 floret, continuous with the pedicels. Glumes absent. Lemma caudate- or aristate-acuminate, membranous, 1-veined. Palea 2-keeled, shorter than lemma. Stamens 2. Lodicules absent. Styles 2, very long. Grain exposed between the gaping lemma and palea, terete; pericarp membranous; hilum punctiform. Basic chromosome number 7.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 100.        Coleanthus}{\fs28      Seidl
\par }{\fs24  By \'86T.G. Tutin. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat. Inflorescence of remote clusters of spikelets. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 1 floret. Glumes absent. Lemma membranous, 1-veined. Palea membranous, 2-keeled, shorter than lemma. Stamens 2. Lodicules absent.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. C. subtilis}{\fs28  (Tratt.) Seidl in Roemer & Schultes,}{\i\fs28  Syst. Veg.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 276 (1817). Stems 2-8(-10) cm, filiform, procumbent. Leaves c. 1 mm wide, linear, usually recurved; sheaths strongly inflated, the uppermost enclosing the base of the inflorescence at anthesis; ligule c. 1 mm, ovate. Spikelets 0\'b775-1 mm, in clusters of 10-20 (-40); pedicels hairy. Lemma ovate, acuminate, awned, ciliate on keel. }{\i\fs28 Damp mud at margins of ponds and reservoirs. Scattered localities in N. & C. Europe.}{\fs28  Au Cz Ga Ge \'86It \'86No \'86Rs (C).
\par 
\par  A rare grass of wide distribution but very sporadic occurrence.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  Tribe       }{\b\fs28 Scolochloeae}{\fs28        Tzvelev
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Leaves linear; silica-bodies rectangular, with sinuate longitudinal walls; 2-celled micro-hairs absent; ligule membranous. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets hermaphrodite, laterally compressed, with (2-)3-4(-5) florets; callus bearded. Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes and between the florets. Glumes shorter than the spikelets. Lemma somewhat coriaceous, lacerate at apex, rounded on the back, sometimes mucronate, very rarely shortly awned, 7-veined. Palea 2-keeled. Lodicules 2, entire or with a lateral tooth. Stamens 3. Ovary densely hairy at apex. Grain densely hairy at apex, with linear hilum 2/3 as long as grain; embryo nearly 1/3 as long as grain; starch-grains compound. Chromosomes large; basic number 7.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 101.        Scolochloa}{\fs28         Link       
\par }{\fs24  By \'86T.G. Tutin. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennials. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a lax panicle. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 3-4 florets. Glumes somewhat unequal, shorter than the spikelets, the lower 3-veined, the upper 5-veined. Lemma 5- to 7-veined, dentate at apex, with 2 tufts of hairs at base. Palea about as long as lemma.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. S. festucacea}{\fs28  (Willd.) Link,}{\i\fs28  Hort. Berol.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 137 (1827) (}{\i\fs28 Graphephorum arundinaceum}{\fs28  (Fries) Ascherson). Robust, rhizomatous perennial; stems up to 200 cm, rooting at the lower nodes. Leaves up to 40 cm \'d7 12 mm, with scabrid margins; ligule up to 6 mm, truncate. Panicle up to 30 cm; branches erect before anthesis, later erecto-patent. Spikelets 9-11 mm. Lower glume 7-8 mm, the upper 8-10 mm. Anthers c. 3 mm. 2n = 28. }{\i\fs28 Lakes or slow-flowing rivers, rarely in wet meadows. N.E. Europe extending southwards to C. Ukraine and westwards to E. Germany.}{\fs28  Fe Ge Po Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  Tribe        }{\b\fs28  Milieae}{\fs28          Endl.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Leaves linear to narrowly lanceolate, flat; silica-bodies few or none; 2-celled micro-hairs absent; ligule membranous. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets all hermaphrodite, dorsally compressed, with 1 floret. Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes. Glumes longer than the floret. Lemma chartaceous or hyaline, becoming strongly indurate in fruit, unawned. Palea similar in texture to the lemma, becoming chartaceous, 2-keeled. Lodicules 2, acute, entire. Stamens 3. Ovary glabrous; styles 2. Grain with linear or oblong hilum up to 2/3 as long as grain; embryo small; starch-grains compound. Chromosomes large; basic number 2, 7, 9.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 102.          Milium}{\fs28           L.
\par }{\fs24  By \'86T.G. Tutin. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets slightly compressed dorsally, with 1 floret. Glumes equal, membranous, longer than the floret, 3-veined. Lemma 5-veined, coriaceous and shiny in fruit. Palea as long as the lemma, coriaceous.
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28  Perennial; panicle usually more than 10 cm, with patent 
\par   to deflexed branches; glumes almost smooth ................................ }{\b\fs28 1. effusum}{\fs28 
\par Annual; panicle usually less than 10 cm, with erect to 
\par   erecto-patent branches; glumes scabrid .......................................... }{\b\fs28 2. vernale}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. M. effusum}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  61 (1753). Shortly rhizomatous perennial. Stems 45-180 cm, smooth, with 3-5 nodes in the lower half. Leaves 10-30 cm \'d7 5-15 mm, glabrous; sheaths smooth; ligule 3-10 mm, obtuse. Panicle 10-40 cm; branches long, slender, smooth, patent or deflexed. Spikelets 3-4 mm. Glumes ovate to elliptic-ovate, acute, green or purplish. Anthers 2-3 mm. 2n = 14, 28. }{\i\fs28 Woods and scrub, usually on moist, base-rich}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 245}
\par }