{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. P. graecum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 13}): 42 (1853). Like {\b 8} but stems up to 45 cm; panicle 4-10(-15) cm, rounded at the base; glumes with more finely pointed awns diverging at the apex; awn 0·5-1·5 mm; anthers 1·5-2 mm.{\i  Dry, open habitats. S.E. Europe. }Bu ?Cr Gr It Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b graecum}: Spikelets 2·5-3·5 mm. Glumes densely ciliate on the keel, with the hairs about as long as the width of the glume.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b aegaeum} (Vierh.) W.Greuter,{\i  Boissiera}{\b  13}: 180 (1967) ({\i P. arenarium} subsp.{\i  aegaeum} Vierh.): Spikelets 2-2·5(-3) mm. Glumes sparsely ciliate on the keel, the hairs less than half as long as the width of the glume.{\i  Ionioi Nisoi, Kithira, Andikithira and Kikladhes}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. MAILLEA (Parl.) Horn af Rantzien. Panicle-branches free. Rhachilla prolonged. Glumes winged on the keel. Lemma 1-veined. Stamens 2. Grain ovoid-oblong, terete.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 10. P. crypsoides} (D'Urv.) Hackel,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  39}: 274 (1892). Annual 2-10 cm. Panicle 3-5 × 0·4-0·7 cm, ovoid, rounded at the base, pale or whitish-green. Spikelets 2-4·5 mm, oblong-lanceolate. Glumes abruptly contracted into a very short awn, with a winged, pectinate-ciliate keel. Lemma 1/3 as long as glumes, glabrous.{\i  Sandy places near the sea. C. & E. Mediterranean region.} Cr Gr Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b crypsoides}: Hairs on the keel 1/3 as long as the width of the glume.{\i  S. Aegean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sardoum} (Hackel) Horn af Rantzien,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1946}: 370 (1946): Hairs on the keel ½ as long as the width of the glume. • {\i Sardegna}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ACHNODON Griseb. Panicle-branches free. Rhachilla prolonged. Glumes not winged on the keel. Lemma 5- to 7-veined. Stamens 3. Grain laterally compressed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. P. subulatum} (Savi) Ascherson & Graebner,{\i  Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 154 (1899) ({\i P. tenue} (Host) Schrader). Annual 2-30(-40) cm. Stems with 1-6 nodes. Leaves 1·5-12 cm × 1-4 mm, acuminate, sometimes convolute, with scabrid veins; ligule up to 5 mm. Panicle 0·8-11 × 0·2-0·7 cm, pale or whitish-green. Spikelets 2-4 mm. Glumes semi-elliptical, gradually narrowed into a short awn. Lemma 2/3 as long as glumes.{\i  Grassland. S. Europe.} Al Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (K) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b subulatum}: Glumes glabrous on the keel. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ciliatum} (Boiss.) Humphries,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 339 (1978) ({\i P. tenue} var. {\i ciliatum} Boiss.): Glumes ciliate on the keel. {\i Jugoslavia, Greece and Kriti.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 94.     Alopecurus}    L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By G.C.S. Clarke. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Usually subglabrous annuals or perennials. Inflorescence a spike-like panicle. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 1 floret. Glumes subequal, often connate below, 3-veined. Lemma hyaline, 3-veined, usually awned from the back; margins often connate below. Palea usually absent or, if present, small. Ovary glabrous; styles usually connate below. Rhachilla disarticulating below the glumes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Hybrids may occur where two species, especially of Sect. {\i Alopecurus}, grow together. They are morphologically intermediate between the parents and appear to be sterile, maintaining themselves vegetatively.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature E. Paunero, {\i Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles }{\b 10}({\b 2}): 301-346 (1952). N. N. Tzvelev,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  8}:12-22 (1971).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Palea present
\par
2 Basal leaves flat; rhizome stout ................................................... {\b 13. gerardii}
\par
2 Basal leaves setaceous; rhizomes slender ................................ {\b 14. vaginatus}
\par
1 Palea absent
\par
3 Glumes glabrous; keel winged
\par
4 Glumes connate for not more than ½ their length ............. {\b 10. myosuroides}
\par
4 Glumes connate for more than ½ their length ........................... {\b 11. creticus}
\par
3 Glumes hairy; keel unwinged
\par
5 Margins of lemma free or connate only at base
\par
6 Inflorescence ovoid or broadly cylindrical, conspicuously hairy .. {\b 7. alpinus}
\par
6 Inflorescence narrowly cylindrical, not conspicuously hairy
\par
7 Glumes obtuse; stem not bulbous at base ................................ {\b 3. geniculatus}
\par
7 Glumes acute; stem bulbous at base ............................................ {\b 5. bulbosus}
\par
5 Margins of lemma connate for at least 1/3 of their length
\par
8 Glumes abruptly narrowed above the middle, with stiff
\par
  hairs in the lower half .................................................................... {\b 12. rendlei}
\par
8 Glumes not abruptly narrowed, with silky hairs throughout
\par
9 Glumes aristate, with dense hairs up to 3 mm ......................... {\b 6. himalaicus}
\par
9 Glumes not aristate, with hairs not more than 2 mm on 
\par
  keel and veins only
\par
10 Glumes obtuse; spikelets not more than 3(-3·5) mm ................. {\b 4. aequalis}
\par
10 Glumes acute; spikelets (3-)4 mm or more
\par
11 Slender annual; inflorescence lax
\par
12 Spikelets in groups of 3-4 per branchlet ................................. {\b 8. utriculatus}
\par
12 Spikelets solitary .................................................................... {\b 9. setarioides}
\par
11 Robust perennial; inflorescence dense
\par
13 Glumes parallel or convergent at apex; lemma acute ................ {\b 1. pratensis}
\par
13 Glumes divergent at apex; lemma obliquely truncate ........ {\b 2. arundinaceus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ALOPECURUS. Annual or perennial. Inflorescence cylindrical to ovoid; glumes with silky hairs usually on keel and veins only; palea absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. pratensis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 60 (1753). Perennial; stems 30-110 cm, erect, not rooting at nodes. Leaves 4-8 mm wide; sheaths scarcely inflated; ligule 1·5-2·5 mm, truncate. Inflorescence 1·8-9 × 0·7-1 cm, cylindrical to ovoid. Spikelets 4-6 mm. Glumes acute, connate for ¼ their length, parallel or convergent at apex; veins and keel with silky hairs. Lemma acute, usually longer than glumes, margins connate for 1/3 their length; awn exserted. Anthers c. 5 times as long as wide.{\i  Meadows and pastures. Most of Europe, but rare in the extreme north-east and south-west.} All except Bl Cr ?Gr Lu Sb; not native in Fa or Is.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pratensis}: Inflorescence 3-9 cm, cylindrical. Hairs on glumes less than 2 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b laguriformis} (Schur) Tzvelev in Fedorov, {\i Fl. Part. Eur. URSS}{\b  1}: 250 (1974): Inflorescence 1·5-4 cm, ovoid. Hairs on glumes 2-3 mm. •{\i  E. & S. Carpathians}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. arundinaceus} Poiret in Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  8}: 776 (1808) ({\i A. ventricosus} Pers.). Like {\b 1} but leaves up to 12 mm wide; sheaths rather inflated; ligule 2-5 mm; inflorescence 0·8-1·3 cm wide, broadly cylindrical; glumes diverging at apex; lemma usually shorter than glumes, obliquely truncate; awn rarely exserted. 2n = 28.{\i  Damp or saline grassland. E. Europe and Baltic region; Spain and Portugal; a few very isolated stations elsewhere. }Bu Da Fe Ga Ge ?Gr ?He Hs It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par
241}
\par