{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 mm. Glumes scarcely connate. Lemma truncate, with a fringe of hairs at apex and free margins; awn more or less included. 2n = 14.{\i  Alpine pastures. Mountains of S. Europe, from the S. Alps to the Pyrenees, S. Appennini and S. Greece.} Al Bu Ga Gr Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. vaginatus} (Willd.) Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  5}: 488 (1884). Like {\b 13} but without thickened rhizome; stems from a caespitose base; basal leaves setaceous, the upper with ligule and lamina reduced or absent; awn exserted up to 10 mm.{\i  Dry, stony slopes. Krym}. Rs (K). ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 95.        Cornucopiae}      L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a short dense panicle surrounded by an obconical, toothed involucre. Spikelets strongly compressed laterally, with 1 floret. Glumes equal, connate in lower 1/3, 3-veined. Lemma equalling the glumes, the margins connate in the lower 1/2-2/3, 5-veined, the median vein often forming a short, dorsal awn. Palea absent. Lodicules absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. cucullatum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 54 (1753). Stems up to 40 cm, usually less, numerous, erect. Leaves linear, acuminate, glabrous; sheaths inflated. Inflorescences c. 1 cm, numerous; peduncles long, stout, curved, retrorsely scabrid. Spikelets 6-7 mm. Glumes truncate, ciliate on keel in lower ½. Lemma truncate. {\i Ditches and other damp places. Kriti; Malta }({\i Gozo}); {\i W.C. Italy.} *Cr *It *Si. ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  European records are all relatively recent, and it is possible that the plant is only casual in Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe       {\b Hainardieae}
\par
W. Greuter
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves linear; silica-bodies orbicular, oblong or elliptical; 2-celled micro-hairs absent; ligule membranous. Inflorescence a slender, cylindrical spike. Spikelets with 1(-2) florets, all hermaphrodite, sessile, alternate, sunk in cavities in the rhachis. Glumes 2, inserted laterally or 1 (except in the terminal spikelet), longer than the lemma, strongly veined, appressed to and completely covering the cavity, except at anthesis, flat, rounded or with an asymmetrical keel on the back. Lemma hyaline, 1- to 3-veined, unawned. Palea 2-veined. Lodicules 2, lanceolate, entire. Stamens 3. Ovary usually with a glabrous apical appendage; styles 2, short. Grain with a linear to elliptical, basal hilum. Starch-grains compound. Chromosomes large; basic number 7, 13, 19.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 96.        Pholiurus}      Trin.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat; ligule membranous. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 2 florets, falling entire at maturity. Glumes 2, equal, strongly veined, coriaceous. Lemma with its side towards the rhachis, membranous, 3-veined, the lateral veins extending to the apex. Rhachis not disarticulating at maturity.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. pannonicus} (Host) Trin.,{\i  Fund. Agrost. }132 (1820) ({\i Lepturus pannonicus} (Host) Kunth). Stems 5-15(-20) cm, geniculate and branching at the base, smooth and glabrous. Leaves up to c. 5 cm × 2 mm, scabrid; ligule 3-4 mm, acute. Spike 5-9 cm, straight or slightly curved. Spikelets 4-5 mm, about as long as the internodes. Glumes ovate, obtuse, with membranous margin and apex. 2n = 14.{\i  Damp, saline or gypsaceous soils. S.E. & E.C. Europe.} Au Bu Cz ?Gr Hs Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par
 A record from N.W. Spain requires confirmation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 97.     Parapholis}      C.E. Hubbard 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat or convolute when dry; ligule membranous. Spikelets sunk in cavities in the rhachis, with 1 floret. Glumes 2, inserted side by side and covering the cavity except at anthesis, strongly veined, coriaceous. Lemma membranous, with its side towards the rhachis, 3-veined, the lateral veins very short. Rhachis disarticulating at maturity below each spikelet.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The glumes are abruptly inflexed near their outer margin, giving them an asymmetrical keel; this is winged in {\b 2} and {\b 3}, the wing forming the apparent margin of the glume and concealing the infolded true margin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Literature: H. Runemark,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  115}: 1-17 (1962).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Keel of glumes distinctly winged
\par
2 Anthers less than 1 mm; plant usually c. 10 cm, stout,
\par
  with clustered spikes ................................................................... {\b 2. marginata}
\par
2 Anthers at least 2 mm; plant usually more than 10 cm,
\par
  slender, with solitary spikes ........................................................ {\b 3. filiformis}
\par
1 Keel of glumes not winged
\par
3 Anthers less than 1 mm; spikes often strongly curved .................. {\b 1. incurva}
\par
3 Anthers at least 2 mm; spikes straight or slightly curved
\par
4 Anthers not more than 2·5 mm; glumes 4-6 mm, not more
\par
  than 1½ times as long as internode ................................................ {\b 4. strigosa}
\par
4 Anthers at least 3·2 mm; glumes 6-9 mm, usually more 
\par
  than 1½ times as long as internode ............................................. {\b 5. pycnantha}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. incurva} (L.) C. E. Hubbard,{\i  Blumea, Suppl.}{\b  3}: 14 (1946) ({\i Pholiurus incurvatus} A. S. Hitchc.,{\i  P. incurvus} (L.) Schinz & Thell., {\i Lepturus incurvatus} Trin.). Stems 2-25 cm, erect or decumbent, smooth and glabrous. Leaves up to 3(-8) cm × 1-2 mm, scabrid above; ligule up to 1 mm; uppermost sheath inflated. Spikes 1-10 cm, with 10-20 spikelets, usually strongly curved, rigid, solitary. Spikelets 4·5-7 mm, somewhat longer than the internodes. Glumes lanceolate, acuminate, the keel not winged. Anthers 0·5-0·9 mm. Cleistogamous. 2n = 38. {\i Sandy, clayey or rocky places near the sea. Coasts of S. & W. Europe, northwards to S. England.} Al Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [Be].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. marginata} Runemark,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  115}: 8 (1962). Like {\b 1} but stems not more than 15 cm; leaves smooth above; sheaths often very strongly inflated and reddish; spikes usually straight, with fewer than 10 spikelets, clustered; glumes with winged keel. 2n = 14.{\i  In similar habitats to and often mixed with }{\b 1}.{\i  Islands of Mediterranean region.} Bl Cr Gr Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. filiformis} (Roth) C. E. Hubbard, {\i Blumea, Suppl.}{\b  3}: 14 (1946) ({\i Pholiurus filiformis} (Roth) Schinz & Thell.,{\i  Lepturus filiformis} (Roth) Trin.). Stems up to 25 cm, erect or decumbent, usually slender. Leaves up to 8 cm × 0·5-1·5 mm, scabrid above; ligule less than 0·5 mm; uppermost sheath not or scarcely inflated. Spike 3-15 cm, with 10-20 spikelets, straight or nearly so. Spikelets 4-6 mm, not more than 1 1/3 times as long as internodes. Glumes linear-lanceolate, acuminate, with winged keel. Anthers (2-)2·5-3·5 mm. Chasmogamous. 2n = 14.{\i  Saltmarshes. Coasts of S. Europe, from C. Portugal to Turkey.} ?Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. strigosa} (Dumort.) C. E. Hubbard,{\i  loc. cit.} (1946) ({\i Lepturus filiformis} auct., non (Roth) Trin.). Like {\b 3} but up to 40 cm; spikelets not more than 1¼ times as long as internodes; glumes not winged on the keel; anthers 2-2·5 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Salt-marshes. Coasts of W. Europe from Scotland and Denmark southwards; locally on the Mediterranean coast, eastwards to N. Jugoslavia.} Be Br Da Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs It Ju Lu Su.
\par

\par
243}
\par