{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 panicle. Leaves few, c. 2 mm in diameter, junciform, strongly aculeolate-scabrid on the abaxial surface, with minute, acute papillae on the sides of the ribs on the adaxial surface; sheaths hairy near the mouth; ligule of basal leaves 1-2·5 mm, of upper leaves (5-)7-10(-15) mm, ciliate. Panicle contracted. Glumes c. 80 mm. Lemma 21-26 mm, the ventral line of hairs reaching the base of the awn; awn 34-40 cm, the column scabrid, the seta plumose, with hairs up to 7 mm.{\i  E.C. Europe and C. part of Balkan peninsula}. Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Represented in Europe by subsp.{\b  euroanatolica} Martinovský, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  87}: 395 (1967). Subsp.{\b  crassiculmis} occurs in S.C. Asia (Turkmenistan).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. bavarica} Martinovský & H. Scholz,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  4}: 322 (1968). Stems up to 70 cm. Leaves 1-1·3 mm in diameter, the basal softly hairy, at least in part, on the abaxial surface and with short hairs on the ribs on the adaxial surface, the upper leaves strongly scabrid; sheaths of the basal leaves with short, soft, dense hairs, the upper sparsely hairy on the back. Panicle contracted. Glumes long-attenuate. Lemma (21-)23-26 mm, the ventral line of hairs reaching the base of the awn; awn (31-)33-41(-45) cm, the column glabrous, the seta with hairs 3-4 mm. •{\i  S. Germany }({\i near Neuburg}). Ge.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. epilosa} Martinovský, {\i Preslia}{\b  39}: 273 (1967). Leaves 0·5-1 mm in diameter, glabrous and usually smooth on the abaxial surface, scabridulous on the ribs on the adaxial surface; ligule of basal leaves 0·5-1 mm. Lemma 18-21 mm; awn (26-) 28-31 cm, the column glabrous, the seta plumose.{\i  S.E. Europe}. Bu Gr ?It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. endotricha} Martinovský, {\i Preslia}{\b  44}: 12 (1972). Stems shortly hairy below the nodes and throughout the uppermost internodes. Leaves with the abaxial surface glabrous and smooth. Lemma 18-21·5 mm; awn 24·5-27(-30) cm, the column glabrous, the seta plumose. •{\i  C. & S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. cretacea} P. Smirnov,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou} ser. 2, {\b 49}({\b 1}): 90 (1940). Leaves often flat when fresh, the abaxial surface smooth; sheaths of upper leaves puberulent and ciliate. Lemma 20-23 mm; awn (27-)30-33(-38) cm, the column glabrous, the seta plumose. •{\i  S.E. Russia} ({\i by the R. Don,} 90{\i  km N.W. of Volgograd}). Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. syreistschikovii} P. Smirnov,{\i  Del. Sem. Hort. Bot. Univ. Mosq.}{\b  1948}, 36 (1948). Leaves glabrous, tuberculate and scabrid on the abaxial surface and with short hairs only on the sides of the ribs on the adaxial surface; ligule of basal leaves 0·5-1 mm. Lemma (18-)20-21·5 mm; awn (32-)34-36(-37·5) cm, the column with hairs up to 2 mm and the seta with hairs 4(-6) mm.{\i  S.E. Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. iberica} Martinovský,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  73}: 150 (1966). Leaves strongly scabrid and aculeolate on the abaxial surface and shortly hairy, at least on the marginal ribs, on the adaxial surface; sheaths of basal leaves glabrous, of the upper ciliate and shortly hairy on the back. Glumes aristate. Lemma 18·5-21(-24) mm; awn c. 30 cm, the column between the geniculations with short, subappressed setae or only tuberculate and with scattered long, soft hairs. •{\i  S. France, C. & E. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A variable species requiring further investigation. The following subspecies can be recognized:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b iberica}: All ribs on the adaxial surface of the leaves densely hairy.{\i  S. France, N.E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pauneroana} Martinovský,{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  27}: 74 (1970): Only the marginal ribs on the adaxial surface of the leaves sparsely hairy, the remainder glabrous.{\i  C. & E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. apertifolia} Martinovský, {\i Preslia}{\b  39}: 274 (1967). Leaves often flat, even when dry, hairy at apex and for c. 1 cm at base, otherwise smooth or scabrid; sheaths hairy near the mouth; ligule of basal leaves 0·5-1 mm, of the upper leaves 2-5 mm. Lemma (19-)20-21·5 mm; awn (20-)22-24(-27) cm; column softly hairy and scabrid here and there; seta plumose. •{\i  E.C. Spain} ({\i near Cuenca}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. S. rechingeri} Martinovský, {\i Preslia}{\b  44}: 10 (1972). Leaves c. 0·8 mm in diameter, the upper hairy at the apex. Lemma 16-18·5 mm, 2-fid at apex; awn (17-)19·5-21(-23) cm, the column glabrous and smooth below the lower geniculation, sparsely hairy between the geniculations; seta plumose.{\i  Serpentine rocks. • N.W. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. S. austroitalica} Martinovský,{\i  Webbia}{\b  20}: 723 (1965). Upper leaves densely and shortly hairy on the adaxial surface. Lemma (15·5-)17-18·5 mm, sometimes with 2 hairy lobes at apex, the column glabrous, the seta plumose.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • S. Italy, Sicilia.} It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. S. novakii} Martinovský,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  73}: 147 (1966). Leaves setaceous, rigid, glaucescent, strongly scabrid on the abaxial surface, scabridulous on the ribs on the adaxial surface; sheaths densely setulose; ligule of basal leaves c. 1 mm, of upper leaves 2·5-4 mm. Lemma 14-15 mm; awn (11-)13-16 cm, the column glabrous, the seta plumose.{\i  Serpentine rocks. • C. Jugoslavia }({\i near Kraljevo,} c. 130{\i  km S. of Beograd}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 16-19}). {\b S. dasyphylla} group. Adaxial leaf-surface densely hairy, the abaxial surface scabrid with conical papillae, often also with hairs 0·5-1 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ventral line of hairs on lemma ending 2-4 mm below the 
\par
  insertion of the awn .................................................................... {\b 18. ucrainica} 
\par
1 Ventral line of hairs on lemma ± reaching the insertion
\par
  of the awn
\par
2 Sheaths glabrous .......................................................................... {\b 19. pontica}
\par
2 Sheaths densely puberulent
\par
3 Abaxial leaf-surface with abundant, soft, ± patent 
\par
  hairs c.1 mm ............................................................................ {\b 16. dasyphylla}
\par
3 Abaxial leaf-surface with sparse, subappressed, rigid 
\par
  hairs c. 0·5 mm ........................................................................... {\b 17. zalesskii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. S. dasyphylla} (Lindem.) Trautv.,{\i  Acta Horti Petrop.}{\b  9}: 350 (1884). Stems up to 80 cm. Leaves c. 3 mm wide when flat, c. 1 mm in diameter when convolute, greyish, with abundant hairs up to 1·2 mm on both surfaces, those on the adaxial surface protruding between the margins of the convolute leaf- basal sheaths puberulent, purplish. Panicle with 5-7 spikelets. Glumes up to 70 mm, aristate, pale violet. Lemma (19-)20-22(-23) mm with 7 lines of hairs above, 2 of which usually reach the base of the awn; awn 30-45 cm, the column glabrous, the seta with hairs 5-6 mm.{\i  E.C. & S.E. Europe.} Cz Ge Hu Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. S. zalesskii} Wilensky, {\i Dnevn. Vseross. S'ezda Russk. Bot.}{\b  1}: 41 (1921). Like {\b 16} but leaves always convolute, c. 0·5 mm in diameter, the abaxial surface tuberculate and mostly also with subappressed hairs, the hairs on the adaxial surface not protruding between the margins of the leaf; lemma 17-19 mm. •{\i  S.E. & E.C. Russia, E. Ukraine, W. Kazakhstan; W. Czechoslovakia.} Cz Rs (C, W, ?K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Among the variants included in this species are{\b  S. glabrata} (P. Smirnov) Martinovský, {\i Preslia}{\b  47}: 260 (1975) and{\b  S. smir}
\par

\par
249}
\par