{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 25-35 cm, dense, with numerous spikelets. Glumes 25-30 mm. Lemma c. 10 mm, membranous, hirsute, 2-fid at apex; awn 4-6 cm, the column with hairs 1-4 mm, the arista with minute appressed hairs. Anthers with a tuft of hairs at apex. 2n = 40.{\i  E., C. & S. Spain, S. Portugal, Islas Baleares.} Bl Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. S. gigantea} Link in Schrader,{\i  Jour. für die Bot.}{\b  1799}({\b 2}): 313 (1800) ({\i Macrochloa arenaria} (Brot.) Kunth). Stems up to 250 cm × 6 mm. Leaves smooth or weakly scabrid and shallowly sulcate on the abaxial surface, minutely and densely puberulent on the adaxial surface; sheaths glabrous, except for the ciliate auricles; ligule very short. Panicle (20-)30-50 cm, very lax. Glumes 25-35 mm, long-attenuate. Lemma 14-18 mm, membranous, with soft hairs 1-5 mm, 2-fid at apex, awn 7-12 cm, scabrid throughout its length. Anthers with a tuft of hairs at apex. 2n = 96.{\i  C. & S. Spain, Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. S. bromoides} (L.) Dörfler, {\i Herb. Norm.}{\b  34}: 129 (1897) ({\i S. aristella} L.,{\i  Lasiagrostis bromoides} (L.) Nevski). Stems up to 100 cm × 1 mm. Leaves convolute, glabrous and smooth on the abaxial surface, minutely puberulent on the ribs on the adaxial surface; sheaths glabrous except for the puberulent auricles; ligule very short. Panicle 15-30 cm, narrow. Glumes c. 10 mm, acuminate. Lemma 6-7 mm, villous below, 2-fid at apex; callus very short, obtuse; awn 1·5-2·5 cm, not geniculate, minutely papillose. 2n = 28.{\i  S. Europe, extending northwards to Hungary}. Al ?Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. S. trichotoma} Nees, {\i Agrost. Brasil.} 375 (1829). Stems up to 50 cm. Leaves convolute, the abaxial surface scabrid, with conical papillae; ligule 1-2 mm. Panicle lax, with divaricate branches. Glumes 6-9 mm. Lemma c. 2 mm, obovate, hairy below, tuberculate above; callus very short, obtuse; awn c. 3·5 cm, scarcely geniculate, papillose.{\i  Naturalized in S. France and C. Italy}. [Ga It.] ({\i Temperate South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 106.     Achnatherum}      Beauv.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Lasiagrostis} Link)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Stipa} but young leaves convolute, not folded; spikelets laterally compressed; lower part of lemma with patent hairs up to 4 mm; awn straight or curved, but not abruptly geniculate and twisted below.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Ligule minute; glumes subequal, the lower (6-)8-9 mm ........ {\b 1. calamagrostis}
\par
Ligule c. 6 mm; upper glume 3/4-4/5 as long as lower, the
\par
  lower 5-6 mm .............................................................................. {\b 2. splendens}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. calamagrostis} (L.) Beauv., {\i Agrost.} 20, 146 (1812) ({\i Calamagrostis argentea }DC., {\i Lasiagrostis calamagrostis} (L.) Link). Robust, caespitose perennial. Stems 60-120 cm, densely clothed in imbricate, coriaceous, scale-like leaf-sheaths at base when young. Leaves 2-3 mm wide, usually convolute when dry, gradually attenuate into the long, slender apex; sheaths smooth, glabrous or ciliate on margin and auricles; ligule minute. Panicle up to 30 cm, rather lax. Spikelets (6-)8-9 mm, shining, often purplish. Glumes lanceolate, acute, glabrous or shortly hairy, membranous, 3-veined. Lemma 3-4 mm, coriaceous, with patent hairs up to 4 mm on the back; awn c. 10 mm, straight or curved. Anthers 3·5-4 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  Rocky or stony ground, mainly in the mountains; calcicole. • S. & S.C. Europe.} Al Au Bu Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. splendens} (Trin.) Nevski, {\i Acta Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS} (Ser. 1){\b  4}: 224 (1937) ({\i Lasiagrostis splendens }(Trin.) Kunth). Like {\b 1} but stems up to 250 cm; ligule c. 6 mm, more or less acute; panicle up to 50 cm; spikelets 5-6 mm; upper glume 3/4-4/5 as long as lower; lemma 5-6 mm.{\i  Steppes and saline gravels. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (C, E). ({\i Siberia, C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe     {\b  Ampelodesmeae}      (Conert) Tutin
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves linear; silica-bodies transversely elliptical; 2-celled microhairs absent; ligule membranous below, ciliate above. Inflorescence a large panicle. Spikelets all hermaphrodite, laterally compressed, with 2-many florets. Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes and between the florets. Glumes shorter than the spikelet, scarious or chartaceous. Lemma coriaceous, with membranous margin, 5- to 7-veined. Palea 2-keeled. Lodicules 2-3, narrowly lanceolate, the anterior 2 larger and ciliate, the posterior glabrous. Stamens 3. Ovary with a densely hairy appendage; styles 2. Grain subterete, with an adaxial groove; hilum linear, long; embryo small; starch-grains simple. Chromosomes small; basic number 12.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 107.      Ampelodesmos}         Link
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Robust, caespitose perennial. Leaves flat in the living state. Inflorescence a large panicle. Spikelets strongly laterally compressed. Glumes shorter than the spikelet, somewhat unequal, keeled, 3- to 5-veined, persistent. Lemma linear-lanceolate, coriaceous, 5-veined, villous on the back in the lower half. Palea shorter than lemma. Rhachilla villous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. mauritanica} (Poiret) T. Durand & Schinz,{\i  Consp. Fl. Afr.}{\b  5}: 874 (1894) ({\i A. tenax} (Vahl) Link). Tussocks attaining 100 cm in diameter. Non-flowering shoots up to 100 cm; flowering stems up to 350 cm × 8 mm, solid. Leaves up to 100 cm × 7 mm, strongly ribbed on both surfaces; sheaths smooth, striate; ligule 8-15 mm, membranous and ciliate below. Panicle up to 50 cm subsecund. Spikelets 10-15 mm, stramineous to purplish; florets 2-5. Lower glume 7-10 mm, the upper 9-12 mm. Lemma 10-15 mm, shortly 2-dentate, with an awn 1-2 mm. 2n = 48.{\i  Dry places, mainly near the coast. Mediterranean region, eastwards to W. Greece.} Bl ?Co Ga Gr Hs It Sa Si [Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe     {\b  Arundineae}      Dumort.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 -Leaves broadly linear; silica-bodies cross-shaped or rounded mixed with somewhat crescentic to saddle-shaped; 2-celled micro-hairs often present; ligule a row of hairs. Inflorescence a large panicle. Spikelets all hermaphrodite, laterally compressed, with 2-many florets. Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes and between the florets, or above the lowest floret. Callus or back of lemma with abundant, long, silky hairs. Glumes equalling or shorter than the spikelet, hyaline or membranous. Lemma membranous, unawned, rounded on the back. Palea hyaline 2-veined. Lodicules 2, truncate. Stamens (2-)3. Ovary glabrous; styles 2. Grain with linear, oblong or punctiform hilum; embryo about half as long to as long as grain; starch-grains compound. Chromosomes small; basic number 12.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 108.        Arundo}         L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Large, rhizomatous perennials. Leaves flat; ligule a line of hairs. Inflorescence a lax panicle. Spikelets laterally compressed, with few, mostly hermaphrodite florets. Glumes subequal, membranous, equalling the florets, 3- to 5-veined, persistent. Lemma
\par

\par
252}
\par