{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Rhizome extensively creeping; leaves crowded, distichously
\par
  arranged; inflorescence ovate or ovate-lanceolate ............ {\b 1. pungens}
\par
Caespitose; leaves few, not distichously arranged; inflorescence
\par
  long, dense, cylindrical, spike-like ......................... {\b 2. indicus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. pungens} (Schreber) Kunth,{\i  Révis. Gram.}{\b  1}: 68 (1829). Widely creeping, with wiry rhizomes and stem-bases, glabrous. Stems 10-30 cm, ascending, simple or branched from the lower nodes. Sheaths crowded, overlapping; leaves 2-8 cm × 2-5 mm, firm, involute, conspicuously distichous, especially on the numerous non-flowering shoots, hairy above. Panicle 3-6 cm, greyish-violet, much-branched, the branches mostly alternate. Spikelets 1·5-2·5 mm, shortly pedicellate, crowded; glumes unequal, the upper nearly as long as the subequal lemma and palea, all lanceolate, acute and glabrous. Anthers 1-1·5 mm. {\i Maritime sands and marshes. S. Europe.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju †Lu *Rm Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sometimes regarded as a variety or subspecies of the pantropical species {\i S. virginicus} (L.) Kunth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. indicus} (L.) R. Br.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Nov. Holl.} 170 (1810). Stems 60-100 cm, erect, in large clumps with numerous leafy shoots at base. Cauline leaves few, 20-30 cm, long-attenuate, flat or folded, aculeolate on margins and upper surface. Panicle up to 30 cm, linear-cylindrical, stiff, dark greyish, often more open and lax at base. Spikelets 1·5-2·5 mm, crowded on slender, erect, usually appressed branches; glumes unequal, the lower obtuse, the upper acute, half as long as the acute lemma; lemma longer than the obtuse palea. Anthers 0·5 mm. 2n = 36.{\i  Waste places and roadsides. Naturalized in S. Europe.} [Az Bu Ga Hs It Lu.] ({\i Tropics and subtropics}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A highly polymorphic species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 123.        Crypsis}     Aiton
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  (incl. {\i Heleochloa}  Host)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a globose or spicate panicle, usually closely subtended by the enlarged sheaths of the uppermost leaves. Spikelets strongly compressed laterally. Glumes subequal, membranous, 1-veined. Lemma equalling or exceeding glumes, membranous, 1-veined. Palea 2-keeled. Stamens 2-3. Lodicules absent. Rhachilla disarticulating below the glumes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Inflorescence wider than long, the rhachis obsolete ..................... {\b 3. aculeata}
\par
1 Inflorescence longer than wide, with a distinct rhachis
\par
2 Glumes and lemma mucronate or shortly awned ...................... {\b 2. acuminata}
\par
2 Glumes and lemma not mucronate or awned
\par
3 Sheath of uppermost leaf longer than lamina, scarcely
\par
  inflated; inflorescence cylindrical ........................................ {\b 1. alopecuroides}
\par
3 Sheath of uppermost leaf shorter than lamina, strongly
\par
  inflated; inflorescence ovoid
\par
4 Inflorescence dense; spikelets c. 3 mm; lemma acute ............ {\b 4. schoenoides}
\par
4 Inflorescence rather lax; spikelets c. 4·5 mm; lemma obtuse . {\b 5. turkestanica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. alopecuroides} (Piller & Mitterp.) Schrader, {\i Fl. Germ.} 167 (1806) ({\i Heleochloa alopecuroides} (Piller & Mitterp.) Host ex Roemer). Stems up to 30 cm, numerous, geniculately ascending. Leaves green or somewhat glaucous, shortly hairy above; sheaths glabrous, the uppermost longer than lamina, scarcely inflated. Inflorescence up to 8 × 0·8 cm. Spikelets 2-3 mm, shortly pedicellate. Glumes lanceolate, ciliate-serrulate on the keel. Lemma little longer than glumes, but exserted. Stamens 3.{\i  Seasonally wet places. Europe northwards to N.C. France, Czechoslovakia and C. Russia.} ?Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Gr Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. acuminata} Trin. in Sprengel, {\i Neue Entdeck.}{\b  2}: 57 (1820) ({\i C. borszczowii} Regel). Like {\b 1} but leaves villous on both surfaces; sheaths with numerous tubercle-based hairs; spikelets c. 4 mm; glumes and lemma with a stout mucro or short awn.{\i  Damp places. S.E. Russia.} Rs (E). ({\i C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. aculeata} (L.) Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew. }{\b 1}: 48 (1789). Stems up to 20 cm, numerous, procumbent, ascending distally. Leaves glaucous, sparsely hairy to almost glabrous on both surfaces; sheaths glabrous, the upper strongly inflated and shorter than the lamina. Inflorescence capitate, wider than long, the rhachis obsolete. Spikelets c. 4 mm, subsessile. Glumes lanceolate, ciliate on the keel and near the apex on the margin. Lemma acute, longer than glumes. Stamens 2. 2n = 16.{\i  Damp, usually saline places. Europe, northwards to N.W. France, Czechoslovakia and S.C. Russia.} ?Al Au Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. schoenoides} (L.) Lam., {\i Tabl. Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 166 (1791) ({\i Heleochloa schoenoides} (L.) Host). Like {\b 3} but inflorescence longer than wide, with a distinct rhachis, dense; spikelets c. 3 mm; glumes not ciliate on the margin; stamens 3. 2n = 36. {\i Damp places. Europe, northwards to N. W. France, Czechoslovakia and C. Russia.} Al Au Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. turkestanica} Eig, {\i Agric. Rec. }({\i Tel-Aviv}){\b  2}: 206 (1929). Like {\b 3} but stems not more than 15 cm, procumbent; inflorescence longer than wide, with a distinct rhachis, rather lax; spikelets c. 4·5 mm; glumes not ciliate on the margin; lemma obtuse; stamens 2-3.{\i  Saline sands and gravels. S.E. Russia.} Rs (E). ({\i C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 124.       Eleusine}        Gaertner    
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A. Hansen. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Leaves flat. Ligule a ring of hairs. Inflorescence of several spikes more or less digitately arranged at the top of the flowering stem. Spikelets compressed, with 2-many florets in 2 rows on one side of a broad rhachis. Glumes unequal, shorter than the florets, 1- to 7-veined; lemma 1- to 3-veined, unawned. Stamens 3. Grain striate; pericarp membranous, not adherent to seed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Annual, with 5-12 slender spikes up to 15 cm .................................... {\b 1. indica}
\par
Perennial, with 2-4 thick spikes not more than 3·5 cm ................. {\b 2. tristachya}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. indica} (L.) Gaertner,{\i  Fruct. Sem. Pl.}{\b  1}: 8 (1788). Caespitose annual. Stems 15-85 cm, branching near base, erect or geniculate; sheaths compressed, glabrous. Leaves 5-23 cm × 3-6 mm, linear. Inflorescence of 5-12 slender spikes each 3·5-15 cm × 3-5 mm; spikelets elliptical, with 4-9 florets. Glumes unequal, acute, lanceolate-oblong. Lemma lanceolate; keel broadened above middle. Grain 1-1·3 mm, brownish-red.{\i  Roadsides and disturbed ground. Naturalized in S. Europe; casual elsewhere}. [Az Bu Ga ?Hs It Lu.] ({\i Tropics and subtropics}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A polymorphic species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. tristachya} (Lam.) Lam., {\i Tabl. Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 1}: 203 (1792). Perennial. Stems 10-30 cm, ascending. Leaves 2-15 cm × 2-3 mm. Inflorescence of 2-4 dense spikes each 1·5-3·5 cm × 7-15 mm. Spikelets with 5-10 florets. Glumes unequal, acute, ovate-lanceolate. Lemma ovate-lanceolate, concave, strongly
\par

\par
258}
\par