{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 as glumes; callus 0·7-1 mm; branches of the awn 10-15 mm, all plumose. {\i Sandy steppes and semi-deserts. S.E. Russia.} Rs (E). ({\i S.W. & C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. karelinii} (Trin. & Rupr.) Tzvelev,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 11}: 71 (1974) ({\i Aristida karelinii} Trin. & Rupr.). Like {\b 1} but stems 40-100 cm; leaves 1·5-4·5 mm wide when flat; panicle usually 20-40 cm; lemma 6-7 mm; callus 1-1·3 mm; branches of awn 16-20 mm. {\i Sandy deserts. On the borders of Europe in W. Kazakhstan} ({\i near Gur'ev}). Rs (E). ({\i C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe        {\b  Nardeae}          Reichenb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves setaceous; silica-bodies saddle-shaped or rounded; slender 2-celled micro-hairs present; ligule membranous. Inflorescence a unilateral spike. Spikelets all hermaphrodite, triangular in section, with 1 floret. Glumes persistent, the lower very small, the upper usually absent. Lemma chartaceous, with a terminal awn. Palea hyaline, 2-keeled. Lodicules absent. Stamens 3. Ovary glabrous; style 1; stigma papillose. Grain with a short, linear hilum; starch-grains compound. Chromosomes large; basic number 13.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 116.        Nardus}           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Densely caespitose perennials. Leaves setaceous. Inflorescence a unilateral spike. Spikelets triangular in section, with 1 floret. Glumes very small, the upper usually absent. Lemma 3-veined, chartaceous, with an apical awn. Palea slightly shorter than lemma.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. stricta} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 53 (1753). Stems (3-)10-40(-60) cm, erect, wiry. Leaves 3-20(-30) cm × c. 0·5 mm, hard, greyish-green, patent at maturity; sheaths tough, whitish, erect, persistent; ligule up to 2 mm, truncate. Spike (1-)3-8 cm. Spikelets 5-9 mm, in 2 rows along one side of the rhachis. Lemma linear-lanceolate; awn 1-3 mm. Anthers 3·5-4 mm. 2n = 26.{\i  Sandy or peaty soils; calcifuge. Most of Europe, but only on mountains in the south.} All except Bl Cr Rs (K, E) Sa Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe      {\b Lygeeae}         Lange
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves linear, convolute; silica-bodies circular or elliptical; 2-celled micro-hairs probably absent; ligule membranous. Spikelets solitary, terminal, with 2(-3) florets. Glumes absent. Lemmas of the 2 florets connate by their margins in the lower half, coriaceous. Paleas connate by their backs below, much longer than the lemmas. Lodicules absent. Stamens 3. Ovary glabrous; style 1; stigma papillose. Grain with a linear hilum as long as the grain; embryo small; starch-grains compound. Chromosomes large; basic number 10.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 117.        Lygeum}       Loefl. ex L. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Caespitose perennial. Leaves convolute. Inflorescence of one terminal spikelet enclosed in a sheath. Spikelet with 2(?-3) florets. Glumes absent. Lemmas of the 2 florets connate by their margins and with abundant long hairs in the lower half, forming a rigid, cylindrical tube, the upper half free, erecto-patent, glabrous. Paleas connate by their backs below, much longer than the lemmas, erect, glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. spartum} L.,{\i  Gen. Pl.} ed. 5, [522] (1754). Rhizome and bases of erect shoots covered with coriaceous scales. Stems up to 70 cm, wiry, solid. Leaves up to c. 50 cm × 1·5 mm, rigid, very tough; sheaths glabrous; ligule c. 7 mm, acute. Inflorescence-sheath 3-4(-9) cm, ovate, acute or with a leaf-like point. Spikelet protruding from the side of the sheath at maturity and falling entire. Lemma c. 2 cm. Palea 3-4 cm. Anthers c. 15 mm. 2n = 40. {\i Dry, sandy or clayey, often gypsaceous soils. Mediterranean region}. *Bl Cr Hs It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe       {\b  Pappophoreae}         Kunth
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves linear, often convolute; silica-bodies saddle-shaped; 2-celled micro-hairs present; ligule a row of hairs. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets all hermaphrodite, scarcely compressed, with 2-many florets. Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes only. Glumes longer than the lemmas. Lemma of fertile florets about as long as wide, with 9 prominent veins excurrent as awns. Palea 2-veined, often longer than lemma. Lodicules 2. Stamens 3. Ovary glabrous; styles 2. Grain with basal punctiform hilum; starch-grains compound. Chromosomes small; basic number 10.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 118.      Enneapogon}    Desv.ex Beauv. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Leaves flat or convolute. Inflorescence a compact or spike-like panicle. Spikelets scarcely compressed with 3(-6) florets, the lower 1(-3) hermaphrodite, the remainder sterile. Glumes unequal, membranous, longer than the lemmas (3-)7- to 9-veined. Lemma of hermaphrodite florets elliptic-oblong, with 9 prominent veins produced into awns longer than the lemma. Palea often longer than lemma.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: H. Freitag,{\i  Collect. Bot.} ({\i Barcelona}) {\b 7}: 483-493 (1968). S. A. Renvoize,{\i  Kew Bull.}{\b  22}: 393-401 (1968).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. persicus} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 5}): 71 (1844). Caespitose perennial; stems 15-20(-30) cm, erect. Leaves convolute, short, rigid, usually more or less horizontal; sheaths with short, glandular and eglandular hairs; ligule a ring of hairs. Panicle 3-6(-12) cm, cylindrical. Spikelets shiny, yellowish or purplish. Glumes 6-7 mm, ovate-lanceolate, with short glandular and eglandular hairs. Lemma 1·7-2 mm, hirsute to above the middle, puberulent near the apex; awns 5-7 mm, 5 longer than the other 4, ciliate in lower 2/3, scabrid above.{\i  Dry, open habitats. S.E. Spain }(c. 15{\i  km  W.S.W. of Cartagena}). Hs. ({\i N.E. Africa, S.W. & C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The only known European station is a very small one far removed from the main area of the species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe       {\b Aeluropodeae }     Nevski ex Bor
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves linear or convolute; silica-bodies dumbbell- or cross-shaped; 2-celled micro-hairs present; ligule a row of hairs. Inflorescence of racemosely arranged, more or less sessile spikes. Spikelets all hermaphrodite, laterally compressed, with 2-many florets. Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes and between the florets. Glumes shorter than the spikelet. Lemma coriaceous. Palea hyaline, 2-keeled. Lodicules 2. Stamens 3. Ovary glabrous styles 2. Grain with punctiform hilum; starch-grains compound. Chromosomes small; basic number 10.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 119.       Aeluropus}        Trin.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.A. Stace. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials with procumbent stems usually developing as strong rhizomes or stolons; flowering stems procumbent to erect, solitary or caespitose, with many, short internodes. Leaves usually stiffly patent, flat or convolute proximally, folded distally, with a cartilaginous, often pungent apex; ligule of long
\par

\par
255}
\par