{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perennial, with rhizome or stout stock
\par
2 Spikelets ovate, green or purplish-green ........................................ {\b 9. collina}
\par
2 Spikelets linear, grey or blackish ................................................. {\b 3. papposa}
\par
1 Annual
\par
3 Spikelets 1-2(-2·5) mm; ligule membranous ............................. {\b 8. diarrhena}
\par
3 Spikelets 3-25 mm; ligule a ring of hairs
\par
4 Leaves with glands on the margin
\par
5 Lemma 1·5-2 mm ............................................................................. {\b 5. minor}
\par
5 Lemma 2-2·8 mm ...................................................................... {\b 4. cilianensis}
\par
4 Leaves without glands on the margin
\par
6 Upper glume 1½-2 times as long as lower
\par
7 Lower panicle-branches 2 or more; lower glume 0·5 mm;
\par
  lemma with inconspicuous lateral veins ........................................... {\b 1. pilosa}
\par
7 Lower panicle-branches 1-2; lower glume 1 mm; lemma
\par
  with conspicuous lateral veins ................................................... {\b 2. pectinacea}
\par
6 Upper glume about as long as lower
\par
8 Lower leaf-sheaths with small axillary inflorescences ............... {\b 6. barrelieri}
\par
8 Inflorescences all terminal on leafy stems ................................ {\b 7. aegyptiaca}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. pilosa} (L.) Beauv.,{\i  Agrost.} 71, 162 (1812) (incl. {\i E. gracilis }Velen.). Annual. Stems 5-50 cm, many, erect or geniculate, smooth and glabrous. Leaves up to 15 cm × 3 mm, scabridulous above and scabrid but eglandular on the margin. Panicle up to 20 cm, lax; lower branches 2 or more, more or less verticillate, usually with long hairs in their axils; pedicels mostly shorter than spikelets. Spikelets up to 5 mm, with 5-10 florets. Glumes unequal, the lower 0·5 mm, oblong, the upper 1 mm, ovate. Lemma oblong, acute, greyish with purple apex; basal smooth, the lateral veins inconspicuous. Grain 0·7-0·8 mm. 2n = 40.{\i  Disturbed habitats, usually sandy. Europe, northwards to N.C. France and N.C. Russia, but absent from many of the islands.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  E. tef} (Zucc.) Trotter, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Ital.}{\b  1918}: 62 (1918) is cultivated on a small scale for its grain and also occurs as a casual in Germany and perhaps elsewhere. It is like {\b 1} but larger in all its parts, with stems up to 100 cm and grain c. 1·25 mm, and the lemma is strongly scabrid on the keel. It is native in Ethiopia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. pectinacea} (Michx) Nees,{\i  Fl. Afr. Austr.} 406 (1841). Like {\b 1} but lower panicle-branches 1-2; lower glume 1 mm, the upper 1·5 mm; lemma with conspicuous lateral veins.{\i  Naturalized in W. France.} [Ga.] ({\i Temperate North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. E. papposa} (Dufour) Steudel,{\i  Syn. Pl. Glum.}{\b  1}: 263 (1854). Perennial, with creeping rhizome. Stems 10-45 cm, erect or geniculate, smooth and glabrous. Leaves up to 10 cm × 2 mm, scabrid on the margin. Panicle very lax; lower branches usually solitary; pedicels longer than spikelets. Spikelets 3-7 mm, with 4-18 florets. Glumes unequal. Lemma suborbicular, obtuse, grey or blackish. {\i Rocky or sandy places. S.E. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N. & C. Africa, extending eastwards to India.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. E. cilianensis} (All.) F. T. Hubbard,{\i  Philippine Jour. Sci.} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 8}: 159(1913) ({\i E. major} Host,{\i  E. megastachya} (Koeler) Link). Annual. Stems up to 60 cm, erect or decumbent at base, somewhat glaucous, smooth and glabrous or sparsely hairy. Leaves up to 15 cm × 4 mm, with elevated glands on the margin and midrib. Panicle up to 15 cm, usually rather dense; lower branches usually solitary; pedicels shorter than the spikelets, with 1-2 crateriform glands. Spikelets 4-25 mm, with up to 40 florets. Glumes subequal, ovate, acute. Lemma 2-2·8 mm, broadly ovate, acute, often glandular on the keel, purplish. 2n = 20.{\i  Rocky places and disturbed ground. S. Europe, extending northwards to Hungary; casual and locally naturalized elsewhere in C. Europe}. Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W,K) Sa Si Tu [*Cz Ge He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. E. minor} Host,{\i  Gram. Austr.}{\b  4}: 15 (1809) (incl. {\i E. suaveolens} A. Becker ex Claus). Annual. Stems up to 50 cm, erect or geniculate, smooth, with sparse, long hairs. Leaves up to 15 cm × 3 mm, with sparse, long hairs and with elevated glands on the margin. Panicle 4-15 cm, usually rather lax, terminal on stems and leafy branches; lower branches solitary or in pairs; pedicels shorter or longer than the spikelets, with 1-2 crateriform glands. Spikelets 4-11 mm, with 5-12(-20) florets. Glumes subequal, lanceolate to ovate. Lemma 1·5-2 mm, lanceolate to ovate, acute, without glands on the keel, greenish- or purplish-grey. 2n = 40, 80. {\i Disturbed ground. S., S.E. & S.C. Europe; naturalized elsewhere in C. Europe.} Al Au Az Bu Co Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Ge Po Rs (B)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. E. barrelieri} Daveau,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i Paris}) {\b 8}: 289 (1894). Like {\b 5} but leaves glabrous, though sometimes ciliate towards the base; panicles terminal and axillary, the latter arising from the lower nodes and emerging from the tops of the sheaths; spikelets 7-15 mm, with 10-20 florets. {\i Disturbed ground. W. Mediterranean region.} Bl Ga Hs It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The distribution is probably imperfectly known, owing to confusion with {\b 5}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. E. aegyptiaca} (Willd.) Link, {\i Hort. Berol.}{\b  1}: 191 (1827). Annual. Stems up to 40 cm, procumbent or ascending, smooth, glabrous. Leaves up to 3 mm wide, glabrous, scabrid on the margin. Panicle up to 15 cm, rather dense; lower branches usually verticillate; pedicels shorter than the spikelets. Spikelets up to 10 mm, with 15-20 florets. Glumes subequal, lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma oblong-lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma oblong-lanceolate, pale.{\i  Sandy river-banks. S. part of U.S.S.R.} Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. E. diarrhena} (Schultes & Schultes fil.) Steudel, {\i Syn. Pl. Glum. }{\b 1}: 266 (1854) ({\i E. kossinskyi }Roshev.). Annual. Stems up to 50 cm, smooth. Leaves up to 5 mm wide, scabrid above; ligule membranous. Panicle up to 20 cm, rather dense; lower branches usually verticillate; pedicels shorter than spikelets. Spikelets 1·5-2·5 mm, with 4-10 florets. Glumes subequal, ovate-lanceolate, obtuse. Lemma ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, usually purplish. •{\i  S.E. Russia} ({\i Volga delta}). Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. E. collina} Trin.,{\i  Mém. Acad. Sci. Pétersb.} ser. 6, {\b 1}: 413 (1830) ({\i E. arundinacea} (L.) Roshev., non Jedwabn.). Perennial. Stems up to 150 cm, erect, simple, surrounded at the base by short, coriaceous sheaths. Leaves up to 30 cm × 10 mm, smooth, with scabrid margin. Panicle up to 25 cm, lax; lower branches solitary; pedicels shorter than the spikelets. Spikelets 2-2·5 mm, with 3-5 florets. Glumes unequal, the lower lanceolate, acute, the upper ovate-oblong, obtuse. Lemma ovate, obtuse, green or purplish-green.{\i  Saline soils. S.E. Russia.} Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 122.       Sporobolus}          R.Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A. Hansen. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Leaves flat or involute; ligule a row of short hairs. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets with 1 floret. Glumes usually unequal, 1-veined. Lemma 1-veined, unawned. Palea like the lemma, usually shallowly 2-fid at apex. Stamens 2-3. Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes. Grain spherical or oblong-elliptical, enclosed in a gelatinous pericarp.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: W. D. Clayton,{\i  Kew Bull.}{\b  19}: 287-296 (1965). P. Jovet & M. Guedes,{\i  Bull. Cent. Etud. Rech. Sci. Biarritz }{\b 7}: 47-75 (1968)
\par

\par
257}
\par