{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 hyaline. Lemma 6-7 mm, with subappressed setae and a ring of longer hairs below the base of the awn; awn 7-10 cm, the column with hairs c. 0·8 mm, the seta with more or less appressed hairs c. 0·1 mm. 2n = 36.{\i  Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. S. barbata} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  1}: 97 (1798). Stems 30-70 cm. Leaves convolute, usually falcate, the abaxial surface glabrous, rarely densely puberulent, the adaxial surface puberulent; sheaths glabrous or puberulent, the uppermost enclosing the base of the inflorescence; ligule (0·1-)0·5-1·2(-3) mm, ciliate. Panicle narrow, with few spikelets. Glumes linear-lanceolate. Lemma (9-)10-13·5 mm, glabrous above except for a ring of hairs below the base of the awn; awn (13-)14·5-19 cm, the column with hairs 0·5-0·8 mm, the seta with hairs 1·5-2 mm.{\i  S. & C. Spain, S. Italy, Sicilia.} Hs It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. S. arabica} Trin. & Rupr., {\i Sp. Gram. Stip.} 77 (1842). Like {\b 28} but ligule (0·3-)2·5 mm; lemma (7·5-)9·5-11 mm; awn (11·5-) 13-15(-16·5) cm.{\i  S.E. Russia.} Rs (E). ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par
  Represented in Europe by subsp.{\b  caspia} (C. Koch) Tzvelev,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc. }({\i Leningrad}) {\b 11}: 16 (1974).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. S. orientalis} Trin. in Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Alt. }{\b 1}: 83 (1829). Stems 10-30 cm. Leaves convolute, the abaxial surface papillose or tuberculate, the adaxial surface with hairs 0·04-0·06 mm; sheaths glabrous but ciliate, the uppermost enclosing the base of the panicle; ligule c. 2 mm, ciliate. Panicle narrow, with few spikelets. Glumes c. 18 mm. Lemma 6·5-7·5 mm, hairy all over towards the base and with lines of hairs above. Awn 4·5-5 cm, the column with hairs 0·06-0·2 mm, the seta with hairs 3·5 mm near the base, much shorter near the apex.{\i  S.E. part of U.S.S.R.} Rs (E). ({\i Siberia, C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. S. capillata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 116 (1762). Stems 20-70(-100) cm. Leaves convolute, the abaxial surface glabrous but usually tuberculate-scabrid, the adaxial surface with hairs c. 0·6 mm; sheaths much longer than the internodes, smooth; ligule of basal leaves 1-2(-3) mm, of upper leaves 15-20 mm. Panicle lax, with many spikelets. Glumes 25-35 mm, long-attenuate. Lemma 10-12(-14) mm, the ventral line of hairs reaching the base of the awn, the other lines shorter; awn 12-18(-23) cm, scabrid. 2n = 44.{\i  S., S.C. & S.E. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. S. sareptana} A. Becker,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  57}({\b 1}): 52 (1882). Like {\b 31} but abaxial surface of leaves with subappressed setae as well as tubercles, the adaxial surface glabrous; sheaths sometimes sparsely puberulent, the lower at most slightly exceeding the internodes; ligule of basal leaves very short, of upper leaves up to 12 mm; ventral line of hairs ¾ as long as lemma; awn 10-15 cm. 2n = 44.{\i  S.E. part of U.S.S.R.} Rs(C, E)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sareptana}: Abaxial leaf-surface strongly scabrid, with rigid hairs and pricklets. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b praecapillata} (Alechin) Tzvelev, {\i Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 11}: 14 (1974): Abaxial leaf-surface scabrid, with pricklets and sometimes a few rigid hairs. •{\i  Middle Volga region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. S. fontanesii} Parl.,{\i  Fl. Ital.}{\b  1}: 167 (1850) ({\i S. lagascae} auct., non Roemer & Schultes). Stems 45-80 cm. Leaves convolute, 0·4-0·9 mm in diameter, glabrous except for the apex of the ribs on the adaxial surface, smooth; sheaths of the upper leaves about as long as the internodes, glabrous or puberulent above; ligule of basal leaves 0·5-1 mm, of upper leaves 3-7(-10) mm, ciliate. Panicle c. 25 cm, with few spikelets. Glumes c. 30 mm. Lemma 13-14(-16) mm, none of the lines of hairs reaching the base of the awn but with a ring of hairs at the apex; awn (12-)15-19(-20) cm. the column with subappressed hairs 0·4 mm on the back and sides, the arista with hairs 0·2 mm. Anthers penicillate at apex.{\i  S. Italy and Sicilia; Aegean region.} ?Cr Gr It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. S. lagascae} Roemer & Schultes, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 333 (1817). Stems up to 80 cm. Leaves usually convolute, the abaxial surface smooth and glabrous, the adaxial surface, at least towards the base, with hairs 0·04-0·2 mm on the ribs, those on the marginal ribs longer than the others; sheaths ciliate and glabrous to puberulent; ligule of basal leaves 0·3-0·5 mm, of upper leaves 2-6 mm, villous. Panicle up to 50 cm, dense. Glumes 30-60 mm, long-attenuate. Lemma (8-)9·5-11·5 mm, with a ring of hairs below the base of the awn; awn 13·5-18(-19·5) cm, weakly geniculate, the column hairy on the angles only, the arista shortly hairy.{\i  N.E. Portugal, C. & S. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. S. celakovskyi} Martinovský,{\i  Preslia }{\b 48}: 187 (1976). Like {\b 34} but the hairs on the marginal ribs of the leaves not longer than the others; lemma 11·8-15 mm; awn (18-)20-25(-29) cm. •{\i  E.C. Spain} ({\i Serrania de Cuenca}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. S. offneri} Breistr.,{\i  Procés-Verb. Soc. Dauph. Étud. Biol.} ({\i Grenoble}) ser. 3,{\b  17}: 2 (1950) ({\i S. juncea} auct., non L.). Stems up to 80 cm. Leaves convolute, c. 0·5 mm in diameter, minutely and densely hairy on the ribs on the adaxial surface; basal sheaths usually smooth and glabrous; ligule (3-)4·5-5·5 mm, ciliate. Lemma (8·5-)10-13 mm, with the ventral line of hairs somewhat more than ½ as long as the lemma, with a ring of hairs below the base of the awn; awn (8-)9-11 cm, scabrid, the column with hairs 0·4-0·6 mm on the angles, the seta with very short hairs. 2n = 44. {\i W. Mediterranean region}. Bl Ga Hs It Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. S. korshinskyi} Roshev., {\i Fl. Az. Ross.}{\b  12}: 163 (1916). Stems up to 70 cm. Leaves convolute, scabrid, the upper much shorter than the basal; ligule very short. Panicle 10-20 cm, contracted, with few spikelets. Glumes 12-16 mm, long-acuminate. Lemma 8-9 mm, rather densely hairy, with a ring of hairs below the base of the awn; awn 9-12 cm, hairy on the angles throughout, the hairs on the seta longer than those on the column, but less than 1 mm. {\i S.E. Russia.} Rs (?C, E). ({\i W.C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. S. parviflora} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  1}: 98 (1798). Stems up to 70 cm. Leaves flat or involute, glabrous and smooth on the abaxial surface, with minute hairs on the ribs on the adaxial surface; sheaths smooth, ciliate on the margin and densely bearded at the mouth; ligule short, truncate. Panicle up to 30 cm, lax, with numerous spikelets. Glumes unequal, the lower 12-15 mm, the upper 7-10 mm. Lemma 4-7 mm, appressed-hairy below, glabrous above; awn 5-10 cm, obscurely geniculate, minutely hairy throughout. 2n = 28.{\i  C., E. & S.E. Spain, S. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Reports of this species from Greece and Kriti require confirmation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. S. tenacissima} L., {\i Cent. Pl.}{\b  1}: 6 (1755) ({\i Macrochloa tenacissima} (L.) Kunth). Very robust; stems 60-150(-200) cm. Leaves usually convolute, c. 1 mm in diameter, glabrous and smooth on the abaxial surface, densely and minutely puberulent on the adaxial surface; non-flowering shoots with 2 lanate projections 2·5-3 cm, ending in a plumose, subulate apex protruding from the mouth of the sheath; ligule very short, ciliate. Panicle
\par

\par
251}
\par