{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 keeled. Grain c. 1 mm, black.{\i  Roadsides and waste places.  Naturalized in S. W. Europe.} [Az Ga Hs It.] ({\i South America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 125.     Dactyloctenium}      Willd.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A. Hansen. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Leaves flat. Inflorescence of digitately arranged spikes. Spikelets laterally compressed, crowded and imbricate, in 2 rows on an axis which is triangular in cross section; florets 3-5, all fertile. Glumes unequal, the lower persistent, the upper deciduous, with a curved awn or mucro; lemma similar to upper glume, with curved awn or mucro. Grain coarsely ridged and sculptured.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. aegyptium} (L.) Beauv.,{\i  Agrost.} 72,{\i  Expl. Pl.} 10 (1812). Annual, with erect stem 10-50 cm, usually geniculate-ascending and rooting at nodes, glabrous. Leaves c. 15 cm × 4-5 mm, linear-acuminate, ciliate with bulbous-based hairs on margins; ligule short, ciliate. Spikes 4-5, 1·5-5 cm; axis straight or falcate, flattened, without spikelets in the distal part. Spikelets 4 mm, usually with 3 florets; upper glume 4 mm (including awn), ovate, 1-veined, strongly keeled, the awn 1·5-2 mm; lemma 4 mm, oblong-gibbous, 3-veined.{\i  Moist, shady places. Naturalized in the Mediterranean region.} [Cr It Si] ({\i Tropics and subtropics.}) 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe     {\b  Chlorideae}       J.G. Agardh
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like Eragrostideae but inflorescence of solitary, digitate or scattered spikes or spike-like racemes; spikelets with 1(-2) hermaphrodite floret and 1 or more sterile florets or with the rhachilla prolonged; lemma often awned; pericarp of grain never free.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 126.       Cynodon}         L.C.M. Richard  
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Leaves flat. Inflorescence of usually 3-5 secund spikes digitately arranged at apex of flowering stem. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 1 floret. Glumes subequal, membranous, keeled, 1-veined. Lemma longer than glumes, chartaceous,obscurely 3-veined. Palea 2-keeled. Stamens 3. Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. dactylon} (L.) Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  1}: 85 (1805). Extensively creeping by stolons and scaly rhizomes; stems up to 30 cm. Leaves up to 6 cm, linear-lanceolate; ligule a ring of hairs. Spikes 1-5 cm. Spikelets 2 mm, subsessile on the flattened rhachis. Glumes linear-lanceolate, often purplish. Lemma naviculiform, sparingly villous on keel and margins. Rhachilla glabrous, prolonged. 2n = 36, 40. {\i W., S., S.E. & E.C. Europe, northwards to S. England and N. Ukraine.} Al Au Az Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Ge].       
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe      {\b  Spartineae}      (Prat) C.E. Hubbard  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Eragrostideae} but silica-bodies rounded; 2-celled micro-hairs globose, sunk in pits in the epidermis; ligule a row of unicellular hairs; inflorescence of racemosely arranged spikes; spikelets with 1 floret; rhachilla disarticulating below the glumes; lemma (3-)5(-9)-veined; lodicules absent; grain with an ovate to elliptical hilum; embryo nearly as long as grain; basic  chromosome number 10.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 127.      Spartina}       Schreber
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizomatous perennials. Leaves flat or convolute. Inflorescence of a number of spikes arranged in a raceme. Spikelets strongly compressed laterally, in 2 rows, closely appressed to one face of the triangular rhachis, each with 1(-2) florets. Glumes unequal, chartaceous, the lower 1-veined, the upper 1- to 3(-6)-veined, about as long as lemma. Lemma 1- to 6-veined, coriaceous, with a wide membranous margin. Palea slightly shorter than lemma.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   All species occur in maritime habitats, often on tidal mud-flats.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  1 Glumes glabrous or with sparse, very short hairs 
\par
2 Upper glume 1-veined ............................................................... {\b 6. densiflora}
\par
2 Upper glume with 3 or more veins 
\par
3 Spikelets at least 10 mm; glumes with sparse, very short
\par
  hairs ........................................................................................... {\b 4. alterniflora}
\par
3 Spikelets not more than 7 mm; glumes glabrous but
\par
  serrulate on mid-vein .................................................................. {\b 5. versicolor}
\par
1 Glumes rather densely hairy with hairs up to 0·5 mm 
\par
4 Anthers 8-13 mm; hairs of the ligule usually 2-3 mm ................... {\b 3. anglica}
\par
4 Anthers 4-8 mm; hairs of the ligule 0·2-2 mm 
\par
5 Anthers 5-8 mm, indehiscent, without fertile pollen;
\par
  stems 30-130 cm; leaves 4-12 mm wide ................................ {\b 2}. × {\b townsendii} 
\par
5 Anthers 4-6 mm, dehiscent, with fertile pollen; stems 
\par
  15-50 cm; leaves not more than 6 mm wide ................................ {\b 1. maritima} 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. maritima} (Curtis) Fernald, {\i Rhodora}{\b  18}: 180 (1916) ({\i S. stricta} (Aiton) Roth). Laxly caespitose; stems 15-70 cm, rather robust. Leaves not more than 6 mm wide, green, often purplish-tinged, the upper cauline erecto-patent; hairs of the ligule 0·2-0·5 mm. Inflorescence 4-10 cm, with (1-)2-3(-5) spikes; rhachis of spikes prolonged up to 14 mm beyond the spikelets. Spikelets 10-15 mm. Glumes linear-lanceolate, rather densely hairy with hairs up to 0·5 mm, the upper 3-veined. Lemma narrowly oblong-lanceolate, minutely hairy above. Anthers 4-6 mm, dehiscent, with fertile pollen. 2n = 60.{\i  Coasts of S. & W. Europe, from the Netherlands to Jugoslavia.} Be Br Ga Ho Hs It Ju Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S}. ×{\b  townsendii} H. & J. Groves,{\i  Rep. Bot. Exch. Club Brit. Is.}{\b  1880}: 37 (1881) ({\i S. alterniflora} ×{\i  maritima}). Like {\b 1} but stems 30-130 cm, more robust; leaves 4-12 mm wide, usually yellowish-green; hairs of ligule 1-2 mm; inflorescence 12-35 cm, with usually 2-4 spikes; rhachis prolonged up to 40 mm; spikelets 12-18 mm; upper glume 3- to 6-veined; anthers 5-8 mm, indehiscent, without fertile pollen. 2n = 62. •{\i  S. England, W. France; widely planted elsewhere for mud-binding}. Br Ga [Be Da Ge Hb Ho]. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. anglica} C. E. Hubbard, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 364 (1978). Like {\b 1} but stems 30-130 cm, more robust; leaves 6-15 mm wide, yellowish-green, the upper cauline usually patent; hairs of ligule 2-3 mm; inflorescence 12-35 cm, with 3-6(-12) spikes; rhachis prolonged up to 50 mm; spikelets (14-)16-21 mm; anthers 8-13 mm, dehiscent, with fertile pollen. 2n = 120, 122, 124. •{\i  S. England; widely planted elsewhere for mud-binding}. Br [Be Da Ga Ge Hb Ho].  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   An amphidiploid presumed to have been derived from {\b 2}. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. alterniflora} Loisel.,{\i  Fl. Gall.} 719 (1807). Laxly caespitose; stems 40-100 cm, robust. Leaves 5-10 mm wide, flat, green; hairs of ligule c. 1 mm. Inflorescence 10-25 cm, with (3-)5-13 rather distant spikes; rhachis of spikes prolonged up to 27 mm beyond the spikelets. Spikelets 10-15 mm. Lower glume linear, the upper ovate-lanceolate, with sparse, very short hairs, 3- to 5-veined. Lemma ovate-lanceolate, glabrous. Anthers 5-6 mm. 2n = 62.{\i  Naturalized in S. England, W. France and N. Spain}. [Br Ga Hs.] ({\i North America}.) 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. versicolor} Fabre,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3 {\b 13}: 123 (1850). Laxly caespitose; stems 60-150 cm, rather robust. Leaves junci-
\par

\par
259}
\par