{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 A species requiring critical study.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Considerable differences in size and shape of perianth-segments, anther-size and leaf-characters have been attributed to taxa included here under {\b 23} on present evidence. The situation has been confused by the association of foliage of one species with flowers of another in collections from Greece, where {\b 23} and {\b 17} may grow together.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 17.        Bulbocodium}      L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.H. Valentine. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials with a corm. Leaves linear to lanceolate. Perianth petaloid, deeply 6-partite, free from the base but with long, narrow claws forming a tube below, and joined by teeth or auricles at the base of the limb. Stamens inserted at the base of the limb; filaments slender; anthers versatile. Ovary 3-locular, sessile; ovules many. Style undivided at base, 3-fid at apex. Capsule oblong, 3-valved, opening only at the apex. Seeds globose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: As for {\i Colchicum.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Flowers 4-8·5 cm .............................................................................. {\b 1. vernum}
\par
Flowers 2·5-3 cm .......................................................................... {\b 2. versicolor}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. vernum} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }294 (1753). Corm up to 3 cm in diameter. Plant 5-20 cm. Leaves 3-4, up to 15 × 1·5 cm, with sheathing base and patent limb, linear to linear-lanceolate, obtuse, appearing in spring at the same time as the flowers. Flowers 1(-3), 4-8·5 cm, pink, rarely white. Perianth-segments linear-lanceolate, acute, each with a pair of acute teeth at base of limb. Capsule 1·5-2 cm. {\i Mountain meadows. Pyrenees, S.W. & W.C. Alps; one station in S. Austria.} Au Ga He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. versicolor} (Ker-Gawler) Sprengel,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 40 (1825) ({\i B. ruthenicum} Bunge). Like {\b 1} but corm 1-1·5 cm in diameter; leaves 0·5-0·8(-1) cm wide; flowers 2·5-3 cm; perianth-segments with a pair of obtuse auricles at base of limb.{\i  Dry grassland. S. part of U.S.S.R., extending very locally westwards to E. Hungary and C. Italy.} Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 18.         Merendera}        Ramond
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By B. Valdes. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Corm with thick, black membranous tunic. Leaves all basal. Lower part of leaves and flowers covered by a membranous cylindrical sheath. Flowers solitary or in fascicles, terminal, subsessile, pinkish-purple. Perianth-segments free, with a long, narrow claw and shorter, wider, narrowly elliptical to narrowly obovate limb. Stamens inserted at the base of the limb. Styles free. Capsule oblong, septicidal with 3 apiculate valves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: As for {\i Colchicum}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Anthers not more than 5 mm, ¼-½ as long as filaments
\par
2 Limb of perianth-segments with 2 basal appendages; plant
\par
  with underground stolons ........................................................... {\b 3. sobolifera}
\par
2 Limb of perianth-segments without basal appendages;
\par
  plant without stolons.
\par
3 Anthers 1·5-2·5(-3) mm, violet ......................................................... {\b 1. attica} 
\par
3 Anthers 3-4·5(-5) mm, yellow ....................................... {\b 2. androcymbioides}
\par
1 Anthers more than 5 mm, usually longer than filaments
\par
4 Leaves more than 3 mm wide, usually appearing after the
\par
  flowers; anthers (5·5-)8-12(-17) mm .......................................... {\b 4. pyrenaica}
\par
4 Leaves not more than 3 mm wide, appearing at about the
\par
  same time as the flowers; anthers 5·5-8(-10) mm .......................... {\b 5. filifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. attica} (Spruner ex Tommasini) Boiss. & Spruner in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 5}): 67 (1844) ({\i M. rhodopaea} Velen.). Corm 15-20(-30) × 10-15(-25) mm, without stolons. Leaves up to 17 cm × 3-5(-8) mm, appearing with the flowers; margin scabrid. Flowers (1-)2-3(-5). Limb of perianth-segments (12-)15-25(-45) × 2-4 mm, obtuse, expanded at base. Anthers 1·5-3 mm, ¼-½ as long as filaments, violet, dorsifixed, versatile. Capsule 12-20 mm, oblong, shortly pedicellate, with styles and claws of perianth-segments long-persistent. Seeds 2-2·2 × 1·6-1·8 mm, oblong, with a more or less triangular beak. Autumn flowering. {\i Dry places. S. Bulgaria, S. Greece.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. androcymbioides} Valdés,{\i  Lagascalia}{\b  7}: 161 (1978). Like {\b 1} but leaves 6-12 mm wide, with a wide, cartilaginous, scabrid margin; flowers 1-2; limb of perianth-segments 1·5-2 mm wide; anthers 3-4·5(-5) mm, yellow, not versatile. Spring-flowering.{\i  Dry places. • S.W. Spain} ({\i Serrania de Ronda}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. M. sobolifera} C. A. Meyer in Fischer & C. A. Meyer,{\i  Ind. Sem. Hort. Petrop.}{\b  1}: 34 (1835). Corm 7-15 × 5-10 mm, with underground stolons. Leaves up to 15 cm × 3-6(-8) mm, appearing with the flowers, sulcate; margin smooth. Flowers 1-2. Limb of perianth-segments 20-40 × 2·5-5(-8) mm, obtuse, the base sagittate with 2 descending linear appendages. Anthers 1·5-3·5 mm, 1/3-1/2 as long as filaments, violet, dorsifixed, versatile. Capsule 15-20 mm, oblong. Seeds subglobose. Spring-flowering. 2n = 54.{\i  E. & C. parts of Balkan peninsula; E. Romania}. Bu ?Gr Ju Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. M. pyrenaica} (Pourret) P. Fourn.,{\i  Quatre Fl. Fr.} 157 (1935) ({\i M. montana} Lange,{\i  M. bulbocodium} Ramond). Corm 20-25(-30) × 15-20(-30) mm. Leaves up to 22 cm × (3·5-)4-8 (-10) mm, usually appearing after the flowers, plicate. Flowers solitary, rarely 2. Limb of perianth-segments (25-)30-45(-65) × (3-)4-6·5(-11) mm, obtuse, rarely emarginate. Anthers (5·5-)8-12(-17) mm, longer than filaments, yellow, basifixed. Capsule (10-)15-20(-25) mm, oblong. Seeds c. 2 × 1·5 mm, globose-pyriform, apiculate. Autumn-flowering. 2n = 60, 54+0-6B.{\i  Dry places. • Iberian peninsula, C. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. M. filifolia} Camb.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Balear. }147 (1827). Corm 15-20 × 10-15(-20) mm. Leaves up to 15 cm × (1-)1·5-2·5(-3) mm, longer than fruiting pedicel, appearing at about the same time as the flowers, flat. Flowers solitary. Perianth-segments (20-)25-40 × (2-)2·5-5(-8) mm, obtuse. Anthers (5·5-)6-8(-10) mm, longer than to somewhat shorter than filaments, yellow basifixed. Capsule 8-12 mm, oblong. Seeds 1·2-1·5(-1·7) × 1·2-1·5 mm, globose, slightly apiculate. Autumn-flowering. 2n = 54.{\i  Sandy soils. S.W. Europe.} Bl Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 19.      Lloydia}      Salisb.ex Reichenb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, bulbous perennials. Stems leafy. Flowers solitary or paired, rarely 3, terminal. Perianth campanulate-infundibuliform, the segments obovate, with a nectariferous pit delimited by a transverse fold above the base. Stamens 6, inserted at the base of the perianth-segments, included. Style shorter than stamens; stigma entire. Fruit a 3-ribbed capsule, dehiscing apically Seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. serotina} (L.) Reichenb.,{\i  Fl. Germ. Excurs. }102 (1830). Bulb elongate, ovoid, with a persistent membranous tunic, enclosed in remains of old leaves, with filiform stolons. Stem 5-15 (-40) cm. Basal leaves usually 2, 7-20(-30) cm, filiform, usually exceeding the stem; cauline leaves 2-4(-5), linear to
\par

\par
25}
\par