{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 hairs; leaf-sheaths overlapping, persistent on stolons and rhizomes. Inflorescence a 2-sided raceme of more or less sessile spikes; spikes with up to c. 20 closely packed, sessile, flattened spikelets arranged distichously and broadside to axis. Spikelets with (2-)4-8(-12) florets. Glumes slightly unequal, with a wide, membranous margin, mucronate. Lemma similar to glumes. Palea about equalling lemma, 2-veined, strongly keeled and enclosing the grain. Grain oblong-ellipsoid; hilum punctiform, basal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Inflorescence 10-50 × 4-10 mm; lower spikes on same side
\par
  of axis of main inflorescence not overlapping .............................. {\b 1. littoralis} 
\par
Inflorescence 5-20 × 3-8 mm; all spikes closely imbricate ........ {\b 2. lagopoides}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. littoralis} (Gouan) Parl.,{\i  Fl. Ital. }{\b 1}: 461 (1850) (incl. {\i A. intermedius} Regel, {\i A. pungens} (Bieb.) C. Koch). Rhizomes and stolons extensively creeping; flowering stems up to 25 cm, erect or decumbent. Leaves and sheaths strongly and closely ridged, glabrous to sparsely hairy on abaxial surface; leaves up to 5 cm but often much less, glabrous to sparsely hairy on adaxial surface. Inflorescence 10-50 × 4-10 mm, narrowly ovoid; axis of inflorescence and spikes minutely aculeolate to shortly pubescent; lower spikes on same side of axis not overlapping, at least on main inflorescences. Lower glume 1-2·5 mm, 1- to 4-veined; upper glume 1·5-3 mm, 3- to 6-veined. Lemma 1·5-4 mm including mucro, 9- to 11-veined; mucro 0·1-0·3 mm. Glumes and lemma glabrous or hairy on hyaline margins, aculeolate on main veins. 2n = 20. {\i Sandy places, mostly maritime and saline. Mediterranean region and S.E. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Typical{\i  A. littoralis} has glabrous or very sparsely hairy leaves and sheaths, and glabrous lemmas 2-3·5 mm.{\b  A. intermedius} Regel,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou }{\b 41}({\b 2}): 292 (1869) ({\i A. littoralis} subsp.{\i  intermedius} (Regel) Tzvelev), from S.E. Russia, differs only in its more densely hairy leaves and somewhat longer lemmas (2·3-4 mm), and{\b  A. pungens} (Bieb.) C. Koch,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  21}: 408 (1848) ({\i A. littoralis} subsp.{\i  pungens }(Bieb.) Tzvelev), also from S.E. Russia, differs only in its somewhat shorter lemmas (1·5-3 mm) which are hairy on the hyaline margins. Each probably merits only varietal status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. lagopoides} (L.) Trin. ex Thwaites{\i  Enum. Pl. Zeyl.} 374 (1864) ({\i A. repens} (Desf.) Parl.). Like {\b 1} but more compact; stolons and rhizomes far-creeping or not; flowering stems up to 15 cm; at least the lower leaves and sheaths hairy on abaxial surface; leaves mostly less than 15 mm; inflorescence 5-20 × 4-8 mm, ovoid to suborbicular; adjacent spikes on same side of axis closely imbricate; glumes and lemmas hairy on dorsal surface.{\i  Maritime sands. Islands of the Mediterranean region eastwards from Sicilia.} Cr Si ?Tu. ({\i N. & N.E. Africa, S. & S.C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 1} and {\b 2} are usually quite distinct, but intermediates sometimes occur, especially in W. Asia. Specimens with hairy leaves and sparsely hairy lemmas, but otherwise resembling {\i A. littoralis}, have been referred to {\i A. littoralis} var.{\i  intermedius} Cosson & Durieu or var. {\i hispidulus} Halácsy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe    {\b  Eragrostideae}      Stapf 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  (incl. {\i Sporoboleae} Stapf)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves linear or setaceous; silica-bodies saddle-shaped; 1- or 2-celled, short, swollen or globose micro-hairs present; ligule usually a row of multicellular hairs. Inflorescence a panicle or of spikes or spike-like racemes. Spikelets all hermaphrodite, laterally compressed or subterete, with 1-many florets. Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes and between the florets from above downwards, or persistent and the grains and lemmas falling in succession from below upwards, with or without the paleas, or rarely the spikelet falling entire. Glumes shorter than the spikelet. Lemma membranous to coriaceous, unawned or rarely with an apical awn, 1- to 3(-5)-veined. Palea 2-keeled. Lodicules 2, truncate. Stamens 1-3. Ovary glabrous; styles 2. Grain sometimes with free pericarp, becoming mucilaginous when wet; hilum punctiform; embryo about half as long as grain; starch-grains compound. Chromosomes small; basic number 9, 10, 12(?6).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 120.     Cleistogenes}        Keng
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Leaves flat; ligule a ciliate rim. Inflorescence a rather lax panicle. Spikelets subterete, with (1-)2-5 florets. Glumes unequal, membranous, shorter than the florets, 1-veined. Lemma obscurely 3-veined, keeled above, shortly 2-dentate and often awned at apex. Palea similar to the lemma. Stamens 3. Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Stems 30-100 cm, straight; awn not more than 3 mm ..................... {\b 1. serotina} 
\par
Stems not more than 20 cm, flexuous; awn up to 4 mm ............... {\b 2. squarrosa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. serotina} (L.) Keng, {\i Sinensia}{\b  5}: 149 (1934) ({\i Diplachne serotina} (L.) Link,{\i  Molinia serotina} (L.) Mert. & Koch). Caespitose, usually with short, stout, densely scaly rhizomes. Stems 30-100 cm, erect, usually with 10-14 leaves. Lower leaves 2-6 mm wide, flat, the upper involute, patent. Terminal panicle 4-10 cm, usually with small axillary inflorescences concealed within the upper leaf-sheaths. Spikelets 6-10 mm. Lemmas widely spaced, lanceolate, puberulent, usually dark purple; awn up to 3 mm. {\i Dry, rocky places and scrub. S. & S.C. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The florets are most usually cleistogamous and without lodicules; those of the axillary inflorescences are apparently always so.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b serotina}: Rhizomes densely scaly. Leaves 4-7 mm wide. Awn not more than 1 mm. 2n = 40. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species, but in U.S.S.R. only in Krym}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b bulgarica} (Bornm.) Tutin, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 361 (1978) ({\i Diplachne serotina} subsp.{\i  bulgarica} Bornm., {\i D. bulgarica} (Bornm.) Roshev.): Rhizomes not densely scaly. Leaves not more than 3 mm wide. Awn 2-3 mm. 2n = 40.{\i  S. part of U.S.S.R., E. Romania, E. Bulgaria}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. squarrosa} (Trin.) Keng, {\i Sinensia}{\b  5}: 156 (1934) ({\i Diplachne squarrosa} (Trin.) Maxim.). Like {\b 1} but stems up to 20 cm, strongly flexuous; rhizomes not densely scaly; leaves not more than 3 mm wide; spikelets with 1-3 florets; lemma with awn up to 4 mm.{\i  Steppes and sandy ground. S.E. Russia and E. Ukraine.} Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 121.     Eragrostis}        N.M. Wolf  
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Leaves flat or convolute, narrow; ligule a ring of hairs (rarely membranous). Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 2-many florets. Glumes unequal to subequal, membranous, shorter than the florets, 1-veined. Lemma 3-veined, membranous, usually unawned, falling separately or with the palea and grain. Palea hyaline, 2-keeled often persistent. Stamens 3 or 2. Lodicules 2, minute, rarely absent, not toothed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Several other species occur as casuals.
\par

\par
256}
\par