{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min31}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min32}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords965}{\nofchars5503}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 3- to 5-veined, with long, soft hairs on the proximal half of the back, not keeled. Rhachilla glabrous.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28  Spikelets at least 12 mm, usually with 3 florets;
\par       lemma 2-fid at apex ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. donax}{\fs28 
\par  Spikelets not more than 10 mm, usually with 1-2 florets;
\par       lemma entire at apex ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. plinii}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. A. donax}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl. }{\fs28 81 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 A. maxima}{\fs28  Forsk\'e5l). Rhizomes long, woody, swollen in places, covered in coriaceous, scale-like sheaths. Stems up to 600 \'d7 3\'b75 cm, persisting and flowering in the second year, usually simple. Leaves up to 60 \'d7 6 cm, glaucous, scabrid at the margin; sheaths smooth, glabrous, covering the nodes. Panicle 30-60 cm, oblong. Spikelets 12-18 mm, usually with 3 florets. Glumes lanceolate, long-acute. Lemma lanceolate, 2-fid at apex, with a short awn from the sinus. Anthers c. 3 mm. 2n = 110, 112.}{\i\fs28  Extensively planted in S. Europe for shelter, and for the manufacture of baskets, reeds for musical instruments and other articles; widely naturalized in ditches and by rivers.}{\fs28  [Al Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.] (.?S. & C. Asia.)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. A. plinii}{\fs28  Turra,}{\i\fs28  Farset. Nov. Gen.}{\fs28  11 (1765). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but stems not more than 300 cm; spikelets 8-10 mm, usually with 1-2 florets; lemma entire at apex. 2n = 72.}{\i\fs28  Mediterranean region, Portugal.}{\fs28  Al Co Cr Ga Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Bl Bu].
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 109.          Phragmites}{\fs28    Adanson
\par }{\fs24  By \'86T.G. Tutin. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Like }{\i\fs28 Arundo}{\fs28  but spikelets with Up to 10 florets; glumes unequal, shorter than the florets; lowest floret male or sterile; lemma glabrous on the back; rhachilla with abundant long hairs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. P.  australis}{\fs28  (Cav.) Trin. ex Steudel,}{\i\fs28  Nomencl. Bot.}{\fs28  ed. 2, }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 : 324 (1841) (}{\i\fs28 P. communis}{\fs28  Trin., }{\i\fs28 Arundo phragmites}{\fs28  L.). Rhizome long, woody, covered with coriaceous scale-like sheaths. Stems 80-350 (-1000) \'d7 0\'b75-1\'b72 cm, not overwintering, usually simple. Leaves up to 50 \'d7 5 cm, greyish-green, gradually tapering to a long, slender apex; sheaths smooth, glabrous, covering the nodes. Panicle (8-)20-30(-50) cm, oblong to ovoid, often purplish. Spikelets 10-16 mm, With 2-10 florets. Glumes lanceolate, acute, the lower 1/2-2/3 as long as the upper. Lemma narrowly lanceolate, acute to acuminate. Anthers 1\'b75-2 mm. 2n = 36, 44, 46, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 54, 96.}{\i\fs28  Wet places. Almost throughout Europe.}{\fs28  All except Az Fa Is Sb.
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28  P. isiaca}{\fs28  Kunth,}{\i\fs28  Re'v. Gram.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 80 (1829) is a large variant of 1, with which it intergrades. It does not seem possible to maintain it at specific or subspecific rank.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  Tribe      }{\b\fs28 Cortaderieae}{\fs28      Zotov
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Like }{\i\fs28 Arundineae}{\fs28  but dioecious or gynodioecious; silica-bodies rounded to dumbbell-shaped; 2-celled micro-hairs present; lodicules ciliate; basic chromosome number 9.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 110.         Cortaderia}{\fs28       Stapf
\par }{\fs24  By \'86T.G. Tutin. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Large caespitose dioecious perennials. Leaves flat; ligule a line of hairs. Inflorescence a large panicle. Spikelets laterally compressed; florets 2-7. Glumes unequal, membranous, 1-veined. Lemma membranous, villous, 3-veined, With a terminal awn. Rhachilla villous, disarticulating above the glumes and just above each floret.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. C. selloana}{\fs28  (Schultes & Schultes fil.) Ascherson & Graebner,}{\i\fs28  Syn. Mitteleur. Fl. }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 325 (1900). Dioecious. Stems up to 3 m, stout. Leaves 1-3 m, glaucous, hard, with sharply serrulate cutting margins. Panicle (30-)50-100 cm; branches erecto-patent in male, patent in female plants. Spikelets c. 15 mm (incl. awn), silvery or sometimes pinkish. Glumes lanceolate, the upper with a long terminal awn. }{\i\fs28 Widely cultivated for ornament and naturalized in W. Europe}{\fs28 . [Az Br Ga Hs.] (}{\i\fs28 South America}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  Tribe        }{\b\fs28  Danthonieae}{\fs28          (G.Beck) C.E. Hubbard 
\par }{\fs24 By \'86T.G. Tutin. 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs24 
\par }{\fs28 Leaves linear or setaceous; silica-bodies rounded or dumbbell-shaped; 2-celled micro-hairs present; ligule a row of hairs. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets all hermaphrodite, somewhat compressed laterally, with 2-10 florets. Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes and between the florets. Glumes about as long as the lowest lemma, often strongly 3- to 11-veined. Lemma coriaceous or membranous-coriaceous, 2-lobed and often awned from the sinus. Palea 2-keeled. Lodicules 2. Stamens 3. Ovary glabrous; styles 2. Grain with elliptical or linear hilum; starch-grains compound. Chromosomes small; basic number 6, 9, 12.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 111.         Danthonia}{\fs28           DC.
\par }{\fs24  By \'86T.G. Tutin. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennials. Leaves flat or involute. Inflorescence a panicle, with few, long-pedicellate spikelets. Spikelets subterete, with 2-5 florets. Glumes subequal, chartaceous, about equalling the spikelet, 5- to 7-veined. Lemma coriaceous, 7- to 9-veined, 2-dentate at apex, with an awn or mucro from the sinus. Palea obtuse or 2-dentate, with 2 keels near the margin. Rhachilla prolonged.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28  Leaf-sheaths with scattered long hairs; lemma unawned .......... }{\b\fs28 1. decumbens}{\fs28  
\par Leaf-sheaths glabrous; lemma awned ................................................ }{\b\fs28 2. alpina}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. D. decumbens}{\fs28  (L.) DC. in Lam. & DC.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Fr.}{\fs28  ed. 3,}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 : 33 (1805) (}{\i\fs28 Sieglingia decumbens}{\fs28  (L.) Bernh.). Stems 10-60 cm decumbent to erect. Leaves 0\'b75-4 mm wide, usually flat, sparsely hairy or glabrous; sheaths with scattered long hairs, bearded at apex; ligule a ring of hairs. Panicle 2-7 cm, with up to 15 spikelets. Spikelets 6-15 mm. Glumes lanceolate to narrowly ovate rounded below, keeled near apex, smooth. Lemma broadly ovate, 2-dentate, with a mucro in the sinus, usually ciliate up to the middle, densely bearded at base. 2n = 24, 36, 124.}{\i\fs28  Most of Europe}{\fs28 . All except Bl Cr Gr Sb Si.
\par 
\par   Often cleistogamous, when the florets lack lodicules and have very small anthers. Cleistogamous spikelets also frequently occur in the axils of the sheaths at the base of the flowering stem.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. D. alpina}{\fs28  Vest,}{\i\fs28  Flora}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Regensb}{\fs28 .) }{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28 : 145 (1821) (}{\i\fs28 D. calycina}{\fs28  (Vill.) Reichenb., non (Lam.) Roemer & Schultes,}{\i\fs28  D. provincialis}{\fs28  DC.). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but leaf-sheaths glabrous; leaves usually convolute panicle seldom with more than 5 spikelets; lemma with 2 long teeth and an awn up to 10 mm, spirally twisted below and somewhat geniculate. 2n = 36. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S. & S.C. Europe}{\fs28 . Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge ?Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par 
\par    }{\i\fs28 D. decumbens}{\fs28  \'d7 }{\i\fs28 alpina}{\fs28  occurs rarely with the parents.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 112.       Schismus}{\fs28         Beauv.
\par }{\fs24  By \'86T.G. Tutin. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat or involute. Inflorescence a rather dense panicle. Spikelets laterally compressed, With 5-10 florets. Glumes subequal, much longer than the lowest lemma, strongly 3- to 5-veined, with a wide scarious margin. Lemma 9-veined, membranous, 2-fid or 2-lobed at apex, sometimes with a short awn from the sinus. Palea shorter than to as long as lemma.
\par 
\par 253}
\par }