{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b novii} Martinovský,{\i  loc. cit.} (1975). For details of these taxa see J.O. Martinovský,{\i  op. cit.} 249-261 (1975).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. S. ucrainica} P. Smirnov, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  22}: 374 (1926). Like {\b 16} but leaves always convolute, c. 0·5 mm in diameter, the abaxial surface densely aculeolate and with sparse, subappressed hairs, the adaxial surface shortly hairy; basal sheaths not purplish; lemma 17-19 mm, the ventral line of hairs ending 2-4 mm below the base of the awn. 2n = 44. {\i S. part of U.S.S.R., E. Romania}. Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. S. pontica} P. Smirnov,{\i  op. cit.}{\b  26}: 268 (1929). Stems up to 40 cm. Leaves convolute, 0·5-0·9 mm in diameter, the abaxial surface aculeate and with more or less appressed hairs, the adaxial with hairs up to 0·5 mm; sheaths glabrous; ligule of basal leaves 0·5-2 mm, of upper leaves up to 4 mm. Panicle 5-10 cm. Lemma c. 17 mm, with 2 marginal lines of hairs reaching the base of the awn, the others shorter; awn up to 40 cm, the column glabrous, the seta with hairs c. 5 mm in the middle, becoming shorter upwards.{\i  Krym; Turkey-in-Europe.} ?Bu Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 20-24}). {\b S. joannis} group. Leaves usually convolute, usually with a tuft of hairs at the apex, at least when young. Glumes long-attenuate. Lemma with the ventral line of hairs usually ending below the base of the awn; awn with plumose seta.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Column hairy
\par
2 Young leaves with a tuft of hairs at apex; lemma 17-18 mm; 
\par
  awn 20-25 cm ............................................................................. {\b 23. anomala}
\par
2 Young leaves glabrous; lemma 23-25 mm; awn 29-36 cm .... {\b 24. danubialis}
\par
1 Column glabrous
\par
3 Sheaths of upper leaves scabrid .......................................... {\b 21. borysthenica}
\par
3 Sheaths of upper leaves smooth
\par
4 Lemma (17-)21-22 mm ............................................................... {\b 22. styriaca}
\par
4 Lemma 15(-20) mm ..................................................................... {\b 20. joannis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. S. joannis} Celak., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  34}: 318 (1884) ({\i S. pennata} auct. scand. et ross., non L.). Leaves 0·5-1 mm in diameter, sometimes flat and 1·5-2·5 mm wide, with hairs up to 3 mm at apex; abaxial surface smooth and glabrous or weakly scabrid; ligule of basal leaves 1(-3) mm, of upper 3(-7) mm. Glumes 40(-70) mm. Awn with glabrous column.{\i  C., S. & E. Europe, westwards to E. France; S.C. Sweden.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Sheaths densely puberulent; adaxial surface of leaf 
\par
  densely hairy ..................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b puberula} 
\par
1 Sheaths glabrous or sparsely puberulent; adaxial 
\par
  surface of leaf glabrous or with scattered hairs
\par
2 Lemma usually 15-17 mm; awn usually 25-33 cm ............ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b joannis}
\par
2 Lemma 17·5-20 mm; awn usually 23-30 cm ................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b balcanica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b puberula} (Podp. & Suza) Martinovský, {\i Preslia }{\b 48}: 181 (1976) ({\i S. joannis} var.{\i  puberula} Podp. & Suza): {\i C. Europe and U.S.S.R}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b joannis}: 2n = 44. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b balcanica} Martinovský, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  118}: 180(1970): •{\i  C.part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. S. borysthenica} Klokov ex Prokudin in Wulf, {\i Fl. Kryma }{\b 1}({\b 4}): 25 (1951). Like {\b 20} but leaves with a shorter and sparser tuft of hairs or glabrous at apex; sheaths of upper leaves scabrid; lemma 21-22 mm.{\i  E. & E.C. Europe.} Au Bu Cz Ge Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b borysthenica}: Lemma with ventral line of hairs ending far below the base of awn.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b germanica} (Endtmann) Martinovský & Rauschert,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  88}: 320 (1977) ({\i S. joannis} subsp.{\i  germanica} Endtmann): Lemma with ventral line of hairs reaching base of awn. •{\i  E. Germany}, ?{\i Poland}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. S. styriaca} Martinovský, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  118}: 179 (1970). Leaves nearly 1 mm in diameter when convolute, glabrous or with few hairs at the apex; abaxial surface strongly scabrid; upper part of sheaths with dense hairs 0·2(-0·8) mm. Lemma 17-22 mm; awn (31-)37-41(-45) cm. •{\i  Mountains of S.E. Austria.} Au.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. S. anomala} P. Smirnov,{\i  Del. Sem. Hort. Bot. Univ. Mosq.}{\b  1930}: 15 (1930). Leaves with a tuft of hairs at the apex only when young, the abaxial surface weakly scabrid. Awn up to 25 cm, the column with hairs c. 4 mm. •{\i  On the borders of S.E. Russia and W. Kazakhstan} ({\i near Teplovka}). Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. S. danubialis} Dihoru & Roman,{\i  Rev. Roum. Biol.} ({\i Bot}.) {\b 14}: 26 (1969). Leaves glabrous on both surfaces, scabrid on the adaxial surface; sheaths of basal leaves retrorsely scabrid, of the upper smooth; ligule 3·5-7 mm. Lemma (22-)23-25 mm; awn 28-36·5 cm, the column with hairs 2-3 mm. 2n = 44.{\i  Stony slopes. • By the Danube above Turnu-Severin.} Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. S. tirsa} Steven,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  30}({\b 2}): 115 (1857). Very robust. Leaves always convolute, c. 0·5 mm in diameter, with a long, setaceous apex; abaxial surface with very short, stiff, subappressed hairs; adaxial surface densely puberulent; basal leaves up to 100 cm, the ligule scarcely visible; sheaths glabrous. Panicle contracted. Glumes long-attenuate. Lemma (16-)18-19·5(-21) mm; awn c. 40 cm, the column glabrous, the seta with hairs 5-6 mm. 2n = 44.{\i  C., S. & E. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tirsa}: Lemma with the ventral line of hairs ending 1-4 mm below the base of the awn, the other lines scarcely ½ as long as the lemma.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b albanica} Martinovský, {\i Preslia}{\b  44}: 21 (1972): Lemma with the ventral line of hairs reaching the base of the awn, the other lines more than ½ as long as the lemma. •{\i  N. Albania}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. S. lessingiana} Trin. & Rupr., {\i Mém. Acad. Sci. Pétersb.} ser. 6, {\b 7}({\b 2}): 79 (1843). Leaves convolute, 0·4-0·5 mm in diameter abaxial surface scabrid, with sparse, stout, conical, subappressed hairs 0·04(-0·1) mm; adaxial surface with slender, unequal, dense hairs on the ribs; sheaths glabrous, smooth; ligule 0·2-0·3 mm. Glumes 20-30 mm. Lemma 8-11 mm, with a ring of long hairs below the base of the awn; awn 12-20(-25) cm, the column glabrous, the seta plumose. 2n = 44.{\i  S.E. Europe}. Bu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b lessingiana}: Sheaths of the cauline leaves glabrous.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b brauneri} Pacz.,{\i  Zap. Krymsk. Obsc. Estestv.}{\b  5}: 151 (1916): Sheaths of the cauline leaves shortly and densely hairy. •{\i  Krym and adjacent islets.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. S. capensis} Thunb.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Cap.} 19 (1794) ({\i S. tortilis} Desf.). Annual or biennial. Stems 10-30(-80) cm, glabrous. Leaves convolute or flat, glabrous or sparsely hairy, smooth; sheaths bearded at the mouth; ligule very short, truncate, shortly ciliate. Panicle 3-10(-15) cm, dense. Glumes long-attenuate,
\par

\par
250}
\par