{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: N. L. Bor in C. C. Townsend & E. Guest,{\i  Flora of Iraq}{\b  9}: 377-382. Baghdad. 1968.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Lowest lemma with obtuse to acute lobes 1/6-1/4 as long 
\par
  as rest of lemma; palea longer than entire part of lemma ............. {\b 1. barbatus} 
\par
Lowest lemma with acuminate lobes 1/3-1/2 as long as rest
\par
  of lemma; palea about as long as entire part of lemma ................. {\b 2. arabicus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. barbatus} (L.) Thell., {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss.} ser. 2,{\b  7}: 391 (1907) ({\i S. calycinus} Cosson & Durieu,{\i  S. marginatus} Beauv.). Stems 3-15 cm, usually numerous, erect or geniculately ascending, smooth and glabrous. Leaves often hairy above near the base, with a tuft of long hairs at junction of sheath and lamina. Panicle 1-4 cm; pedicels short. Spikelets 5-7 mm. Glumes usually less than 5 mm, lanceolate, glabrous. Lemma 2-3 mm, hairy near the margin in the lower 1/2-2/3, the lowest with obtuse to acute lobes 1/6-1/4 as long as the rest of the lemma. Palea longer than the entire part of the lemma.{\i  Dry, open habitats. Spain and S. France; an occasional casual elsewhere.} Ga Hs. ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. arabicus} Nees,{\i  Fl. Afr. Austr.} 422 (1841). Like {\b 1} but glumes usually more than 5 mm; lowest lemma with acuminate lobes 1/3-1/4 as long as the rest of the lemma; palea about as long as the entire part of the lemma.{\i  Dry, open habitats. S. Greece and C. Aegean region.} ?Cr Gr. ({\i S.W. & S.C. Asia, Egypt}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe        {\b  Molinieae}      Jirasek
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves linear, flat, deciduous; silica-bodies dumbbell-shaped; slender 2-celled micro-hairs present; ligule a row of hairs. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets hermaphrodite, laterally compressed, with 1-4 florets. Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes and between the florets. Glumes shorter than the spikelet. Lemma membranous, 3-veined, rounded on the back, unawned. Palea 2-keeled. Lodicules 2, obovate. Stamens 3. Ovary glabrous; styles 2. Grain with linear hilum as long as the grain; starch-grains compound but readily separating. Chromosomes small; basic number 9.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 113.         Molinia}        Schrank
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Caespitose perennials. Leaves flat; ligule a row of hairs. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets laterally compressed, with 1-4 florets. Glumes subequal, membranous, shorter than the florets, the lower 1-veined or without a vein, the upper 1- to 3-veined. Lemma membranous, 3-veined, rounded on the back. Palea about equalling lemma.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: H. J. Conert,{\i  Die Systematik und Anatomie der Arundineae,} 155-182. Weinheim. 1961. V. Jirásek,{\i  Acta Univ. Carol.} ({\i Biol}.){\b  1965}: 227-243 (1965).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. caerulea} (L.) Moench,{\i  Meth.} 183 (1794). Stems 15-150(-250) cm, erect, rigid, with 1 node towards the base, disarticulating at this node, the basal internode up to 5 cm, usually swollen and clavate. Leaves 10-50 cm × 3-10 mm, tapering gradually to the apex, deciduous, sparsely hairy or glabrous, scabridulous on the margins; sheaths smooth, hairy near the apex. Panicle 5-40 cm, compact and spike-like, with short branches, to very lax, with long branches. Spikelets 4-9 mm, purple, brownish, yellowish or green. Glumes lanceolate to ovate or oblong, acute. Lemma ovate, acute to obtuse. Anthers 1·5-3 mm, violet-brown.{\i  Throughout Europe, except for some islands, but mainly on mountains in the south.} All except Az Bl ?Co Cr Is Rs (K) Sa Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Very variable. Two subspecies may be recognized, but many intermediates occur and the correlation between chromosome number and morphology needs further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b caerulea}: Stems usually not more than 90 cm; leaves 3-6(-10) mm wide. Panicle narrow with short, more or less erect branches. Lowest lemma 3(-4) mm, subobtuse. Caryopsis c. 2 mm. 2n = 36.{\i  Damp, humus-rich, base-poor soils. Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b arundinacea} (Schrank) H. Paul,{\i  Ber. Bayer. Bot. Ges.}{\b  23}: 154 (1938) ({\i M. arundinacea} Schrank): Stems up to 250 cm; leaves usually 8-12 mm wide. Panicle with long, patent to erecto-patent branches. Lowest lemma 4-6 mm, long-acute. Caryopsis c. 3 mm. 2n = ?36, 90.{\i  Somewhat base-rich mineral soils with fluctuating water-table. Locally throughout much of the range of the species, but less common than subsp.} ({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe          {\b Aristideae}       C.E. Hubbard ex Bor
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves setaceous to linear, flat or often convolute; silica-bodies dumbbell-shaped or elliptic-oblong; slender 2-celled microhairs present; ligule a row of hairs. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets all hermaphrodite, terete or somewhat compressed laterally, with 1 floret. Rhachilla disarticulating above the glumes. Glumes membranous, shorter or longer than the floret. Lemma chartaceous, becoming coriaceous, with a terminal, 3-fid awn. Palea hyaline, 2-keeled. Lodicules 2-3, usually finely veined. Stamens 3 or 1. Ovary glabrous; styles 2. Grain with linear hilum as long as the grain; starch-grains compound. Chromosomes small; basic number 11, 12.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 114.      Aristida}       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Caespitose annuals or perennials. Leaves often convolute. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets somewhat compressed laterally. Glumes shorter to longer than the floret, unequal, 1- to 3-veined. Lemma convolute, coriaceous, villous at base, with a usually 3-fid terminal awn. Palea short, without or with 2 veins.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. adscensionis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 82 (1753). Caespitose perennial or commonly annual. Stems up to 40 cm. Leaves usually convolute, rigid, strongly ribbed; sheaths ribbed, often purplish below; ligule a ring of short hairs. Panicle 15-20 cm, narrow. Spikelets c. 10 mm (excluding awn), often purplish. Lower glume 7-8 mm, the upper 9-10 mm. Lemma 8-9 mm; longest branch of the awn up to 25 mm, scabrid. {\i S.part of Mediterranean region. }Cr ?Gr Hs It Si. ({\i Tropics and subtropics}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  A. coerulescens} Desf., {\i Fl. Atl.}{\b  1}: 109 (1798), appears to differ from {\b 1} only in being perennial; in all other characters it seems to fall within the range of variation found in that species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 115.     Stipagrostis}     Nees
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Aristida} but at least the middle branch of the awn plumose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Stems 20-50 cm; branches of the awn 10-15 mm ............................ {\b 1. pennata}
\par
Stems 40-100 cm; branches of the awn 16-20 mm ......................... {\b 2. karelinii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. pennata} (Trin.) De winter,{\i  Kirkia}{\b  3}: 135 (1963) ({\i Aristida pennata} Trin.). Perennial with far-creeping rhizome. Stems 20-50 cm, branched from the base. Leaves usually convolute, 0·4-2 mm wide when flat, scabrid on both surfaces and shortly hairy above; ligule a ring of short hairs. Panicle usually 8-20 cm. Spikelets 12-15 mm (excluding awn), whitish. Glumes unequal, the lower longer than the upper; Lemma 4·5-6 mm, half as long
\par

\par
254}
\par