{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. colonum} (L.) Link,{\i  Hort. Berol.}{\b  2}: 209 (1833). Laxly caespitose annual; stems 10-70 cm. Inflorescence 4-15 cm, the racemes up to 3 cm, simple. Spikelets 1·5-3 mm, in 4 regular rows on each raceme, subglobose to ovate-elliptical, pubescent, acute to cuspidate, unawned; upper lemma 1·5-2·5 mm. {\i Cultivated ground, ditches and waste places. A frequent casual in S. Europe and locally naturalized in the Mediterranean region; possibly native in the S. part of its range.} [?Bl Cr Ga *It *Hs *Lu *Si.] ({\i Tropics and subtropics}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. crus-galli} (L.) Beauv., {\i Agrost.} 53, 161 (1812). Laxly caespitose annual; stems 25-100 cm. Inflorescence 6-25 cm, the longest racemes 2-10 cm, mostly with short secondary branchlets at the base. Spikelets (2-)3-4(-4·5) mm, in 2 to several irregular rows on each raceme, ovate-elliptical, hispid, acuminate to awned; upper lemma 2-3 mm, including the herbaceous apex. 2n = 54.{\i  Ditches, roadsides and waste places. S. Europe; naturalized further north.} Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Au Be Cz Da Ge He Ho Hu Po Rs (B, C)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. E. oryzoides} (Ard.) Fritsch,{\i  Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  41}: 742 (1891). Erect annual; stems 25-150 cm. Inflorescence 6-25 cm, the longest racemes 2-5 cm, usually simple. Spikelets 3·8-6·5 mm, in 2 irregular rows on each raceme, ovate-elliptical, hispid, acuminate to awned; upper lemma 3·5-5 mm, including the herbaceous apex.{\i  A weed of ricefields. S. & S.C. Europe}. †Cz Hs Hu It Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) ?Sa Si.] ({\i Origin uncertain.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 135.      Brachiaria}         (Trin.) Griseb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.D. Clayton. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Inflorescence of unilateral racemes arranged along a central axis. Spikelets dorsally compressed, unawned, with 2 florets; lower glume adaxial, usually shorter than the spikelet; upper glume almost as long as the spikelet; lower floret male, the lemma resembling the upper glume; upper floret hermaphrodite, the lemma coriaceous to crustaceous, clasping only the margins of the palea.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. eruciformis} (Sibth. & Sm.) Griseb. in Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Ross.}{\b  4}: 469 (1853). Laxly caespitose annual; stems 10-50 cm, geniculate. Inflorescence of 3-12 racemes on an axis 1-6 cm long; racemes 0·5-2·5 cm, the spikelets borne singly on a triquetrous rhachis. Spikelets 2-2·5 mm, narrowly ovate; lower glume an ovate scale up to 0·5 mm; upper glume and lower lemma pubescent; upper lemma smooth, obtuse.{\i  Ditches, cultivated fields and damp waste places. Mediterranean region and S.E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Cr Gr Hs It Ju Si Tu [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 136.       Eriochloa}       Kunth
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.D. Clayton. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Brachiaria} but spikelets supported on a bead-like swelling; lower glume nearly always vestigial, adherent to the swollen rhachilla-internode; lower floret sometimes sterile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. succincta} (Trin.) Kunth,{\i  Enum. Pl.}{\b  1}: 73 (1833). Laxly caespitose annual; stems 10-60 cm, geniculate. Leaf-blades and sheaths pubescent. Inflorescence of 3-15 racemes each 1-2 cm long. Pedicels scabrid and with scattered, short hairs above. Spikelets 3-3·5 mm, elliptical, thinly pubescent, acute; lower glume vestigial; lower floret reduced to a lemma; upper lemma with a mucro 0·3 mm.{\i  River-banks liable to flooding. S.E. Russia} ({\i along the Volga, below Volgograd}). Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  E. villosa} (Thunb.) Kunth, {\i Revis. Gram.}{\b  1}: 30 (1829), from E. Asia, has recently been found in rice-fields in S. Ukraine and S.E. Russia and may be becoming naturalized. It has spikelets 4·5-6 mm and pedicels with dense, long hairs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 137.           Digitaria}         Haller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.D. Clayton. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Leaves flat; ligule membranous. Inflorescence of unilateral racemes arranged subdigitately or upon a short central axis and bearing the spikelets in appressed groups of 1-5 or more. Spikelets dorsally compressed, with 2 florets; lower glume abaxial, small or absent; upper glume as long as or much shorter than the spikelet; lower floret sterile, represented by a lemma usually as long as the spikelet; upper floret hermaphrodite, the lemma chartaceous to cartilaginous, with its hyaline margins enfolding and concealing most of the palea.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Upper glume exceeding the upper lemma ....................................... {\b 1. debilis}
\par
1 Upper glume not exceeding the upper lemma
\par
2 Upper glume as long as the spikelet ........................................ {\b 4. ischaemum}
\par
2 Upper glume 1/3-3/4 as long as the spikelet
\par
3 Veins of lower lemma scaberulous; upper glume 1/3-1/2
\par
  as long as the spikelet ............................................................... {\b 2. sanguinalis}
\par
3 Veins of lower lemma smooth; upper glume (1/2-)2/3-3/4
\par
  as long as the spikelet ...................................................................... {\b 3. ciliaris}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. debilis} (Desf.) Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Horti Berol.} 91 (1809). Annual; stems (10-)20-60 cm, geniculately ascending. Inflorescence of 3-17 racemes each 3-16 cm, subdigitate or with a short central axis; rhachis of raceme triquetrous, the spikelets in pairs. Spikelets (2-)2·4-3·6(-4·5) mm, lanceolate; lower glume a tiny scale, separated from the upper by a distinct internode; upper glume longer than the upper lemma, acuminate; lower lemma 0·3-1 mm shorter than upper glume, acute, appressed-pubescent in stripes. 2n = 36.{\i  Damp places. Portugal and N.W. Spain: W. Italy.} Hs It Lu. ({\i Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    An old record from S.W. France has never been confirmed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. D. sanguinalis} (L.) Scop., {\i Fl. Carn.} ed. 2, {\b 1}: 52 (1771) ({\i Panicum sanguinale} L.). Annual; stems 20-60 cm, geniculately ascending. Inflorescence of 2-16 racemes each 3-20 cm, subdigitate; rhachis of raceme triquetrous, winged, the spikelets in pairs. Spikelets 2·3-3·5 mm, ovate-elliptical; lower glume a tiny scale; upper glume 1/3-1/2 as long as the upper lemma; lower lemma obscurely pubescent, scaberulous on the veins, sometimes with brownish glassy bristles. 2n = 36.{\i  Sandy places and cultivated ground. S. & S.C. Europe; naturalized or casual further north.} Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si [Au Be Cz Ge He Ho Po Rs (B, C) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 3. D. ciliaris} (Retz.) Koeler,{\i  Descr. Gram. }27 (1802). Like {\b 2} but the upper glume (1/2-)2/3-3/4 as long as the spikelet; lower lemma with smooth veins.{\i  A common weed of rice-fields in Italy and probably elsewhere}. [It.] ({\i Tropics and subtropics}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. D. ischaemum} (Schreber) Muhl.,{\i  Descr. Gram. Amer. Sept.} 131 (1817) ({\i D. filiformis} auct., non (L.) Koeler, {\i Panicum lineare} auct., non L.). Annual; stems 10-40 cm, geniculately ascending. Inflorescence of 2-6 racemes, each 1·5-11 cm, subdigitate; rhachis of raceme flat, ribbon-like, the spikelets in groups of 3. Spikelets 1·8-2·2 mm, elliptical; lower glume a small hyaline rim; upper glume as long as the spikelet; lower lemma pubescent with clavellate hairs.{\i  In sandy places, often as a weed. C. & S. Europe.} Bu Co Ga Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) ?Si Tu [Au Be *Br Cz Da Ge He Ho Po Rs (B, C) Su].
\par

\par
262}
\par