{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 154.       Coix}         L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat. Inflorescence of 3 spikelets, 1 female and 2 sterile, enclosed in a bony involucre, and a terminal spike of male spikelets. Male spikelets in groups of 2 or 3, dorsally compressed; glumes chartaceous; lemma and palea membranous; stamens 3. Female spikelets with suborbicular, beaked glumes and membranous lemma and palea. Lodicules absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. lacrymajobi} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 972 (1753). Stems up to 2 m, erect, smooth, glabrous. Leaves up to 5 cm wide, lanceolate, cordate at base, acuminate; ligule c. 10 mm. Male spikelets 6-8 mm. Involucres 8-10 mm, ovoid to globose, white or bluish, very hard. Stigmas protruding far beyond the involucre.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized in the Mediterranean region}. [Ga Hs It Si.] ({\i Tropical Asia and Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 155.         Zea}         L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual. Leaves flat. Male inflorescence a terminal panicle of spike-like racemes; female inflorescences axillary, of numerous spikelets arranged in longitudinal rows on a thickened axis, the whole enclosed in leaf-sheaths. Male spikelets in pairs, one subsessile, the other pedicellate; florets 2; glumes equal, membranous; lemma and palea hyaline; stamens 3; lodicules 2. Female spikelets with 2 florets, the lower sterile; glumes wider than long, fleshy below, hyaline above; lemmas short, hyaline; lodicules absent; style long, shortly 2-fid at apex, hairy throughout its length.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. Z. mays} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 971 (1753). Stems up to 4(-9) m, 2-6 cm in diameter, solid, erect, rooting at the lower nodes. Leaves 3-12(-15) cm wide, undulate; ligule 3-5 mm, truncate. Male inflorescence up to 20 × 20 cm, erect; spikelets 6-15 mm. Female inflorescences c. 20 cm; peduncles with short internodes; styles 15-25(-40) cm, exserted from the apex of the sheaths at and after anthesis; caryopsis 5-10 mm, dorsiventrally compressed, usually cuneiform. {\i Extensively cultivated for its grain} ({\i maize, corn}){\i  in S. & S.C. Europe, and more recently as green fodder in parts of N. Europe.} [All except Da Fa Fe Is No Su Rs (N, B) Sb.] ({\i Not known wild; first cultivated in Mexico.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc  PRINCIPES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 194.        PALMAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. V.H. Heywood. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs or trees; stem usually unbranched. Leaves large, persistent, petiolate with a conspicuous sheath. Inflorescence a simple or branched spadix, enveloped by 1 or several spathes. Flowers hermaphrodite or unisexual, hypogynous. Perianth usually of 2 whorls of 3. Anthers dehiscing longitudinally. Ovary of 1-3 free or united carpels; ovules 1 in each carpel. Fruit a berry or drupe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In addition to those described below, numerous species are planted in the Mediterranean region on roadsides and in parks. The more conspicuous and widely planted of these include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b Washingtonia filifera} (J. A. Linden) H. A. Wendl., {\i Bot. Zeit.}{\b  37}: 68 (1879), from S. California, a tree up to 20 m with flabellate leaves long-persistent after withering and clothing the upper part of the stout, grey stem, splitting into segments leaving intersegmental filaments.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  Livistona australis} (R. Br.) C. F. P. Mart., {\i Hist. Nat. Palm.}{\b  3}: 241 (1838), from E. Australia, a tree 15-25 m with flabellate leaves, the persistent bases projecting from the slender, brownish stem in young plants.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b Howeia forsterana} (C. Moore & F. Mueller) Becc., {\i Malesia }{\b 1}: 41 (1877), from Lord Howe Island, a tree up to 12 m with pinnatisect leaves leaving annular scars on the slender, smooth, grey stem, the leaf-segments distichous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b Arecastrum romanzoffianum} (Cham.) Becc., {\i Agric. Colon.}{\b  10}: 455 (1916), from S. America, a tree up to 15 m with pinnatisect leaves leaving annular scars on the slender, grey, smooth stem, the leaf segments in groups of 3-5.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b Jubaea chilensis} (Molina) Baillon,{\i  Hist. Pl.}{\b  13}: 397 (1895) ({\i J. spectabilis} Humb., Bonpl. & Kunth), from Chile, a tree up to 28 m with short pinnatisect leaves leaving rhombic scars on the stout, grey, smooth stem.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Literature; G. Roster,{\i  Boll. Soc. Tosc. Ort.} (1913,1914,1915). J. de C. e Vasconcellos & J. do A. Franco,{\i  Portug. Acta Biol.} (B), {\b 2}: 289-425 (1948).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Leaves flabellate; plant usually not more than 1·5 m,
\par
  often ± acaulescent ................................................................. {\b 1. Chamaerops}
\par
Leaves pinnatisect; plant up to 30 m, caulescent ............................ {\b 2. Phoenix}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.    Chamaerops}        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J. do Amaral Franco. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dioecious or polygamo-dioecious, caespitose shrubs, rarely arborescent. Leaves flabellate, divided to 1/3-1/2 into numerous induplicate, ensiform, 2-fid segments; petiole about as long as lamina, spinose-dentate. Spadices pedunculate, densely branched; spathes 2-4. Flowers yellow. Stamens with short, broad filaments. Ovary of 3 free carpels. Fruit with a fibrous, fleshy mesocarp rich in butyric acid. Seeds sulcate, not grooved on ventral side.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b Trachycarpus fortunei} (Hooker) H. A. Wendl.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  8}: 429 (1861) ({\i T. excelsus} auct., non (Thunb.) H. A. Wendl.), from C. & E. China, is frequently cultivated for ornament in S. and W. Europe. It is like {\i Chamaerops} but with solitary stems up to 12 m, covered with black fibres, petiole minutely denticulate, fruit purplish-black and seeds grooved on the ventral side.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. humilis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1187 (1753). Acaulescent or with a short, obconical stem not more than 1·5-2 m in the wild, covered with grey or whitish fibres. Leaves with a green to glaucous, flat lamina up to 80 cm. Spadices up to 35 cm; spathe more or less lanate at margin. Fruits (8-)12-30(-45) mm, globose, ovoid or oblong, yellow or brown. {\i Sandy or rocky ground, mainly near the coast. W. Mediterranean region, eastwards to Malta; S. Portugal.} Bl Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Frequently cultivated for ornament in the Mediterranean region when it often develops as a tree with stems up to 3 m or more.
\par

\par
267}
\par