{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 linear-lanceolate, the lower 12-25 × 1-2 mm, the upper subtending the pedicels, bract-like, shorter and wider. Pedicels 20-25 mm. Perianth-segments 9-15 mm, white with reddish or purplish veins, obtuse or rounded at the apex. Capsule globose. 2n = 24.{\i  Tundra, stony slopes, rock-ledges and alpine meadows. Alps and Carpathians; N. Ural and arctic Russia; isolated stations in N. Wales and S.W. Bulgaria.} Au Br Bu Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, ?C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 20.         Gagea}          Salisb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By I.B.K. Richardson. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Bulbous perennials. Stems erect, solitary, unbranched, leafy. Flowers solitary or in a few-flowered umbel or raceme. Perianth cylindrical-campanulate to rotate, of 6 free, usually yellow segments. Stamens 6, inserted at the base of the perianth-segments, included; anthers basifixed. Fruit a loculicidal capsule with many seeds.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Basal leaves arise directly from the bulb; cauline leaves are intended to include those subtending the first branch of the inflorescence; leaves above the first branch are considered as bracts. It is important to sample several specimens in assessing the character-state of leaves. The biseriate perianth-segments frequently differ somewhat in size; descriptions refer to all six unless otherwise stated; where no colour is mentioned they are yellow inside and greenish-yellow outside. Bulbils are occasionally present in the leaf-axils of most taxa but are stated as present only for those in which they are a relatively constant feature.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: A. Terracciano,{\i  Revisione monografica delle Specie di Gagea della Flora spagnola.} Palermo. 1905. W. Greuter, {\i Israel Jour. Bot.}{\b  19}: 155-160 (1970).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bulbs (2-)3, one with a tunic ....................................................... {\b 1. pratensis}
\par
1 Bulb 1, or 2 in a common tunic
\par
2 Bulb 1
\par
3 Basal leaves 2 or more
\par
4 Perianth-segments yellow; bulbils present .................................. {\b 8. bulbifera}
\par
4 Perianth-segments white, with purple stripes; bulbils absent
\par
5 Anthers obtuse; flowers usually 3-5 ................................................ {\b 9. graeca}
\par
5 Anthers acute; flowers usually solitary ...................................... {\b 10. trinervia}
\par
3 Basal leaf solitary
\par
6 Seeds compressed; perianth-segments long-acuminate;
\par
  bulb usually with a fibrous collar ................................ ({\b 5-7}). {\b reticulata} group
\par
6 Seeds subglobose; perianth-segments ± obtuse; bulb 
\par
  without a fibrous collar
\par
7 Stem usually 3-7 cm; basal leaf 1·5-3 mm wide, linear;
\par
  perianth-segments c. 13 mm ............................................................ {\b 2. pusilla}
\par
7 Stem usually 10-30 cm; basal leaf 7-15 mm wide, linear
\par
  lanceolate; perianth-segments 15-18 mm ........................................... {\b 3. lutea}
\par
2 Bulbs 2 in a common tunic
\par
8 Basal leaf solitary; perianth-segments acuminate ......................... {\b 4. minima}
\par
8 Basal leaves usually 2
\par
9 Cauline leaf 1, distinct from the bracts .................................... {\b 11. spathacea}
\par
9 Cauline leaves 2, larger than but similar to the bracts
\par
10 Lower cauline leaves opposite 
\par
11 Stems glabrous above ............................................................... {\b 12. fistulosa} 
\par
11 Stems ± hairy above ................................................ ({\b 13-15}). {\b arvensis} group
\par
10 Lower cauline leaves alternate, rarely subopposite or
\par
   solitary 
\par
12 Pedicels glabrous ...................................................... ({\b 16-20}). {\b foliosa} group 
\par
12 Pedicels hairy
\par
13 Bulb usually with numerous recurved fibrous roots;
\par
   plant usually 8-20 cm .................................................. ({\b 16-20}). {\b foliosa} group
\par
13 Bulb with few or no recurved fibrous roots; plant 
\par
   usually 2-8 cm ........................................................ ({\b 21-23}).{\b  bohemica} group
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. pratensis} (Pers.) Dumort., {\i Fl. Belg.} 140 (1827) ({\i G. stenopetala} Reichenb.; incl. {\i G. paczoskii}(Zapal.) Grossh.). Bulbs (2-)3, unequal. Stem glabrous. Basal leaf solitary, broadly linear, flat; cauline 2, opposite, lanceolate, ciliate. Flowers (1-)2-6; pedicels glabrous. Perianth-segments (10-)15-20 mm, oblong-linear, subacute to obtuse. Capsule ovoid; seeds subglobose. 2n = 36, 48, 60.{\i  Grassland and disturbed ground. Europe northwards to} c. 61° {\i N. in Sweden, but absent from most of the islands and much of the west and south-east. }Au Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K) Si Su [Fe].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from Krym with keeled basal leaf and ovate-lanceolate perianth-segments have been called {\b G. transversalis} Steven, {\i Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  30}({\b 3}): 81 (1857), and similar plants with 2n = 48 occur in Czechoslovakia; they may merit subspecific status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. G. pusilla} (F. W. Schmidt) Schultes & Schultes fil., {\i Syst. Veg. }{\b 7}: 543 (1829). Bulb solitary, rarely 2, without a collar. Stem glabrous. Basal leaf solitary, linear, somewhat canaliculate; cauline 2-3, opposite, lanceolate, usually glabrous. Flowers 1-3(-6); pedicels glabrous. Perianth-segments c. 13 mm, lanceolate, subobtuse. Capsule ovoid-globose. Seeds subglobose. 2n = 24.{\i  Dry grassland and stony ground. C. & S.E. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu ?It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, E) ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b G. germainae} Grossh.,{\i  Pl. Or. Exsicc. }{\b 1-8}: 10 (1924), from Caucasus and Iran, has been recorded from Krym. It is like {\b 2}, but with subspathulate, often orange-tinged perianth-segments, and may merit recognition as a species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. G. lutea} (L.) Ker-Gawler, {\i Bot. Mag. }{\b 30}: t. 1200 (1809) ({\i G. silvatica} (Pers.) Loudon; incl.{\i  G. erubescens} Besser). Bulb solitary, without a collar. Stem glabrous. Basal leaf solitary, 7-15 mm wide, linear-lanceolate, flat; cauline 2, opposite, lanceolate, ciliate. Flowers 1-7(-10); pedicels glabrous or hairy. Perianth-segments 15-18 mm, oblong-linear, obtuse. Capsule globose. Seeds subglobose. 2n = 72. {\i Woods and scrub. Most of Europe.} Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C. V, K, E) Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. G. minima} (L.) Ker-Gawler,{\i  Jour. Sci. Arts }({\i London}) {\b 1}: 180 (1816) (incl. {\i G. granulosa }Turcz.). Bulbs 2, in a common tunic. Stem glabrous. Basal leaf solitary, 1-2 mm wide, narrowly lanceolate, more or less flat; cauline 1-2, opposite, long-lanceolate, attenuate at apex, usually glabrous. Flowers 1-7; pedicels glabrous or sparsely pubescent. Perianth-segments 10-15 mm, linear-lanceolate, acuminate. Capsule obovoid; seeds subglobose. 2n = 24. {\i Woods and meadows. Most of Europe except the southwest and the islands.} ?Al Au Bu Cz Da Fe Ge Gr He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 5-7}). {\b G. reticulata} group. Bulb solitary, rarely with stolons bearing terminal bulbils, often with a distinct collar and covered with fibrous roots. Basal leaf solitary; cauline alternate, crowded, narrowly linear. Flowers 1(2-6); pedicels puberulent. Perianth-segments lanceolate, long-acuminate. Capsule obovoid-oblong, obtuse; seeds compressed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Basal leaf flat .................................................................................. {\b 6. fibrosa}
\par
1 Basal leaf subterete
\par
2 Bulb with a long collar ............................................................... {\b 5. reticulata}
\par
2 Bulb without or with an indistinct collar ........................................ {\b 7. taurica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. G. reticulata} (Pallas) Schultes & Schultes fil., {\i Syst. Veg. }{\b 7}: 542 (1829). Plants often in clusters. Bulb sometimes covered with recurved fibrous roots, with a collar 1-3 cm. Stem usually 10-15 cm, puberulent. Basal leaf linear, subterete, puberulent. Perianth-segments 14-20 mm.{\i  Dry, grassy slopes. S.E. Europe.} Bu Cr Gr Rm Rs (E).
\par

\par
26}
\par