{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 mm, 1-3 per spikelet, antrorsely scabridulous. Spikelets 1·8-2·2 mm, ellipsoid; upper glume as long as the spikelet; upper lemma finely rugose. 2n = 18.{\i  Most of Europe.} All except Az Br Fa Hb Is Rs (N) Sb, but probably only as an alien in Da Fe No Rs (B) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. verticillata} × {\b viridis} is like {\b 3} but has the rhachis hispidulous. It has 2n = 36 and occurs spontaneously throughout most of S. Europe, and is naturalized in C. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. italica} (L.) Beauv.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1812). Annual; stems up to 150 cm. Leaves 15-45 cm × 6-20 mm. Panicle 4-30 cm, spike-like, ellipsoid to cylindrical or more often lobed, the rhachis villous; bristles 2-16 mm, 2-5 per cluster of spikelets, antrorsely scabridulous. Spikelets 2-3 mm, broadly ellipsoid; upper glume 2/3 as long to almost as long as the spikelet; upper lemma smooth, disarticulating from the rest of the spikelet at maturity.{\i  Cultivated for fodder and bird-seed in the southern half of Europe and  often locally naturalized}. [Au Bu Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It  Ju Po Rm Rs (C) Sa Tu.]
\par

\par
  Origin unknown, but probably derived from {\b 3}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 141.      Pennisetum}      L.C.M. Richard 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.D. Clayton. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Inflorescence spike-like, each spikelet or cluster of spikelets enclosed by an involucre of slender bristles which are free throughout and fall with the spikelets. Spikelets lanceolate to oblong, with two florets; lower glume often minute; upper glume very small or up to as long as the spikelet; lower floret male or sterile, its lemma as long as the spikelet or much reduced; upper floret hermaphrodite, its lemma membranous to thinly coriaceous.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Inflorescence linear; spikelets 4·5-6·5 mm .................................... {\b 1. setaceum}
\par
Inflorescence broadly cylindrical to subglobose;
   spikelets 7-14  mm ....................................................................... {\b 2. villosum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 1. P. setaceum} (Forskål) Chiov., {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Ital.}{\b  1923}: 113 (1923). Densely caespitose perennial; stems 20-100 cm. Leaves up to 30 cm × 3 mm, convolute, scabrid, rigid. Inflorescence 10-30 cm, linear; involucres with slender peduncles 1-3 mm; bristles 1·6-4 cm, ciliate below. Spikelets 4·5-6·5 mm. {\i Dry slopes. N.W. Sicilia, Isole Lipari}. Si. ({\i N.E. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. villosum} R. Br. ex Fresen.,{\i  Mus. Senck}.{\b  2}: 134 (1837). Laxly caespitose perennial; stems 10-100 cm. Leaves 7-70 cm × 2-6 mm, flat or folded. Inflorescence 2-10 cm, broadly cylindrical to subglobose; involucres subsessile to shortly pedunculate; bristles 3·5-7 cm, plumose below. Spikelets 7-14 mm. 2n = 45.{\i  Dry places. A frequent casual in the W. Mediterranean region and Portugal; naturalized in Italy and the Açores.} [Az It.] ({\i Ethiopia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 142.        Cenchrus}        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.D. Clayton. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Inflorescence spike-like; rhachis angular; each spikelet or cluster of spikelets enclosed by an involucre of more or less flattened bristles or spines, which are connate below to form a disc or cup and fall with the spikelets. Spikelets lanceolate or ovate, unawned, with 2 florets; lower glume up to half as long as spikelet, sometimes absent; upper glume as long as spikelet; lower floret male or sterile, its lemma as long as spikelet; upper floret hermaphrodite, its lemma firmly membranous to coriaceous. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Involucre of flexuous bristles free almost to the base ....................... {\b 1. ciliaris}
\par
Involucre of rigid spines, the inner connate for half 
\par
  their length ..................................................................................... {\b 2. incertus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. ciliaris} L.,{\i  Mantissa Alt. }302 (1771). Perennial; stems 25-100 cm. Leaves 3-23 cm × 2-9 mm. Panicle 2-12 cm, with glabrous rhachis; involucre 6-15 mm, elongate, containing 2-4 spikelets, the bristles flexuous, ciliate, connate only at the base to form a disc 0·5-1·5 mm in diameter, antrorsely scabrid. Spikelets 2-5·6 mm.{\i  Dry hillsides. Sicilia and Isole Lipari.} Si. ({\i Africa, S.W. Asia}.)  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. incertus} M. A. Curtis,{\i  Boston Jour. Nat. Hist.}{\b  1}: 135 (1837). Annual; stems 10-90 cm. Leaves 6-18 cm × 3-7 mm. Panicle 4-10 cm; involucre 8-12 mm, globose, containing 2-3 spikelets; spines 8-40, the inner long, accrescent, retrorsely scabrid, the outer shorter, few, downward pointing. Spikelets 3·5-5·8 mm.{\i  Disturbed ground. Naturalized in C. Mediterranean region}. [?.Az Co ?Ga ?Hs It.] ({\i Tropical and warm-temperate America.})   
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C. longispinus} (Hackel) Fernald,{\i  Rhodora}{\b  45}: 388 (1943), from North America, is perhaps becoming naturalized in S. Europe. It is like {\b 2} but has 45-75 spines, the outer numerous, and the spikelets 6-7·8 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 143.     Tricholaena}      Schrader
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.D. Clayton. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials, rarely annuals. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets oblong in outline, unawned; lower glume very small or absent; upper glume as long as the spikelet, thinly membranous, indistinctly 5-nerved, slightly emarginate to acute; lower floret male, its lemma similar to the upper glume; upper floret hermaphrodite, the lemma thinly cartilaginous, clasping only the margins of the palea. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. teneriffae} (L. fil.) Link,{\i  Handb.}{\b  1}: 91 (1829). Perennial; stems 10-60 cm, wiry, ascending. Panicle 3-15 cm, narrowly oblong. Spikelets 2·5-3·5 mm; upper glume and lower lemma tuberculate-hirsute with white hairs extending 0·5-4 mm beyond the apex.{\i  Dry stony slopes. S.W. Italy, Sicilia.} It Si. ({\i S.W. Asia, N. Africa, Atlantic Islands.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe        {\b Andropogoneae}      Dumort.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves linear to lanceolate or ovate, flat or convolute; silica-bodies dumbbell- or cross-shaped; slender 2-celled micro-hairs present; ligule membranous, sometimes ciliate. Inflorescence usually a panicle or of 1 or more variously arranged racemes. Spikelets usually in pairs, one sessile with a lower male or sterile and an upper hermaphrodite floret, the other pedicellate, with 2 male or sterile florets. Pedicellate spikelets usually deciduous, the sessile spikelets usually falling with a joint of the rhachis. Glumes more or less coriaceous, longer than the florets. Lemmas membranous, the upper often with a geniculate awn. Palea shorter than lemma, often absent. Lodicules 2, truncate, or absent. Stamens 1-3. Ovary glabrous; styles 2, sometimes connate for most of their length. Grain with punctiform, basal hilum; embryo often half as long as grain; starch-grains simple. Chromosomes small; basic number 5, 9-14, 17, 19.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 144.          Imperata}         Cyr.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.D. Clayton. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizomatous perennials. Inflorescence a narrow, often spike-like panicle with tough branches bearing paired similar spikelets, each borne upon a slender pedicel. Spikelets with 2 florets, terete; glumes as long as the spikelet, membranous; lower floret reduced to a hyaline lemma; upper floret hermaphrodite, with unawned hyaline lemma and shorter palea; stamens 1-2.
\par

\par
264}
\par