{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. Z. latifolia} (Griseb.) Stapf, {\i Kew Bull.}{\b  1909}: 385 (1909). Like {\b 1} but perennial; stems up to 2 cm wide, glabrous at the nodes; inflorescence up to 55 cm; awn of female spikelets only slightly longer than the lemma.{\i  Extensively naturalized in the Volga delta.} [Rs (E).] ({\i Temperate E. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe         {\b Paniceae}        R.Br.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves linear to lanceolate or ovate; silica-bodies nodular, dumbbell- or cross-shaped; elongate 2-celled micro-hairs present; ligule membranous or a row of hairs, rarely absent. Inflorescence a panicle or of variously arranged racemes or spikes. Spikelets usually all hermaphrodite, usually falling entire at maturity, dorsally to laterally compressed or terete, with 2 florets, the lower male or sterile, the upper hermaphrodite. Glumes and lower lemma similar in texture. Upper lemma much firmer than the lower. Lodicules usually 2, truncate. Stamens 3. Ovary glabrous; styles 2. Grain mostly with punctiform hilum; embryo about half as long as grain; starch-grains simple. Chromosomes small; basic number 9, 10, 15, 17, 19, rarely 7.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 132.          Panicum}          L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.D. Clayton. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets more or less compressed dorsally, unawned, with 2 florets; lower glume shorter than the spikelet; upper glume as long as the spikelet; lower floret male or sterile, its lemma resembling the upper glume, with or without a palea; upper floret hermaphrodite, the lemma crustaceous, clasping only the margins of the palea.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Annual, without non-flowering shoots at anthesis
\par
2 Spikelets 4-5·5 mm ................................................................... {\b 1. miliaceum}
\par
2 Spikelets 2-3 mm
\par
3 Leaf-sheaths hispid ...................................................................... {\b 2. capillare}
\par
3 Leaf-sheaths glabrous ..................................................... {\b 3. dichotomiflorum}
\par
1 Perennial, with non-flowering shoots at anthesis
\par
4 Spikelets 1·5 mm, pubescent .................................................. {\b 4. implicatum}
\par
4 Spikelets 2-5·5 mm, usually glabrous
\par
5 Plant rhizomatous; upper lemma smooth ....................................... {\b 5. repens}
\par
5 Plant caespitose; upper lemma rugose ...................................... {\b 6. maximum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. miliaceum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 58 (1753). Annual; stems 50-120 cm. Leaves 15-40 cm × 10-20 mm; sheaths hispid. Panicle 10-30 cm, compact, with rigid branches. Spikelets 4-5·5 mm, elliptical, persistent; lower glume 1/2-2/3 as long as spikelet, sharply acute to acuminate; upper glume and lower lemma many-veined, long-acute.{\i  Cultivated, formerly widely as a cereal, now more locally and mainly for fodder, in C., S. & E. Europe, and widely naturalized.} [Al Au Bl Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Tu.] ({\i China and C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. capillare} L., {\i Sp.Pl.} 58 (1753). Annual; stems 20-80 cm, erect or ascending. Leaves 10-30 cm × 5-15 mm; sheaths hispid. Panicle 8-40 cm, deciduous, diffuse, with capillary branches. Spikelets 2-3 mm, elliptical; lower glume ½ as long as the spikelet, acute; upper glume and lower lemma long-acute to attenuate.{\i  Disturbed ground. Naturalized in S., C. & E. Europe, northwards to C. Russia.} [Az ?Cz Ga ?Ge He Hs Hu It Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, E).] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. dichotomiflorum} Michx,{\i  Fl. Bor. Amer.}{\b  1}: 48 (1803). Annual; stems 50-200 cm, geniculate, ascending. Leaves 10-50 cm × 3-20 mm; sheaths glabrous. Panicle 10-40 cm, diffuse. Spikelets 2-3 mm, narrowly elliptical, deciduous; lower glume c. ¼ as long as the spikelet, obtuse to subacute; upper glume and lower lemma acute.{\i  Disturbed ground. Naturalized in S. Europe.} [Ga It.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. implicatum} Scribner ex Britton & A. Br.,{\i  Ill. Fl. U.S. Canad. }{\b 3}: 498 (1898). Perennial, forming a winter rosette of short, lanceolate leaves; stems 20-55 cm. Cauline leaves 2-10 cm × 2-10 mm. Panicle 3-6 cm, spreading, the branches often tangled. Spikelets 1·5 mm, pubescent, elliptical; lower glume 1/3 as long as spikelet, obtuse to acute; upper glume and lower lemma obtuse; upper lemma smooth.{\i  Naturalized in S.W. France.} [Ga.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. repens} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 87 (1762). Aggressively rhizomatous perennial; stems 15-60 cm, erect. Leaves 4-25 cm × 2-8 mm, distichous. Panicle 4-15 cm. Spikelets 2-3 mm, elliptical, glabrous; lower glume ¼ as long as the spikelet, suborbicular, cup-shaped; upper glume and lower lemma acute; upper lemma smooth. 2n = 54.{\i  Damp, sandy places, mostly near the sea. Mediterranean region, extending to Portugal and N.W. Spain}. Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si [Az].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. maximum} Jacq.,{\i  Icon. Pl. Rar.}{\b  1}: 2 (1781). Caespitose perennial; stems 25-75 cm, erect. Leaves 5-25. cm × 3-6 mm. Panicle 6-15 cm. Spikelets 2·3-3 mm, elliptical, sparsely pubescent; lower glume 1/3 as long as the spikelet, obtuse; upper glume and lower lemma obtuse; upper lemma finely transversely rugose. {\i Calcareous rocks near the sea. Sicilia.} Si. ({\i Tropics and warm temperate regions.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 133.     Oplismenus}       Beauv.    
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.D. Clayton. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Inflorescence of unilateral racemes, sometimes reduced to fascicles, arranged along a central axis. Spikelets with 2 florets; glumes subequal, ½-¾ as long as the spikelet, at least the lower awned; lower floret male or sterile, the lemma herbaceous; upper floret hermaphrodite, the lemma subcoriaceous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. undulatifolius} (Ard.) Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 482 (1817). Perennial with trailing stems 15-50 cm or more. Leaves 1-7 cm × 4-15 mm, narrowly lanceolate to narrowly ovate. Inflorescence 2-8 cm, with cuneate fascicles of 2-6 spikelets. Spikelets 2·5-4 mm, lanceolate; glumes with viscid awns up to 15 mm.{\i  Damp, shady places. Very locally from the E. Pyrenees to N.W. Jugoslavia.} He Hs It Ju. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 134.      Echinochloa}       Beauv.   
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.D. Clayton. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Ligule absent in European species. Inflorescence of unilateral racemes arranged along a central axis. Spikelets in several rows, convex abaxially, flattened adaxially, cuspidate or awned, with 2 florets. Glumes unequal, the lower abaxial, shorter than the spikelet, the upper as long as the spikelet. Lower floret male or sterile, the lemma resembling the upper glume; upper floret hermaphrodite, the lemma crustaceous, smooth, clasping only the margins of the palea.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Racemes seldom more than 3 cm, simple; spikelets 1·5-
\par
  3 mm, in 4 regular rows on each raceme, acute to 
\par
  cuspidate, unawned; upper lemma 1·5-2·5 mm ............................ {\b 1. colonum} 
\par
1 Longest racemes 2-10 cm; spikelets acuminate or awned,
\par
  in 2-several irregular rows
\par
2 Spikelets mostly 3-4 mm; upper lemma 2-3 mm; at least
\par
  the longer racemes with secondary branchlets ............................ {\b 2. crus-galli}
\par
2 Spikelets 3·8-6·5 mm; upper lemma 3·5-5 mm; racemes
\par
  simple .......................................................................................... {\b 3. oryzoides}
\par

\par
261}
\par