{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 form, 0·8-1·5 mm in diameter, at first purplish; hairs of ligule c. 0·2 mm. Inflorescence 6-16 cm, with 2-6 rather distant spikes; rhachis of spikes not prolonged beyond the spikelets. Spikelets 5-7 mm. Glumes lanceolate, glabrous, the upper 3-veined. Lemma ovate-lanceolate, glabrous. Anthers c. 4 mm.{\i  S.W. Europe and W. Mediterranean region.} Az Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. densiflora} Brongn., {\i Bot. Voy. Coq.} 14 (1829). Densely caespitose; stems up to 150 cm, robust. Leaves junciform, 3-8 mm wide when flat; hairs of ligule 1-2 mm. Inflorescence 10-30 cm, with 2-15 usually overlapping spikes, closely appressed to the axis. Spikelets 8-14 mm. Glumes lanceolate, glabrous or with sparse, very short hairs, both 1-veined. Lemma lanceolate, with sparse, very short hairs. Anthers 3-5 mm.{\i  Naturalized in S.W. Spain.} [Hs.] ({\i Coasts of temperate South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe          {\b Zoysieae}        Miq.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves usually convolute, plicate or setaceous; silica-bodies saddle-, dumbbell- or cross-shaped; swollen 2-celled micro-hairs present; ligule absent or a row of hairs. Inflorescence a compound raceme. Spikelets all hermaphrodite or some male, falling entire, singly or in groups, dorsally compressed, with 1 floret. Glumes longer than the floret, one or both with curved spines or hooks on the back, or smooth. Lemma and palea hyaline. Lodicules 2 or absent. Stamens 3 or 2. Ovary glabrous; styles 2. Grain with free pericarp; hilum punctiform; starch-grains compound. Chromosomes small; basic number 9, 10.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 128.          Tragus}        Haller  
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Leaves flat. Inflorescence spike-like. Spikelets dorsally compressed, with 1 floret. Glumes very unequal, the lower minute, hyaline, the upper 7-veined, longer than the floret, chartaceous, with hooked spines on the veins. Lemma 3-veined, hyaline, setulose on the back. Palea as long as lemma. Stamens 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. racemosus} (L.) All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem.}{\b  2}: 241 (1785). Stems up to 40 cm, decumbent or procumbent, rooting at the lower nodes, more or less branched, smooth. Leaves 1-3 cm × 2-3 mm, rigid, acuminate; margin with tubercle-based setae; sheaths somewhat inflated; ligule a line of stout hairs. Inflorescence 2-8 cm. Spikelets c. 4 mm, in groups of 2-5 at the ends of short branches, each group falling entire at maturity. Upper glume lanceolate, acuminate. Lemma lanceolate, acute. Anthers c. 0·5 mm.{\i  Dry, sandy or stony places. S. & S.C. Europe.} Al Au Bl Bu Co Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Tribe      {\b Oryzeae}       Dumort.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves linear; silica-bodies dumbbell-shaped, arranged transversely; elongate, 2-celled micro-hairs present; ligule membranous, lacerate. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets all hermaphrodite or very rarely unisexual, laterally compressed, with 1 floret, rarely with 2 sterile florets below it. Glumes minute or absent. Lemmas 1 or 3, membranous to coriaceous, when 3 the two lower scale-like, unawned or with a terminal awn. Palea like the lemma of the fertile floret. Lodicules 2, entire or 2-lobed. Stamens 6, 3 or 1. Ovary glabrous; styles 2. Grain with a linear hilum as long as the grain; starch-grains compound. Chromosomes small; basic number 12.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 129.        Oryza}            L.    
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Robust annuals or perennials. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a panicle. Spikelets strongly laterally compressed, with 1 floret disarticulating above the glumes, but long-persistent in cultivars. Glumes represented by small, semi-orbicular scales. Sterile lemmas usually 2, much shorter than the fertile lemma, 1-veined. Fertile lemma indurate, with 5 prominent veins. Palea similar to the fertile lemma but narrower and 3-veined. Stamens 6.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. sativa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 333 (1753). Annual. Stems up to 100 cm, erect, glabrous. Leaves up to 60 × 1·5 cm, scabrid on the margin; sheaths with ciliate auricles; ligule up to 20 mm, acute, chartaceous. Panicle up to 30 cm, nodding after anthesis. Spikelets up to 12 mm. Glumes c. 0·25 mm. Lemma with appressed hairs, particularly on the veins, awned or not. Palea ciliate on the mid-vein.{\i  Cultivated as a cereal} ({\i rice}){\i  in S. & S.C. Europe.} [Al Bu Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E).] ({\i S. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 130.      Leersia}         Swartz
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Oryza} but glumes and sterile lemmas absent; fertile lemma and palea herbaceous; stamens 1-6.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. oryzoides} (L.) Swartz,{\i  Nov. Gen. Sp. Pl.} 21 (1788). Rhizomatous perennial. Stems up to 100 cm, decumbent and rooting at the lower nodes; nodes bearded. Leaves up to 30 × 1 cm, long-acute, scabrid on the margin; upper sheaths often inflated, more or less scabrid; ligule c. 1 mm, truncate, chartaceous. Panicle 5-17 cm, lax; branches flexuous. Spikelets 5-6 mm, very shortly pedicellate. Fertile lemma strigulose, pectinateciliate on keel. 2n = 48. {\i Wet places. From S. England and S. Finland southwards to the Açores, C. Italy and Turkey-in-Europe.} Al Au Az Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par
 The inflorescence is sometimes chasmogamous and completely exserted from the leaf-sheath, with anthers c. 3 mm, sometimes cleistogamous and partly or wholly enclosed in the leaf-sheath, with anthers c. 0·5 mm, depending on climatic conditions.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 131.       Zizania}      L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A. Hansen & †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Annuals or perennials. Leaves flat. Inflorescence a large terminal panicle with patent or ascending branches. Spikelets with 1 floret, unisexual, falling entire. Glumes small or lacking. Male spikelets in the lower part of the panicle, pendent, the lemma unawned or shortly awned; female spikelets in the upper part of the panicle, ascending, the lemma with a long awn.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Annual; stems puberulent at the nodes; awn of female 
\par
  spikelets 5-6 times as long as lemma ............................................ {\b 1. aquatica}
\par
Perennial; stems glabrous at the nodes; awn of female 
\par
  spikelets slightly longer than lemma .............................................. {\b 2. latifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. Z. aquatica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 991 (1753). Annual. Stems 150-300 cm, up to 1 cm wide, stout, erect to decumbent, often branched, puberulent at the nodes. Leaves 50-125 cm × 5-25 mm, linear lanceolate, with scabrid margins; ligule up to 1 cm. Inflorescence up to 40 cm; male spikelets 10 × 1-2 mm, narrowly lanceolate, usually purple-tinged at apex; stamens 6; anthers 4-5 mm, yellow; female spikelets 1·5-2 mm wide, linear, with scabrid awn 5-6 times as long as lemma. Grain 12-20 × 1·4-2 mm, linear, cylindrical, purplish-black.{\i  Occasionally sown by lakes or rivers to attract wild-fowl; locally naturalized in the U.S.S.R. and perhaps elsewhere.} [Rs (B, C, W).] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par
260}
\par