{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 138.     Paspalum}          L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.D. Clayton. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous or sparsely hairy annuals or perennials. Leaves flat or convolute; ligule membranous; sheaths often bearded at the mouth. Inflorescence of unilateral racemes arranged digitately or along a central axis, bearing appressed spikelets. Spikelets orbicular to oblong, dorsally compressed, usually plano-convex, with 2 florets; lower glume abaxial, usually absent; upper glume as long as the spikelet; lower floret sterile, represented by a lemma as long as the spikelet; upper floret hermaphrodite, the lemma more or less crustaceous, its narrowly folded margins leaving the palea exposed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: P. Silva, {\i Agron. Lusit.}{\b  2}: 5-23 (1940).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Upper glume villous
\par
2 Racemes usually 3-5, spikelets 2·8-3·8 mm ............................... {\b 1. dilatatum}
\par
2 Racemes usually 12-18; spikelets 2-3 mm .................................... {\b 2. urvillei}
\par
1 Upper glume glabrous or puberulent
\par
3 Upper glume appressed-puberulent ......................................... {\b 3. paspalodes}
\par
3 Upper glume glabrous .............................................................. {\b 4. vaginatum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. dilatatum} Poiret in Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  5}: 35 (1804) ({\i Digitaria dilatata} (Poiret) Coste). Caespitose perennial; stems 40-180 cm, ascending. Inflorescence of (2-)3-5(-11) racemes on a common axis 2-20 cm; raceme 4-11 cm, with narrowly winged rhachis. Spikelets 2·8-3·8 mm, ovate, yellowish-green; upper glume sparsely hairy on the surface, more densely villous near the margin; lower lemma similar but glabrous. 2n = 50.{\i  Damp, shady places and waste ground. S.W. Europe and Italy}. [Az Ga Hs It Lu.] ({\i Brazil to Argentina.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. urvillei} Steudel,{\i  Syn. Pl. Glum.}{\b  1}: 24 (1853). Like {\b 1} but stems 75-250 cm, erect; inflorescence of (6-)12-18(-25) racemes on a common axis 10-40 cm; raceme 7-14 cm; spikelets 2-3 mm. 2n = 20.{\i  Rice-fields and other wet places. Naturalized in W.C. Portugal and perhaps elsewhere in S. Europe.} [Lu.] ({\i Brazil to Argentina}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. paspalodes} (Michx) Scribner, {\i Ment. Torrey Bot. Club }{\b 5}: 29 (1894). Creeping stoloniferous perennial; stems 6-50 cm. Sheaths ciliate on margin. Inflorescence of 2(-4) racemes; racemes 1·5-7 cm, with a narrow, flattened rhachis. Spikelets 2·5-3·5 mm, ovate, plano-convex, relatively plump, pale green; lower glume often present as a small scale; upper glume appressed-puberulent, herbaceous, with distinct mid-vein; lower lemma similar but glabrous. 2n = 60. {\i Marshy places, mainly near the coast. S. Europe}. [Al Az Bu Ga Gr Hs It Lu Rs (K) Tu.] ({\i Tropics}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. vaginatum} Swartz,{\i  Nov. Gen. Sp. Pl.} 21 (1788) ({\i Digitaria vaginata} (Swartz) Philippe). Like {\b 3} but sheaths glabrous at apex, though ligule ciliate on back; spikelets ovate-elliptical, flattened; lower glume nearly always absent; upper glume glabrous, thinly papery, the mid-vein obscure. 2n = 20. {\i Maritime sands and ricefields. S.W. Europe, Sicilia.} [Ga Hs Lu Si.] ({\i Tropics}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 139.      Stenotaphrum}     Trin.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.D. Clayton. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Inflorescence spike-like, composed of very short racemes more or less embedded in a thickened central axis. Spikelets with 2 florets; lower glume abaxial, small; upper glume as long as or much shorter than the spikelet; lower floret male or sterile, as long as the spikelet, its lemma and palea chartaceous to coriaceous; upper floret hermaphrodite, otherwise resembling the lower.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. secundatum} (Walter) O. Kuntze, {\i Revis. Gen.}{\b  2}: 794 (1891). Stoloniferous perennial; stems 5-30 cm, procumbent. Leaves broadly linear, plicate when young, obtuse. Inflorescence 3-10 cm, the racemes wholly or partially sunk in one face of a corky central axis; racemes 5-10 mm, bearing 1-3 spikelets on a triquetrous rhachis prolonged into a subulate point. Spikelets 4-5 mm, narrowly ovate, pale green. {\i Seashores and coastal grassland. Naturalized in S.W. Europe and Sicilia}. [Az Bl Ga Hs Lu Si.] ({\i Tropics and subtropics}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 140.       Setaria}        Beauv.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.D. Clayton. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Inflorescence a panicle, usually spike-like, the spikelets subtended by bristles which persist on the axis after the spikelets fall. Spikelets oblong to ovate; glumes unequal; lower floret male or sterile, as long as the spikelet; upper floret hermaphrodite, its lemma crustaceous, boat-shaped, often rugose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   All species grow in cultivated ground or waste places. On account of their weedy and ruderal habit it is almost impossible to delimit with confidence their native areas from those in which they are naturalized. They are all found as occasional casuals in N. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spikelets not deciduous, the upper lemma disarticulating
\par
  at maturity above the persistent lower lemma .................................. {\b 4. italica} 
\par
1 Spikelets deciduous as a whole
\par
2 Upper glume 1/2-2/3 as long as the upper lemma .......................... {\b 1. pumila}
\par
2 Upper glume about as long as the upper lemma
\par
3 Bristles retrorsely barbed, adhering tenaciously to clothing .... {\b 2. verticillata}
\par
3 Bristles antrorsely barbed ............................................................... {\b 3. viridis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. pumila} (Poiret) Schultes in Schultes & Schultes fil.,{\i  Mantissa}{\b  2}: 274 (1824) ({\i S. glauca} auct., non (L.) Beauv.,{\i  S. lutescens} F. T. Hubbard). Annual; stems 5-130 cm. Leaves 3-30 cm × 2-10 mm. Panicle 1-15 cm, spike-like, cylindrical, the rhachis hispidulous; bristles 3-8 mm, usually 4-12 per spikelet, antrorsely scabridulous. Spikelets 2·7-3·3 mm, ovate; upper glume 1/2-2/3 as long as the spikelet, exposing the strongly rugose upper lemma. 2n = 36, 72. {\i S. & S.C. Europe; naturalized northwards to the Netherlands and the Baltic region}. Al Au Az Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Be Ge He Ho Po Rs (?N, B, C)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. geniculata }(Lam.) Beauv., {\i Agrost.} 51, 178 (1812), from North America, is like {\b 1} but perennial and is more or less naturalized in parts of S.W. Europe. It has 2n = 72.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. verticillata} (L.) Beauv., {\i loc. cit.} (1812). Annual; stems 10-100 cm or more. Leaves 5-30 cm × 4-16 mm. Panicle 2-12 cm, spike-like, more or less cylindrical, often with the spikelets irregularly clustered, the rhachis hispidulous; bristles 3-8 mm, usually 1 per spikelet, retrorsely barbed. Spikelets usually 2-2·3 mm, ellipsoid; upper glume as long as the spikelet; upper lemma finely rugose. 2n = 18, 36, c. 54.{\i  S. Europe; naturalized northwards to the Netherlands and the Baltic region.} Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, ?K, E) Sa Si Tu [Au Be Cz Ge He Ho Hu Po Rs (B, C)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. adhaerens} (Forskål) Chiov.,{\i  Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.} nov. ser., {\b 26}: 77 (1919), from Africa, occurs locally in the Mediterranean region. It is one of a number of variants of {\b 2} which do not seem to merit specific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. viridis} (L.) Beauv., {\i Agrost.} 51, 178 (1812). Annual; stems 10-100(-200) cm. Leaves 2-20(-40) cm × 4-12(-25) mm. Panicle 1-10(-20) cm, spike-like, cylindrical, with densely imbricate spikelets, the rhachis pilose to villous; bristles 5-10
\par

\par
263}
\par