{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 in Europe. 2n = 24, 36.{\i  Marshy river-banks and shallow water. Naturalized throughout a large part of Europe, but absent from the extreme north, the south-west, and most of the Mediterranean region.} [Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Su.] ({\i S. & E. Asia, W. North America.}) 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Introduced into Europe through Turkey about 1550, as a  medicinal plant.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.       Calla}         L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.T. Prime. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stock a rhizome. Leaves petiolate, entire. Spathe persistent, erect, nearly flat, not enfolding the spadix. Spadix without appendage, shorter than spathe. Flowers mostly hermaphrodite, but the uppermost often male; perianth absent. Stamens 6 (rarely more). Ovary 1-locular; seeds 6-8.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. palustris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 968 (1753). Rhizome stout, green, clothed in persistent, membranous, sheathing leaf-bases. Leaves 5-12 × 4-11 cm, orbicular to broadly ovate, cordate, cuspidate; petiole 5-35 cm. Scape about equalling the leaves. Spathe similar to leaves in shape, but smaller, white on inner (adaxial) surface; 2 or 3 spathes sometimes present on a single scape. Spadix 1-3 × 0·7-2 cm. Flowers yellowish-green, numerous, densely packed. Berry c. 5 mm, red. 2n = 36, 72.{\i  Swamps and lake-margins. N., C. & E. Europe, westwards to Belgium and southwards to S. Romania and S.C. Russia.} Au Be Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.      Lysichiton}      Schott
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stock a rhizome. Leaves shortly petiolate, entire. Spathe deciduous, erect, boat-shaped, loosely investing the spadix, its basal part prolonged into a narrow, tubular sheath which closely surrounds the peduncle, but is split down one side, at least in upper part. Spadix shorter than spathe, without appendix. Flowers hermaphrodite; perianth-segments 4. Stamens 4. Ovary 1- to 2-locular; seeds 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. americanus} Hultén & St John,{\i  Svensk Bot. Tidskr.}{\b  25}: 455 (1932). Robust plant, forming large clumps. Leaves 4-120 × 27-70 cm, ovate, truncate at base, appearing after the flowers. Scape shorter than leaves. Spathe up to 25 cm, bright yellow, deciduous. Spadix 5-12 cm, stout, greenish. Perianth-segments and filaments often unequal. Berry green, partly embedded in spadix.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and naturalized on river-banks in a few places in Britain and Ireland.} [Br Hb.] ({\i W. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.    Zantedeschia}     Sprengel   
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.T. Prime. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stock a short rhizome. Leaves long-petiolate, entire. Spathe persistent, obliquely infundibuliform, the lower part with over-lapping margins, closely enfolding base of spadix. Spadix without appendix, shorter than spathe. Flowers unisexual, without perianth. Male and female flowers contiguous, the male zone much longer; female flowers with 3 spathulate staminodes. Stamens 2-3. Ovary 1- to 3-locular; seeds c. 6.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. Z. aethiopica} (L.) Sprengel,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  3}: 765 (1826). Leaves 15-45 × 10-25 cm, sagittate with rounded lobes, acuminate; petiole up to 75 cm. Scape somewhat exceeding the leaves. Spathe up to 25 cm, rhombic-ovate, the cuspidate apex recurved. Spadix about half as long as spathe, the upper part entirely covered by densely crowded, bright yellow anthers, the limits of individual flowers being quite obscure. Berry yellow, seldom formed in Europe.{\i  Widely cultivated for ornament in S. & W. Europe and locally naturalized.} [Az Co Ju.] ({\i South Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.      Colocasia}        Schott
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.T. Prime. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stock a depressed-globose tuber, with slender underground stolons. Leaves entire, peltate, long-petiolate. Spathe persistent, the lower part with overlapping margins, closely enfolding base of spadix. Spadix with short appendix, much shorter than spathe. Flowers unisexual, without perianth. Male flowers separated from female by a gap bearing scale-like sterile flowers. Stamens 3, connate throughout their length to form a stout column. Ovary 1-locular; seeds fairly numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. esculenta} (L.) Schott in Schott & Endl.,{\i  Melet. Bot.} 18 (1832) ({\i C. antiquorum} Schott). Plant very robust, with large tuber and coarse foliage. Leaves up to 60 × 35 cm, cordate-sagittate, shining, conspicuously veined, the lamina usually deflexed; petiole up to 100 cm, stout, inserted c. 1/5 of the distance from sinus to apex of lamina. Scapes shorter than leaves. Spathe 20-45 cm, lanceolate, acuminate, the basal part which enfolds the spadix green, the upper part dull orange-yellow. Spadix less than half as long as spathe.{\i  Formerly cultivated in S. Europe for its edible tubers and petioles, and locally naturalized in marshes or beside water.} [Az Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.] ({\i Tropical Asia, perhaps also tropical America; widely cultivated throughout the tropics}.)   
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Inflorescences are seldom, if ever, produced by naturalized plants in Europe, and in some cultivars they are unknown, even in the tropics.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 6.        Arum}          L.          
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.T. Prime. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stock a tuber. Leaves petiolate, hastate to sagittate. Spathe withering before fruit is ripe, the lower part with overlapping margins. Spadix with long appendix. Flowers unisexual, without perianth, the male separated from the female, but not widely. Sterile flowers usually present, both between male and female and above the male (rarely very few or absent). Stamens 3-4. Ovary 1-locular; berry red; seeds 1-6.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The form of the tuber is of taxonomic importance; there are two main types. A {\i vertical} tuber is discoid or depressed-globose, with the shoot appearing from near the centre of the upper surface. A{\i  horizontal} tuber is irregularly cylindrical, with the axis of the cylinder horizontal and the shoot appearing at one end of the axis. Young tubers are often aberrant in form; the character should be judged by inspection of several mature tubers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: G. Dihoru,{\i  Rev. Roum. Biol.} ({\i Bot}.) {\b 15}: 71-84 (1970). J. Hruby, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Genève} ser. 2, {\b 4}: 113-160 (1912). C. T. Prime,{\i  Lords and Ladies.} London. 1960. A. Terpó,{\i  Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  18}: 215-225 (1973).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowering in autumn ...................................................................... {\b 7. pictum}
\par
1 Flowering in spring or early summer 
\par
2 Sterile flowers absent or very few ............................................... {\b 6. creticum}
\par
2 Sterile flowers fairly numerous  
\par
3 Leaves appearing in spring 
\par
4 Tuber horizontal; leaves often with blackish spots .................. {\b 2. maculatum}
\par
4 Tuber vertical; leaves without spots ............................................ {\b 3. orientale}
\par
3 Leaves appearing in autumn or early winter  
\par
5 Spadix about equalling spathe .................................................. {\b 4. elongatum}
\par
5 Spadix much shorter than spathe 
\par
6 Tuber horizontal; spathe white or pale green, sometimes
\par
  tinged with purple ......................................................................... {\b 1. italicum}
\par
6 Tuber vertical; spathe purplish-black .............................................. {\b 5. petteri}
\par

\par
269}
\par