{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr11\min2}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr11\min3}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords929}{\nofchars5296}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \qc\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 2.        Phoenix}{\fs28        L.
\par }{\fs24  By J. do Amaral Franco. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Dioecious; trees. Leaves pinnatisect, with numerous induplicate, linear-lanceolate, long-acuminate segments, the proximal shorter, spinescent; petiole much shorter than lamina, unarmed. Spadices pedunculate, with few, simple branches; spathe 1. Flowers yellowish. Stamens with subulate filaments. Ovary of 3 free carpels. Fruit a berry, developing usually from 1 carpel only. Seeds deeply grooved along ventral side.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Fruit 2\'b75-7\'b75 cm; plant up to 30 m ........................................... }{\b\fs28 1. dactylifera}{\fs28 
\par 1 Fruit 1\'b74-2\'b73 cm; plant not more than 20 m
\par 2 Fruit succulent; stem single ..................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. canariensis}{\fs28 
\par 2 Fruit not succulent; stems usually several ................................. }{\b\fs28 3. theophrasti}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. P. dactylifera}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  1188 (1753). Up to 30 m; stems slender, usually several. Leaves erect-arcuate, glaucous, the median segments 30-40 cm, rigid. Female flowers with inner perianth-segments twice as long as outer. Fruit 2\'b75-7\'b75 cm, usually orange, scarcely fibrous, succulent.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated on a small scale for ornament and for its fruits}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 dates}{\fs28 )}{\i\fs28  throughout much of S.Europe, and on a large scale in S.E. Spain}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 near Elche}{\fs28 ). [Hs.] (}{\i\fs28 N. Africa and S.W. Asia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. P. canariensis}{\fs28  hort. ex Chabaud, }{\i\fs28 Provence Agric.}{\b\fs28  19}{\fs28 : 293 (1882). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 but not more than 20 m, with a single much stouter stem; green leaves with median leaf-segments 40-50 cm, very stiff; female flowers with inner perianth-segments only slightly exceeding the outer; fruit 1\'b75-2\'b73 cm, orange or dark purple.}{\i\fs28  Frequently planted for ornament in the Mediterranean region and S.W. Europe; locally casual and possibly naturalized.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Islas Canarias}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. P. theophrasti}{\fs28  W. Greuter,}{\i\fs28  Bauhinia}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28  243 (1967). Plant not more than 10 m; stems slender, usually several. Leaves erect-arcuate, subglaucous, the median segments 30-40 cm, rigid, the proximal spinose, yellowish. Female flowers with inner perianth-segments about as long as the outer. Fruit 1\'b74-1\'b76 cm, yellowish-brown becoming blackish, fibrous, not succulent. }{\i\fs28 Sandy ground near the sea. \bullet  Kriti. }{\fs28 Cr.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs36  SPATHIFLORAE
\par 
\par }{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 195.     ARACEAE}{\fs28 
\par }{\fs24  Edit. D.A. Webb. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial, usually glabrous herbs, with underground rhizomes or tubers. Leaves all basal, usually with distinct petiole, and often with more or less reticulate venation. Flowers small, often unisexual, arranged in a compact spike (}{\i\fs28 spadix}{\fs28 ), subtended and usually partly enfolded by a large, petaloid or leaf-like bract (}{\i\fs28 spathe}{\fs28 ), the axis of the spadix often prolonged beyond the flower-bearing zone as a fleshy, usually coloured }{\i\fs28 appendix}{\fs28 . In monoecious plants the female flowers are at or near the base of the spadix, the male flowers above them; vestigial, sterile flowers, usually in the form of filiform papillae, may also be present. Perianth of 4-6 free, sepaloid segments, or (more usually) absent. Stamens 1-6, rarely more. Ovary superior or nude, sometimes sunk in the axis of the spadix, 1- to 3-locular; stigma usually sessile or subsessile. Fruit a berry, sometimes rather dry.
\par 
\par   A large family, centred in the wet tropics, where it includes many epiphytes and climbers. The majority of European species have more or less fetid flowers and are pollinated by flies.
\par 
\par   Measurements of the scape include the spadix and spathe.
\par 
\par  Literature: A. Engler & K. Krause in Engler, }{\i\fs28 Pflanzenreich}{\b\fs28  73}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 IV. 23F}{\fs28 ): 1-249 (1920).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Leaves peltate ............................................................................ }{\b\fs28 5. Colocasia}{\fs28 
\par 1 Leaves not peltate
\par 2 Leaves pedately divided into \'b1 numerous segments ........... }{\b\fs28 10. Dracunculus}{\fs28 
\par 2 Leaves entire or with 2 basal lobes
\par 3 Spathe \'b1 flat, not enfolding the spadix even at the base
\par 4 Leaves linear to ensiform, without distinct petiole;
\par   spathe similar, green ....................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. Acorus}{\fs28 
\par 4 Leaves cordate-orbicular to -ovate, with distinct 
\par   petiole; spathe suborbicular, white on adaxial surface ...................... }{\b\fs28 2. Calla}{\fs28 
\par 3 Base of spathe tubular, or convolute with overlapping 
\par   margins, enfolding and concealing at least the base of 
\par   the spadix or its peduncle
\par 5 Spathe bright yellow
\par 6 Leaves 8-15 cm, hastate-sagittate ....................................................}{\b\fs28  6. Arum}{\fs28 
\par 6 Leaves 40-120 cm, truncate at base ......................................... }{\b\fs28 3. Lysichiton}{\fs28 
\par 5 Spathe white, green, brown, purple, black or pale greenish-yellow
\par 7 Spathe with margins connate at base, forming a closed tube
\par 8 Male and female flowers contiguous on the spadix;
\par   leaves with cordate or sagittate base ........................................... }{\b\fs28 8. Arisarum}{\fs28  
\par 8 Male and female zones separated by a zone of the spadix
\par   which is naked or bears sterile flowers; leaves with 
\par   cuneate or truncate base .................................................................. }{\b\fs28 7. Biarum}{\fs28 
\par 7 Spathe with margins at base overlapping but free
\par 9 Spadix \'b1 horizontal, expanded laterally into wings 
\par   which are adnate to the inner surface of the spathe;
\par   female flower solitary ...............................................................}{\b\fs28  9. Ambrosina}{\fs28 
\par 9 Spadix erect, free from spathe, bearing several female flowers
\par 10 Spadix without appendix, covered up to the apex by 
\par    sessile anthers .......................................................................}{\b\fs28  4. Zantedeschia}{\fs28 
\par 10 Spadix with conspicuous appendix; male flowers restricted
\par    to a narrow zone concealed by the spathe ........................................ }{\b\fs28 6. Arum}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.        Acorus}{\fs28        L.
\par }{\fs24  By C.T. Prime. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Stock a rhizome. Leaves linear to ensiform, parallel-veined, without distinct petiole. Spadix apparently lateral, the base of the leaf-like spathe continuing the line of the scape; appendix absent. Flowers hermaphrodite, with 6 perianth-segments. Stamens 6. Ovary 2- or 3-locular; seeds few.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. A. calamus}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  324 (1753). Rhizome stout. Base of leaves and scape pinkish. Leaves 50-125 \'d7 0\'b77-2 cm, acute, often with part of the margin undulate, with a conspicuous, usually excentric midrib. Leaves and rhizome fragrant when bruised. Scape triquetrous, equalling or exceeding the leaves. Spathe 15-90 cm, the lower part stem-like, the upper part leaf-like. Spadix 5-9 \'d7 0\'b76-1\'b72 cm, obtuse, ascending or erecto-patent; flowers greenish-yellow, very numerous and densely packed. Perianth-segments 2 \'d7 1 mm, obovate-cuneate. Berry not formed
\par 
\par 268}
\par }