{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. I. cylindrica} (L.) Raeuschel,{\i  Nomencl. Bot.} ed. 3, 10 (1797) ({\i Saccharum cylindricum} (L.) Lam.). Stems up to 120 cm. Leaf-blades up to 60 × 0·3-0·6 cm, convolute, rigidly erect. Panicle up to 20 cm, densely cylindrical, obscured in silky white hairs. Spikelets 4-5 mm, lanceolate; stamens 2. 2n = 50, 60.{\i  Open, sandy habitats, usually by rivers or the seashore. S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 145.        Saccharum}       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.D. Clayton. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials, often tall. Inflorescence a large, often plumose panicle with persistent branches bearing fragile racemes of paired similar spikelets. Spikelets with 2 florets, lanceolate, dorsally compressed, enveloped in long hairs from the callus; glumes as long as the spikelet; lower floret reduced to a hyaline lemma; upper floret hermaphrodite, the lemma hyaline (sometimes reduced to a subulate vestige).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lemma awnless
\par
2 Axis of panicle hirsute ........................................................... {\b 1. spontaneum}
\par
2 Axis of panicle glabrous to pubescent .................................... {\b 2. officinarum}
\par
1 Lemma awned
\par
3 Panicle narrowly ovate, lobed, plumose; lower glume
\par
  attenuate ....................................................................................... {\b 3. ravennae}
\par
3 Panicle linear to lanceolate, with racemes appressed to
\par
  the, axis; lower glume obtuse to subacute ..................................... {\b 4. strictum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. spontaneum} L., {\i Mantissa Alt.} 183 (1771). Tall rhizomatous perennial; stems 2-4 m or more. Leaf-blades mostly 5-15 mm wide. Panicle 25-60 cm, the axis hirsute; racemes 3-15 cm, usually much longer than the supporting branches. Spikelets 3·5-7 mm, the callus with silky white hairs 2-3 times as long as the spikelet; glumes membranous above, subcoriaceous in the lower third, glabrous on the back, ciliate above; upper lemma subulate and up to 3 mm or absent.{\i  Moist  soils. Sicilia.} Si. ({\i S. Asia, N. & E. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. officinarum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 54 (1753). Like {\b 1} but leaf-blades up to 40 mm wide; panicle 100 cm or more, broadly pyramidal, the axis glabrous to pubescent.{\i  Cultivated in S. Spain} ({\i sugar-cane}). [Hs.] ({\i New Guinea; widely cultivated in the tropics and subtropics.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. ravennae} (L.) Murray,{\i  Syst. Veg.} 88 (1774) ({\i Erianthus ravennae} (L.) Beauv.). Caespitose perennial; stems up to 3 m. Panicle 25-60 cm, narrowly ovate, plumose, lobed; racemes 1-2 cm, much shorter than the flexuous supporting branches. Spikelets 3·5-5 mm, the callus-hairs about as long as the spikelet; lower glume membranous, hirsute on the back or glabrous, attenuate to an acute apex; upper lemma 2·5-3 mm, lanceolate, hyaline, with a terminal awn 3-4 mm.{\i  By water and on coastal sands. Mediterranean region; S.W. & E. Bulgaria.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Si Tu [Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. strictum} (Host) Sprengel, {\i Pugillus }2: 16 (1815) ({\i Erianthus hostii} Griseb.). Caespitose perennial; stems up to 2 m. Panicle 10-25 cm, linear to lanceolate, dense; racemes 2-6 cm, about as long as the stiff supporting branches, appressed to the axis. Spikelets 4·5-5·5 mm, the callus-hairs about as long as the spikelet; lower glume cartilaginous, purplish, glabrous on the back, hirsute on the margin, abruptly contracted to an obtuse or subacute apex; upper lemma 3-4 mm, lanceolate, with a terminal awn 2-6 mm.{\i  Damp sands and stony streamsides. Balkan peninsula, extending to N.E. Italy and S. Romania.} Al Bu Gr It Ju Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 146.       Sorghum}       Moench
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.D. Clayton. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials, mostly robust. Inflorescence a large terminal panicle with persistent branches bearing short fragile racemes of paired dissimilar spikelets. Sessile spikelets with 2 florets, dorsally compressed; lower floret reduced to a hyaline lemma; upper floret hermaphrodite, the lemma 2-dentate with a glabrous geniculate awn. Pedicellate spikelets male or sterile, smaller than the sessile, unawned.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  1 Perennial weed or ruderal; spikelets deciduous at maturity ....... {\b 1. halepense}
\par
1 Annual; cultivated
\par
2 Sessile spikelets 6-7·5 mm, ellipsoid, narrow,
\par
   tardily deciduous ....................................................................... {\b 2. sudanense}
\par
2 Sessile spikelets 4-6 mm, ovoid to subglobose, persistent ............. {\b 3. bicolor}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. halepense} (L.) Pers., {\i Syn. Pl.}{\b  1}: 101 (1805). Perennial with abundant creeping rhizomes; stems 50-150 cm. Panicle 10-30 cm, lanceolate, the ultimate racemes bearing up to 5 pairs of spikelets. Sessile spikelets 4·5-5·5 mm, ellipsoid; awn 10-16 mm, or absent. Pedicellate spikelets 4·5-6 mm, narrowly lanceolate, purplish. 2n = 40, 41, 42, 43.{\i  Dry, open habitats. Possibly native in the E. Mediterranean region; widely naturalized as a weed and ruderal in S. & S.C. Europe}. [Al Az Bl Bu Co *Cr Cz Ga *Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si *Tu. ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. sudanense} (Piper) Stapf in Oliver,{\i  Fl. Trop. Afr.}{\b  9}: 113 (1917). Annual; stems 150-300 cm. Panicle 15-30 cm, ovate to pyramidal, lax, the racemes bearing 2-5 pairs of spikelets. Sessile spikelets 6-7·5 mm, ellipsoid; awn 10-16 mm. Pedicellate spikelets 5·5-8 mm, narrowly lanceolate.{\i  Cultivated as a fodder crop in S.E. & E.C. Europe.} [Au Bu Cz Hu Rm Rs (W, K, E).] ({\i Sudan}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. bicolor} (L.) Moench, {\i Meth}. 207 (1794). Like {\b 2} but very variable; sessile spikelets 4-6 mm, ovoid to subglobose, persistent.{\i  Cultivated mainly as a grain crop. S., S.E. & S.C. Europe}. [Au Bu Co Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).] ({\i Tropical Africa; widely cultivated elsewhere in the tropics}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    There is a great diversity of variants, which are best treated as cultivars of a single species (see J. D. Snowden, {\i The Cultivated Races of Sorghum}. London. 1936.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 147.       Chrysopogon}       Trin.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.D. Clayton. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Inflorescence a terminal panicle with slender whorled branches each bearing a triad of 1 sessile and 2 pedicellate spikelets. Sessile spikelets with 2 florets, more or less compressed laterally; lower floret reduced to a hyaline lemma; upper floret hermaphrodite, the lemma 2-dentate or entire, geniculately awned. Pedicellate spikelets male or sterile, narrowly lanceolate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. gryllus} (L.) Trin., {\i Fund. Agrost.} 188 (1820). Coarsely caespitose perennial; stems 30-120 cm. Panicle 10-25 cm, lanceolate to ovate. Sessile spikelets 5-8 mm, purplish, the callus c. 2 mm, acute, with reddish-brown hairs; lower glume spinulose on margin; upper glume aristate; upper lemma minutely 2-dentate, with a geniculate awn 2-3·5 cm. Pedicellate spikelets 7-12 mm, aristate.{\i  Dry places. S. & S.C. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Gr He Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W) Tu.
\par

\par
265}
\par