{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 148.     Dichanthium}     Willemet  
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.D. Clayton. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Inflorescence of 1-many fragile racemes bearing paired, dissimilar spikelets, one sessile, the other pedicellate. Sessile spikelets with 2 florets, compressed dorsally; lower floret reduced to a hyaline lemma; upper floret hermaphrodite, with entire lemma passing into a glabrous, geniculate awn. Pedicellate spikelets male or sterile, unawned.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Lower glume of sessile spikelet with a deep circular pit ............ {\b 1. insculptum}
\par
Lower glume of sessile spikelet without a pit ............................ {\b 2. ischaemum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. insculptum} (A. Richard) W. D. Clayton,{\i  Kew Bull.}{\b  32}: 3 (1977) ({\i Andropogon insculptus} A. Richard). Caespitose, scrambling or stoloniferous perennial; stems 25-200 cm. Inflorescence sub-digitate or with a short central axis, of 3-20 racemes each 2-8 cm; internodes and pedicels with a translucent line. Spikelets 3-4·5 mm, narrowly elliptical, glossy, acute; awn 15-25 mm. Lower glume of sessile spikelet with a deep circular pit. Pedicellate spikelet with 0-3 pits.{\i  Dry, open habitats. Sicilia.} Si. ({\i Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. D. ischaemum} (L.) Roberty, {\i Boissiera}{\b  9}: 160 (1960) ({\i Andropogon ischaemum} L.). Caespitose perennial; stems 15-100 cm, ascending. Inflorescence subdigitate, of 3-15 racemes each 3-7 cm; internodes and pedicels with a translucent line. Spikelets 3·5-4·5 mm, narrowly elliptical, chartaceous, acute; awn 10-15 mm. Lower glume of sessile spikelet and pedicellate spikelet without pits.{\i  Dry places. Europe northwards to N. France and Poland.} Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W,K,E)Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 149.       Andropogon}       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.D. Clayton. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Inflorescence of paired or digitate fragile racemes bearing paired, dissimilar spikelets, one sessile, the other pedicellate. Sessile spikelet with 2 florets, the callus inserted in the cupuliform apex of the internode; lower glume with 2 keels; lower floret reduced to a hyaline lemma; upper floret hermaphrodite with 2-dentate lemma passing into a glabrous, geniculate awn. Pedicellate spikelets male or sterile, unawned or finely aristulate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. distachyos} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 1046 (1753). Caespitose perennial, sericeous-pubescent at the base; stems 25-100 cm. Inflorescence a terminal pair of racemes each 4-14 cm. Sessile spikelet 8-16 mm, lanceolate; lower glume more or less flat on the back, with a membranous wing on the lateral keels; upper glume with a slender awn 4-10 mm; upper lemma with awn 15-30 mm. Pedicellate spikelet aristulate. 2n = 40.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Al Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. gerardii} Vitman,{\i  Summa Pl.}{\b  6}: 16 (1792), from North America, has been recorded from S. France and may perhaps be naturalized. It has usually 3-6 digitate racemes and the lower glume of the sessile spikelet is unwinged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 150.        Hyparrhenia}      N.J.Andersson ex E.Fourn.   
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.D. Clayton. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Inflorescence of pairs of fragile racemes bearing paired dissimilar spikelets. Sessile spikelet with 2 florets the callus oblique; lower glume rounded on the back, without keels; lower floret reduced to a hyaline lemma; upper floret hermaphrodite, with 2-dentate lemma passing into a hairy geniculate awn. Pedicellate spikelets male or sterile, usually longer than the sessile, unawned or finely aristulate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. hirta} (L.) Stapf in Oliver, {\i Fl. Trop. Afr.}{\b  9}: 315 (1919) ({\i Andropogon hirtus} L., {\i Cymbopogon hirtus} (L.) Thomson). Caespitose perennial; stems 30-60(-100) cm. Inflorescence up to 30 cm, of 2-10 raceme-pairs; racemes 2-4 cm, each with 4-7 pairs of spikelets. Sessile spikelet 4-6·5 mm, linear-elliptical, white-villous, the callus acute; awn 10-35 mm. Pedicellate spikelet 3-7 mm, narrowly lanceolate, villous, unawned. 2n = 30, 40.{\i  Dry, open habitats. Mediterranean region, Portugal}. Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 151.         Heteropogon}         Pers.  
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.D. Clayton. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Inflorescence a fragile raceme bearing paired dissimilar spikelets (but similar and unawned in lower part of raceme). Sessile spikelets with 2 florets, terete, with pungent callus; lower floret reduced to a hyaline lemma; upper floret hermaphrodite, the lemma narrow, convolute, with an apical hairy geniculate awn. Pedicellate spikelets male or sterile, lanceolate, larger than the sessile, unawned, with a long slender callus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. contortus} (L.) Beauv. ex Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 836 (1817). Caespitose perennial; stems 30-100 cm. Racemes 3-10 cm, solitary or few, the awns forming a twisted spire. Sessile spikelets 5·5-10 mm, including a pungent callus 2-3 mm; awn 5-8 cm. Pedicellate spikelets 5-15 mm, glabrous to tuberculate-villous.{\i  Dry, open habitats. W. & C. Mediterranean region, extending to S. Switzerland.} Bl Ga He Hs It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 152.       Phacelurus}    Griseb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.D. Clayton. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizomatous perennials. Inflorescence of 1-several fragile racemes, arranged subdigitately or on a short common axis, and bearing paired spikelets; internodes and pedicels stout. Sessile spikelets with 2 florets, dorsally compressed; lower floret male, with hyaline lemma and palea; upper floret hermaphrodite, with hyaline unawned lemma. Pedicellate spikelets similar to the sessile but with both florets male.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. digitatus} (Sibth. & Sm.) Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 424 (1846). Coarse perennial; stems 70-150 cm. Racemes 1-7, each 20-35 cm, stiff, borne subdigitately or on a central axis up to 15 cm. Sessile spikelets 10-18 mm, narrowly lanceolate, acute. Pedicellate spikelets with an oblong callus 1-3 mm. 2n = 20.{\i  Ditches and other wet places. S.E. Europe}. Al Bu Gr ?Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 153.       Hemarthria}       R.Br. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.D. Clayton. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Caespitose or rhizomatous perennials. Inflorescence of terminal and axillary spike-like racemes, with a tough rhachis and one sessile and one pedicellate spikelet at each node. Spikelets with 2 florets, dorsally compressed and more or less sunk in the rhachis, to which the pedicel is adnate, unawned; lower glume coriaceous; lower floret reduced to a hyaline lemma; upper floret hermaphrodite.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. altissima} (Poiret) Stapf & C. E. Hubbard,{\i  Kew Bull.}{\b  1934}: 109 (1934). Rhizomatous perennial; stems up to 2·5 m, procumbent. Racemes 4-10 cm. Spikelets 4-6 mm, the sessile elliptic-oblong, with obtuse to emarginate lower glume, the pedicellate narrowly triangular, with subacute to acute lower glume.{\i  Shallow water and muddy places. Mediterranean region.} Bl Cr Gr Hs It Si. ({\i Africa}.)
\par

\par
266}
\par