{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 15-25 cm, dark reddish-purple. Spadix shorter than spathe, of the same colour. Sterile flowers present above the male, but usually absent between male and female. Fruiting spike 3-5 cm. Flowering in autumn. 2n = 28.{\i  Stony places in scrub. Islands of W. Mediterranean region.} Bl Co It Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 7.             Biarum}           Schott
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.T. Prime. & D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stock a depressed-globose or more or less discoid tuber, with apical bud. Scarious scale-leaves usually conspicuous, concealing base of foliage-leaves and of inflorescence. Foliage leaves entire, with or without distinct petiole. Scape usually short. Spathe withering before fruit is ripe, the lower part with margins united to form a tube. Spadix with long appendix. Flowers unisexual, without perianth, the male widely separated from the female. Sterile flowers usually present between male and female; sometimes present also above the male. Stamens 1-2. Ovary 1-locular, with a single ovule. Berry white or pale green, sometimes striped with purple.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   This genus is very imperfectly understood, and its study is made more difficult by the fact that plants seldom have leaves and flowers present at the same time. The taxonomy presented below must be regarded as provisional.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   In most species the first-formed leaves of each season, and also those of young plants are shorter, wider and more distinctly petiolate than are mature leaves. Descriptions refer primarily to the latter.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: S. Talavera,{\i  Lagascalia}{\b  6}: 275-296 (1976).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spathe strongly cucullate, with tube about as long as lamina ........ {\b 1. davisii}
\par
1 Spathe not cucullate; tube not more than 1/3 as long as lamina  
\par
2 Sterile flowers present above the male, as well as 
\par
  between male and female ........................................................ {\b 2. tenuifolium}
\par
2 Sterile flowers present only between male and female, 
\par
  or entirely absent  
\par
3 Flowering in late spring; the lower sterile flowers 
\par
  variously connate, forming branched filaments ............................ {\b 5. spruneri}
\par
3 Flowering in autumn or winter; sterile flowers all 
\par
  consisting of simple filaments  
\par
4 Tube of spathe cylindrical; sterile flowers usually 
\par
  more than 8 ............................................................................ {\b 3. carratracense}
\par
4 Tube of spathe inflated, ± globose; sterile flowers 
\par
  usually less than 8 ............................................................................. {\b 4. dispar}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. davisii} Turrill,{\i  Gard. Chron}. ser. 3,{\b  104}: 437 (1939). Leaves with distinct petiole 2-4 cm and ovate-oblong lamina 1·5-3 cm × (5-)10-13 mm, truncate at base. Scape 3-4 cm, slender. Spathe 3-5 × 1·5-2·5 cm, greenish-white spotted with pinkish-brown, the lower half tubular, strongly ventricose, the upper half forming a triangular, acuminate, cucullate, forwardly-curved lamina. Female flowers 10-20; zone of male flowers 8-10 mm. Sterile flowers sometimes present between male and female and above male, but very small and few, and often absent. Appendix of spadix slender, dark red, shorter than spathe. Anthers obtuse. stigma sessile. Flowering in late autumn, without leaves.{\i  Stony hillsides and rock-crevices. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. tenuifolium}(L.) Schott in Schott & Endl., {\i Melet. Bot}. 17 (1832). Leaves 5-20(-40) cm × 3-15 mm, linear to oblong or spathulate, with or without distinct petiole, flat or undulate. Scape not more than 5 cm, underground. Spathe 8-20(-30) cm; tube 2·5-6 cm, cylindrical, whitish; lamina lanceolate-acuminate, not cucullate, dark purple, tinged with green outside, 3-5 times as long as the tube. Zone of female flowers c. 3 mm, of male flowers 6-8(-12) mm; sterile flowers well-developed as numerous, mainly simple, filaments, between male and female zones and also some (very variable in number) above the male. Appendix of spadix slender, purple, exceeding the spathe. Anthers obtuse, dehiscing by lateral slits. Stigma sessile. Seeds 4-5 × 2-3 mm. Flowering in late summer or autumn, without leaves, or rarely in late spring or early summer, with leaves. 2n = 16, 20, 22, 26.{\i  Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} Al Cr Gr Hs It Ju Lu Si.   
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable, but the customary division into subspecies according to dimensions of leaves, spathe and spadix is of little value, at least in Europe. The recorded chromosome numbers show, unfortunately, no clear correlation with either morphology or geographical range. The plants from S.W. Europe, with 2n = 22 and 26 respectively have been distinguished as {\b B. arundanum} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 110 (1852), and{\b  B. galiani} Talavera,{\i  Lagascalia}{\b  6}: 289 (1976). The former has the lower sterile flowers regularly whorled, and a few of them are 2-fid; in{\i  B. galiani}, which differs from the other variants in its calcifuge habit, a few of the sterile flowers are 3-fid. Variants from Kriti, with strongly undulate leaves, also have the sterile flowers whorled; they have been referred to {\b B. zeleborii} Schott, {\i Österr. Bot. Wochenbl.}{\b  7}: 245 (1857), originally described from W. Anatolia.   
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Until the variation of the complex has been more thoroughly studied over its entire geographical range, the taxonomic status of these variants must remain uncertain.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. B. carratracense} (Haenseler ex Willk.) Font Quer,{\i  Butll. Inst. Catalana Hist. Nat.}{\b  26}: 53 (1926) ({\i Ischarum haenseleri} (Willk.) Schott). Leaves oblong to oblanceolate, usually with distinct petiole, flat or slightly undulate. Scape up to 14 cm. Spathe 10-35 cm; tube 2-6 cm, cylindrical; lamina 4-5 times as long as tube, lanceolate, dark reddish-purple, sometimes tinged with green outside. Zone of female flowers c. 5 mm, of male flowers 6-10 mm, separated by a gap of c. 15 mm bearing 8-20 filiform sterile flowers. No sterile flowers present above the male. Appendix of spadix usually about equalling the spathe, dark reddish-purple, rarely green. Anthers dehiscing by an apical pore. Style short but distinct. Seeds 5-6 × 4-5 mm. Flowering in autumn. 2n = 98, c. 96. •{\i  S.Spain.} Hs.   
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Included by some authors under {\b B. bovei} Blume, {\i Rumphia}{\b  1}: 114 (1836), from S.W. Asia and Egypt, and possibly conspecific. The Spanish plant, however, seems to be smaller in all its parts, and has a much narrower spathe and leaves.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. B. dispar} (Schott) Talavera, {\i Lagascalia}{\b  6}: 289 (1976). Like {\b 3} but spathe not more than 25 cm, with tube 1-4 cm, strongly inflated and subglobose; spadix usually shorter than spathe; sterile flowers (0-)1-8(-12). 2n = 74. {\i S.W. Spain and S.E. Portugal; Sardegna}. Hs Lu Sa.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. B. spruneri} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 13}): 5 (1853). Like {\b 3} but spathe 10-15 cm, about equalling the spadix; sterile flowers between male and female variously connate, forming branched filaments; anthers apiculate; flowering in late spring, with leaves.{\i  Dry hillsides. • S. Greece. }Gr.   
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  B. fraasianum }(Schott) N.E. Br.,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot}.) {\b 18}: 254 (1880), was inadequately described from a single gathering in S.E. Greece. It may be a variant of {\b 5}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 8.      Arisarum}     Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.T. Prime. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stock a tuber or rhizome. Leaves petiolate, entire. Spathe withering before fruit is ripe, the lower part with margins united to form a closed tube, the upper part cucullate, enfolding and 
\par

\par
271}
\par