{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 retrorsely scabrid throughout, shorter than to equalling nut. Stigmas 2. Nut 2·5-3 mm, ellipsoid-obovoid, plano- or biconvex, smooth, reddish-brown.{\i  Damp or wet places. W., C. & S. Europe.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, E) Sa Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b S. ehrenbergii} Boeckeler,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  36}: 712 (1870), from S.E. Russia (near Orenburg), combines the apparently lateral inflorescence of {\b 8} with the longer (6-7 mm) and awned glumes of {\b 3}. It is regarded by some authors as a hybrid between these two species.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. supinus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 49 (1753) ({\i Schoenoplectus supinus} (L.) Palla; incl.{\i  Scirpus melanospermus} C. A. Meyer). Annual. Stems 3-30 cm × 0·5-2 mm. Bract up to 15 cm, usually much exceeding the inflorescence. Spikelets (1-)2-12(-20) in the inflorescence, 3-12 mm, ovoid or lanceolate. Glumes 2·5-4 mm, ovate or elliptical, obtuse, shortly apiculate, reddish- or purplish-brown, with green midvein, glabrous, or ciliolate at apex. Perianth-bristles 4-6, rudimentary or short, rarely equalling nut. Stigmas 3. Nut 1-1·6 mm, obovoid, brown or black, dull, prominently transversely and undulately rugose. {\i Damp places. Europe northwards to N.C. France, C. Poland and N. Ukraine.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. juncoides} Roxb.,{\i  Fl. Indica}{\b  1}: 218 (1820). Like {\b 9} but stems up to 60 cm; bract up to 8 cm; spikelets 1-6 in the inflorescence; perianth-bristles 6, slightly shorter than nut, retrorsely barbed; nut 2 mm, obscurely transversely rugose or nearly smooth.{\i  Naturalized in rice-fields in C.Portugal}. [Lu.] ({\i Tropical and subtropical Asia, North America, Australia.})
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. HOLOSCHOENUS (Link) Koch. Terrestrial, rhizomatous perennials. Stems simple, terete, mostly with leafless sheaths below. Inflorescence apparently lateral, of 1-many compact, globose, sessile or pedunculate heads, subtended by 1-2 bracts, the lower bract forming an apparent prolongation of the stem and usually exceeding the inflorescence. Perianth-bristles absent. Stamens 3. Nut trigonous, smooth.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. holoschoenus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 49 (1753) ({\i Holoschoenus vulgaris} Link). Stems 30-150 cm, smooth, with leafless sheaths below, the upper sheaths often with a short, semi-terete lamina; sheaths splitting into a fibrous reticulum at maturity. Bracts 1-2, semiterete, the lower erect. Spikelets 2·5-4 mm, ovoid, obtuse, arranged in 1-10 compact globose heads up to 12 mm wide, at least one of which is sessile, the others on unequal, sometimes compound rays. Glumes 1·5-3 mm, obovate, truncate, mucronate, whitish or brownish, with green midvein, ciliate on margin and keel. Nut 0·6-1·3 mm, obovoid, shiny, brownish-white.{\i  Damp places. Europe, northwards to S. England and White Russia.} Al Au †Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, L) Sa Si Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Several intergrading variants with imprecise geographical ranges, based on number and size of heads, length of upper involucral bract, and vigour (length and width of stem), have been given varietal to specific rank; their characteristics may be found variously mixed, even on stems arising from the same rhizome.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ISOLEPIS (R. Br.) Griseb. Terrestrial, caespitose annuals or perennials. Stems simple, terete, usually slender, sometimes leafy below. Inflorescence apparently lateral, simple or compound, usually a sessile fascicle of 1-several spikelets, with a terete or subterete bract (rarely 2) appearing as a prolongation of the stem. Perianth-bristles absent. Stamens 1-3. Stigmas 2-3. Nut trigonous.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. setaceus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 49 (1753) ({\i Isolepis setacea }(L.) R. Br., {\i Schoenoplectus setaceus} (L.) Palla). Annual or perennial. Stems 3-30 cm × 0·3-0·5 mm. Bract up to 2 cm, usually exceeding the inflorescence. Spikelets 1-4(-10) in the inflorescence, 2-5 mm, ovoid. Glumes 1·3-2·1 × 0·6-1·2 mm, ovate or broadly elliptical, obtuse, shortly apiculate, purplish-brown, with green midvein, glabrous. Perianth-bristles absent. Stamens 1-2. Nut 0·5-1·2 mm, obovoid, with convex faces and obtuse angles, shiny, brown or black, prominently longitudinally ribbed and finely transversely striate. 2n = 28.{\i  Damp places. Most of Europe except the north-east.} All except ?Al Bl Cr Fe Rs (N, ?C) Sa Sb Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. S. pseudosetaceus} Daveau, {\i Bol. Soc. Brot.}{\b  9}: 33 (1891). Like {\b 12} but stems not more than 15 cm; nut with slightly concave faces and acute angles, dull, pale brown, finely papillose.{\i  Damp places. Portugal, S. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. S. cernuus} Vahl,{\i  Enum. Pl.}{\b  2}: 245 (1805) ({\i S. savii} Sebastiani & Mauri,{\i  Schoenoplectus cernuus} (Vahl) Hayek). Like {\b 12} but annual; bract not more than 1 cm and often shorter than the inflorescence; spikelets 1(-3) in the inflorescence; glumes white or greenish; nut broadly obovoid or suborbicular, dull, almost smooth or finely longitudinally papillose.{\i  Damp places. S. & W. Europe, northwards to N.W. Scotland.} ?Al Az Bl Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hb Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. S. prolifer} Rottb.,{\i  Descr. Icon. Rar. Pl.} 55 (1773). Caespitose perennial, without or with short, ascending rhizomes. Stems (10-)25-60(-90) cm × 1-4 mm. Bract 2-10 mm, shorter than or equalling the cluster of spikelets. Inflorescence a cluster of 5-20 spikelets, usually with 1-5(-10) pedunculate additional clusters of spikelets; spikelets 2-10 mm, linear. Glumes 2-2·5 × c. 1 mm, ovate to oblong-lanceolate, subobtuse or apiculate, pale reddish-brown-scarious, with greenish midrib, glabrous. Perianth-bristles absent. Stamens 3. Nut c. 1 mm, ovoid, yellowish, minutely reticulate.{\i  Naturalized in S.W. France} ({\i near Bayonne}). [Ga.] ({\i S. Africa, Australia, New Zealand}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. ELEOGITON (Link) Pax. Floating or submerged aquatic perennials, rarely terrestrial. Stems branched, compressed, leafy. Inflorescence a terminal, solitary spikelet on an axillary peduncle; bract absent. Perianth-bristles absent. Stamens 3. Stigmas 2-3. Nut biconvex or trigonous, smooth.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. S. fluitans} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 48 (1753) ({\i Isolepis fluitans} (L.) R. Br.). Stems 5-50(-130) cm, rooting at the nodes, with slender rhizomes. Leaves up to 100 × 2 mm. Peduncles up to 10 cm. Spikelets 2-5 mm, ovoid. Glumes 2 mm, ovate, obtuse, pale greenish. Nut 1·2-1·5 mm, obovoid, whitish or yellowish. 2n = 60.{\i  Usually in still or slow-moving water. W. & W.C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden and C. Italy.} Az Be Br ?Cz Da Ga Ge Ho Hs It ?Ju Lu No ?Po Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. BAEOTHRYON (Ehrh. ex A. Dietr.) Bentham & Hooker fil. Terrestrial perennials. Stems simple, trigonous or terete, with leafless sheaths at the base, the uppermost sheath with a short lamina. Inflorescence a solitary, terminal spikelet. Perianth-bristles 0-6. Stamens 3. Nut trigonous, smooth.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. S. hudsonianus} (Michx) Fernald,{\i  Rhodora}{\b  8}: 161 (1906) ({\i Trichophorum alpinum} (L.) Pers.,{\i  Scirpus alpinus} (L.) Dalla Torre & Sarnth., non Schleicher ex Gaudin,{\i  Eriophorum alpinum} L.). Densely caespitose, with very short rhizomes, without stolons. Stems 10-40 cm, trigonous, scabrid above. Leaf-lamina up to 1(-3) cm. Spikelet 5-7 × c. 3 mm, ellipsoid to lanceolate, with 8-12 flowers. Glumes oblong-ovate, obtuse,
\par
\par 279}
\par