{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b S. atrovirens} Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Horti Berol.} 79 (1809), native of North America, is like {\b 1} but with spikelets in fascicles of 8-20 at the apices of the ultimate rays, usually brownish-red glumes and perianth-bristles smooth below; it has been reported frequently as a casual in C. Europe and N.E. France and is perhaps becoming naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. radicans} Schkuhr, {\i Ann. Bot.} ({\i Usteri}) {\b 4}: 48 (1793). Like {\b 1} but stems caespitose; long, procumbent non-flowering shoots present which root and form new plants at their apices; spikelets 3-8 mm, lanceolate, ovoid-lanceolate or elliptical, acute, usually solitary at apices of ultimate rays; glumes not mucronulate; perianth-bristles 2-3 times as long as nut, smooth or with only a few retrorse hairs towards apex, flexuous.{\i  Damp places. From S. Norway and Finland southwards to the Vosges, N. Italy and C. Romania.} Au Cz Fe Ga Ge Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. BOLBOSCHOENUS (Ascherson) Beetle. Terrestrial, rhizomatous perennials with tuberous stolons. Stems simple, trigonous, leafy. Inflorescence terminal, more or less simple. Perianth-bristles (0-)1-6. Stamens 3. Stigmas 2-3. Nut plano-convex, lenticular or trigonous, smooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. maritimus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 51 (1753). Stems 30-120 cm, scabrid above. Leaves 2-10 mm wide, flat, glabrous or scabrid on midvein and margin. Bracts 2-4, leaf-like to setaceous. Inflorescence a sessile fascicle of 1-several spikelets, or of rays up to 5 cm bearing 1-6 spikelets at their apices. Spikelets 8-45 mm, ovoid or lanceolate. Glumes 5·5-7·5 mm, ovate, emarginate with a scabrid awn 1-3 mm in the sinus, glabrous or puberulent. Perianth-bristles retrorsely barbed, shorter than to longer than nut. Nut 0·9-3 mm, obovoid, shiny, brown to black. 2n = 80, c. 104.{\i  Damp places and marshes, usually saline. Most of Europe.} All except Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b maritimus} ({\i Bolboschoenus maritimus} (L.) Palla; incl. {\i B. compactus} (Hoffm.) Drobov,{\i  B. planiculmis }(F. W. Schmidt) Egorova): Glumes reddish- or dark-brown. Nut plano-convex or trigonous. {\i Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b affinis} (Roth) T. Norlindh,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  125}: 404 (1972) ({\i Bolboschoenus affinis} (Roth) Drobov, {\i B. popovii} Egorova): Glumes whitish-yellow, stramineous or silvery-membranaceous. Nut lenticular.{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} ({\i Caucasus to India.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. PTEROLEPIS (Reichenb.) Bentham & Hooker fil. (Sect. {\i Schoenoplectus} (Reichenb.) Bentham & Hooker fil.). Terrestrial or semi-aquatic, usually rhizomatous perennials, rarely annuals. Stems simple, trigonous or terete, usually with leafless sheaths below, the uppermost sheath often with a short lamina. Inflorescence apparently lateral, subtended by 1-2 bracts, the lower forming an apparent prolongation of the stem. Perianth-bristles 1-6. Stamens 3. Stigmas 2-3. Nut plano-convex, biconvex or trigonous, usually smooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. lacustris} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 48 (1753). Rhizomatous perennial. Stems 50-300 cm, solitary, terete, with leafless sheaths below, the upper sheath often with a short lamina. Lower bract usually shorter than the inflorescence. Spikelets 3-10 mm, ovoid, in fascicles arranged in a head or a simple or compound umbel with unequal rays. Glumes 3-4 mm, broadly obovate, emarginate, with obtuse lateral lobes, mucronate, often fimbriate-ciliate, reddish-brown. Perianth-bristles 5-6, retrorsely scabrid, as long as or longer than nut. Stigmas 2-3. Nut 2-3 mm, smooth, greyish-brown. {\i Usually in water. Almost throughout Europe.} All except Az Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b lacustris} ({\i Schoenoplectus lacustris} (L.) Palla): Stems up to 300 cm, green. Glumes more or less glabrous. Stigmas usually 3. Nut 2·5-3 mm, compressed-trigonous. 2n = 42.{\i  In fresh water. Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tabernaemontani} (C.C. Gmelin) Syme in Sowerby,{\i  Engl. Bot.} ed. 3, {\b 10}: 64 (1870) ({\i S. glaucus} Sm., non Lam., {\i S. tabernaemontani} C.C. Gmelin, {\i Schoenoplectus tabernaemontani} (C.C. Gmelin) Palla): Stems not more than 150 cm, more or less glaucous. Glumes with dense red papillae, especially above. Stigmas usually 2. Nut 2-2·5 mm, plano- or biconvex. 2n = 38 42, 44.{\i  Mainly in brackish water. Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The distinction between the two subspecies is relatively clear throughout much of Europe, but in the south part of European U.S.S.R. more variation is encountered, and a third taxon has been distinguished as{\b  S. hippolyti} V. Krecz., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  7}: 28 (1937), which combines the green stems and relatively smooth glumes of subsp. ({\b a}) with the plano-convex nut and 2 stigmas of subsp. ({\b b}). On a world scale the complex of taxa related to {\b 4} is very difficult (see T. Koyama{\i  Jour. Fac. Sci. Tokyo Univ.} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 7}: 321-324 (1958)).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b S}. × {\b carinatus} Sm.,{\i  Engl. Bot.}{\b  28}: 1983 (1809) ({\b 4} × {\b 8}; incl. {\i S. kalmussii} Ascherson, Abromeit & Graebner), occurs mainly in C. & N.W. Europe; it has the general appearance of{\b  4}, but the stems are terete below and trigonous above the middle, the nuts are plano-convex, and the glumes often have some red papillae.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. mucronatus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 50 (1753) ({\i Schoenoplectus mucronatus} (L.) Palla). Perennial. Stems 40-100 cm, densely caespitose trigonous, with leafless sheaths. Lower bract exceeding the inflorescence. Spikelets 4-12 mm, ovoid to oblong 2-20 in a compact, sessile fascicle. Glumes 3-4 mm, broadly obovate obtuse, mucronate, glabrous, reddish, with green midvein. Perianth-bristles (4-)6, retrorsely scabrid, slightly longer than nut. Stigmas (2)3. Nut 1·5-2·5 mm, obovoid, trigonous, blackish-brown, transversely rugulose.{\i  Marshes. C. & S. Europe, eastwards to E. Ukraine and extending to W.C. France.} Au Az Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. pungens} Vahl,{\i  Enum. Pl.}{\b  2}: 255 (1805) ({\i S. americanus} auct. eur., non Pers.). Like {\b 5} but rhizomatous; stems solitary; uppermost 2-3 sheaths with lamina; spikelets 1-6; glumes emarginate, with acute lateral lobes, ciliate; perianth-bristles absent or rudimentary; stigmas 2; nut plano-convex, yellowish-brown, smooth. {\i Marshes. W. & C. Europe, extending to S.C. Italy}. Au †Be ?Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Lu Po †Rs (B) [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. litoralis} Schrader, {\i Fl. Germ.} 142 (1806) ({\i Schoenoplectus litoralis} (Schrader) Palla). Rhizomatous perennial. Stems 30-200 cm, solitary, trigonous, with leafless sheaths below, the upper sheath usually with a lamina. Lower bract equalling or exceeding the inflorescence. Spikelets 5-15 mm, ovoid to oblong mostly in fascicles in compound umbels with unequal rays. Glumes 3-4 mm, broadly obovate, emarginate, mucronate glabrous, brown, with scarious margin. Perianth-bristles 4-6, spathulate-dilated and hairy at apex, longer than nut. Stigmas 2(3). Nut 1-2(-3) mm, obovoid, plano- or biconvex (rarely trigonous), smooth, brown.{\i  Damp places. S. Europe, extending northwards to S.W. Hungary.} ?Au Bu Co Cr Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. triqueter} L., {\i Mantissa} 29 (1767) ({\i Schoenoplectus triqueter} (L.) Palla). Rhizomatous perennial. Stems 50-150 cm, solitary, with leafless sheaths below, the uppermost sheath usually with a short lamina. Lower bract equalling or exceeding the inflorescence. Spikelets 5-10 mm, ovoid, mostly in sessile fascicles, with a few pedunculate fascicles. Glumes 3·5-4 mm, broadly obovate emarginate, mucronate, fimbriate-ciliate, reddish-brown, with green midvein. Perianth-bristles 6, linear, not dilated at apex,
\par

\par
278}
\par