{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 196.        LEMNACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.H. Valentine. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small aquatic perennial herbs. Fronds floating or submerged, flowering at the surface of the water, multiplying by buds from one median or two lateral pouches, the new fronds separating or remaining linked. Roots simple, on the ventral surface of the fronds, or absent. Inflorescence minute, consisting of 1 stamen and 1 ovary in a cavity on the dorsal surface of the frond, or 2 stamens and 1 ovary enclosed in a sheath and in a bud-pouch. Ovary 1-locular; style short, undivided; ovules 1-4, basal. Fruit a utricle; seeds 1-4.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All the species of the family are found in fresh water.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: C. den Hartog & F. van der Plas,{\i  Blumea }{\b 18}: 355-368 (1970).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Fronds not more than 1 mm, floating, with neither roots
\par
  nor veins and with a single, basal median bud-pouch;
\par
  raphides absent ............................................................................... {\b 1. Wolffia}
\par
1 Fronds more than 1 mm, floating or submerged, usually 
\par
  with roots and veins and with two lateral bud-pouches;
\par
  raphides present
\par
2 Fronds floating or submerged, each with a single root 
\par
  and 1-3(-5) often inconspicuous veins ............................................{\b  2. Lemna}
\par
2 Fronds floating, each with at least 2 roots and 3-15 veins ......... {\b 3. Spirodela}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.     Wolffia}      Horkel ex Schleiden 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A. Lawalrée. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Fronds not more than 1 mm, floating, symmetrical, with neither roots nor veins. Bud-pouch 1, basal, median, infundibuliform, with circular opening. Raphides absent. Inflorescence consisting of 1 stamen and 1 ovary in a single cavity on the upper surface of the frond. Anthers 1-locular, dehiscing apically. Ovary globose; ovule 1, orthotropous. Fruit globose; seed smooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. W. arrhiza} (L.) Horkel ex Wimmer, {\i Fl. Schles.} ed. 3, 140 (1857) ({\i W. michelii} Schleiden,{\i  Lemna arrhiza }L.). Fronds 0·5-1 mm, ellipsoid or subglobose, light green. 2n = 50.{\i  From England and Lithuania southwards to W.C. Portugal, Sicilia and Bulgaria.} Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The smallest European vascular plant. Flowers are never produced in Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.       Lemna}        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A. Lawalrée. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Fronds more than 1 mm, floating or submerged, separate or connected, symmetrical or asymmetrical, flat or slightly swollen, rarely inflated; roots one per frond or absent; veins 1-3(-5). Bud-pouches 2, lateral. Raphides present. Inflorescence consisting of 2 stamens and 1 ovary enclosed in a sheath and in one of the two bud-pouches. Anthers 2-locular, dehiscing transversely. Ovary globose; ovules 1 or 4-6, orthotropous to anatropous. Fruit more or less globose; seeds longitudinally ribbed, rarely smooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Fronds 5-15 mm, wholly submerged except when flowering,
\par
  translucent, ± acute and serrulate at apex, several 
\par
  linked by conspicuous stalks ........................................................... {\b 1. trisulca}
\par
1 Fronds 2-6 mm, floating, opaque, obtuse or rounded at the
\par
  apex, entire, free or a few linked by inconspicuous stalks
\par
2 Fronds 1-veined, oblong or falcate ........................................... {\b 5. valdiviana}
\par
2 Fronds 3(-5)-veined, sometimes obscurely so, ovate,
\par
  elliptical, obovate or suborbicular
\par
3 Fronds grey-green or reddish-brown on the dorsal surface, 
\par
  frequently strongly swollen beneath, the ventral surface
\par
  with up to 40-50 meshes 0·2-0·7 mm ................................................ {\b 2. gibba}
\par
3 Fronds usually light green on the dorsal surface, 
\par
  always ± flat on both surfaces, the ventral surface 
\par
  with not more than 15-20 meshes 0·1- 0·25 mm
\par
4 Fronds almost symmetrical; roots with a wingless sheath
\par
  and an obtuse cap .............................................................................. {\b 3. minor}
\par
4 Fronds very asymmetrical; roots with a winged sheath 
\par
  and an acute cap .......................................................................... {\b 4. perpusilla}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Staurogeton} Reichenb. Submerged, but rising to the surface to produce flowers. Fronds with persistent stalks.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. trisulca} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 970 (1753). Fronds 5-15 mm, submerged, translucent, oblong to narrowly ovate, more or less acute and serrulate at apex, 3-veined. Flowering fronds floating and smaller than the sterile ones. Ovule 1. 2n = 40, 44.{\i  Most of Europe except some of the islands}. All except Al Az Bl Co Cr Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen.{\b  Lemna.} Floating. Fronds with fugacious stalks.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. gibba} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 970 (1753). Fronds 2-5 mm, floating, opaque, broadly ovate to suborbicular, rounded at the apex, entire, frequently strongly swollen beneath, 3(-5)-veined, the dorsal surface grey-green or sometimes reddish-brown, the ventral surface with 40-50 meshes 0·2-0·7 mm. Ovules 4-6. 2n = 40, 50 64. {\i Most of Europe, northwards to} c. 63°{\i  N. in Sweden}. All except ?Al Az Cr Fa Is Rs (N) Sb; extinct in No.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. minor} L., {\i Sp, Pl.} 970 (1753). Fronds 1·5-5 mm, floating, opaque, almost symmetrical, elliptical to narrowly ovate or obovate, rounded at the apex, entire, more or less flat on both surfaces, 3-veined, the dorsal surface light green, the ventral surface with 10-20 meshes 0·1-0·25 mm. Roots with a wingless sheath and an obtuse cap. Ovule 1. 2n = 40, 42, 50.{\i  Most of Europe.} All except Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. perpusilla} Torrey,{\i  Fl. New-York}{\b  2}: 245 (1843) ({\i L. paucicostata} Hegelm. ex Engelm.). Fronds 2-6 mm, floating, opaque, very asymmetrical, obovate-elliptical, rounded at the apex, entire, more or less flat on both surfaces, 3-veined, the dorsal surface light green. Roots with a winged sheath and an acute cap. 2n = 40.{\i  Naturalized locally in rice-fields in N. Italy and S. France}. [Ga It.] ({\i Asia, Africa, North and South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. valdiviana} Philippi,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  33}: 239 (1864). Fronds 2-6 mm, floating, opaque, frequently very asymmetrical, oblong or falcate, rounded at the apex, entire, more or less flat and light green on both surfaces, obscurely 1-veined. 2n = 40.{\i  Naturalized locally in S.W. France} ({\i Lac Marion, near Biarritz}). [Ga.] ({\i North and South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.        Spirodela}     Schleiden
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A. Lawalrée. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Fronds floating, separate or 2-5 connected, flat to inflated, asymmetrical, with an inferior scale and a superior fugacious scale 3- to 15-veined; roots 2-18 on each frond, rarely absent. Bud-pouches 2, lateral. Rhaphides present. Inflorescence consisting of 2 stamens and 1 ovary enclosed in a sheath and in one of the two bud-pouches. Anthers 2-locular, dehiscing transversely. Ovary globose; ovules 1 or 2-4, orthotropous to anatropous. Fruit more or less globose; seeds longitudinally ribbed or smooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. polyrhiza} (L.) Schleiden,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  13}: 392 (1839) ({\i Lemna polyrhiza} L.). Fronds 4-10 mm, floating, opaque, asymmetrical ovate to suborbicular, rounded at the apex, entire, flat on both surfaces, 5- to 9-veined, the dorsal surface dark green and shining, the ventral surface often purplish; roots usually 5-15 per frond. 2n = 40.{\i  Most of Europe except the extreme north and south.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Sa Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very rarely flowering.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. oligorrhiza} (Kurz) Hegelm.,{\i  Lemnac.} 147 (1868), with fronds 2-5 mm and roots 2-5 per frond, has been recorded from rice-fields in N.W. Italy (S. of Matara) and is perhaps becoming naturalized.
\par

\par
273}
\par