{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 erect. Female capitula 3-6, remote, the lower often pedunculate. Male capitula 3-10, distinct, remote, all borne on main axis. Fruit ellipsoid, often pedicellate; style straight. 2n = 30.{\i  Much of Europe, but absent from many of the islands and parts of the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Sa Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. angustifolium} Michx,{\i  Fl. Bor. Amer.}{\b  2}: 189 (1803) ({\i S. affine} Schnizlein). Stem up to 100 cm, floating or rarely erect. Leaves flat in transverse section, inflated and sheathing at base. Inflorescence simple. Lowest bract 10-60 cm, at least twice as long as inflorescence. Female capitula 2-4, remote, the lower usually pedunculate. Male capitula (1-)2(-3), crowded and appearing as one elongated capitulum on main axis. Fruit ellipsoid, brown, shortly pedicellate; style straight. 2n = 30.{\i  N. & N.C. Europe, extending southwards in the mountains to N. Portugal, the Alps and Macedonia.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Hs Ho Is It Ju Lu No Po Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. glomeratum} Laest. ex Beurl.,{\i  Öfvers. Kongl. Vet.-Akad. Förhandl.}{\b  9}: 192 (1853). Stem up to 40 cm, erect. Leaves with winged keel below, not inflated at base. Inflorescence simple, congested. Lowest bract at least 3 times as long as inflorescence. Female capitula (2-)3-5(-6), crowded together on the main axis, rarely the lower pedunculate and somewhat remote. Male capitula 1-2, usually contiguous with uppermost female capitulum. Fruit constricted around the middle, the lower part ovoid, the upper part tapering into the style, brown, shortly pedicellate.2n = 30.{\i  N. Europe, southwards to White Russia.} Fe No Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. minimum} Wallr.,{\i  Erst. Beitr. Fl. Hercyn.}{\b  2}: 297 (1840). Stem 8-30 cm, floating, very rarely erect, with 4-9 internodes. Leaves flat, thin, usually translucent, slightly inflated at base. Inflorescence simple. Lowest bract 1-5(-8) cm, scarcely exceeding inflorescence. Female capitula (1-)2-3(-4), usually sessile, remote. Male capitulum separated from the female by an obvious internode, solitary (rarely 2 and then close together and appearing as one). Fruit obovoid, pale brown, sessile, with short, beak-like style. 2n = 30.{\i  Europe southwards to the Pyrenees, N. Appennini and S. Bulgaria.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. hyperboreum} Laest. ex Beurl.,{\i  Öfvers. Kongl. Vet.-Akad. Förhandl.}{\b  9}: 192 (1853). Stem up to 30 cm, floating, with not more than 5 internodes. Leaves elliptical in transverse section, rather thick, not translucent. Inflorescence simple. Lowest bract distinctly longer than inflorescence. Female capitula 2-3(-4), irregularly disposed, the lower mostly pedunculate and remote, the upper sessile and crowded. Male capitulum remote from the female, solitary (rarely 2 and then close together and appearing as one). Fruit broadly obovoid, pale brownish-yellow, shortly pedicellate; style minute or absent. 2n = 30.{\i  Fennoscandia and N. Russia; one station in S. Alps.} Fe Is It No Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 198.        TYPHACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. S.M. Walters. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious. Flowers usually surrounded by hairs or scales (sometimes interpreted as perianth-segments), in 2 dense, superposed, cylindrical, spike-like partial inflorescences, the female below, the male above. Male flowers with simple or forked hairs or linear-lanceolate scales, or naked; stamens in clusters of 1-3 (-8); filaments often irregularly united. Female flowers on branched stalks, with hairs and sometimes also with scales, the branches with sterile flowers. Ovary superior, 1-locular, on a hairy stalk; style persistent; ovule solitary. Fruit dry, usually dehiscent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  All species grow in marshes or shallow water, at the margins of lakes, pools and rivers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.          Typha}         L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.D.K. Cook. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, aquatic or semi-terrestrial perennial herbs, with fibrous roots and creeping rhizomes. Stems erect, corm-like at base. Leaves mostly basal, linear, distichous, erect; sheath closely enveloping the stem, tapering or auriculate above; lamina linear, elongate, semi-cylindrical to flat, sometimes somewhat keeled below, with a layer of air-filled cavities.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: G. Dihoru,{\i  Rev. Roum. Biol.} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 17}: 79-86 (1972). J.-B. Gèze,{\i  Études botaniques et agronomiques sur les} Typha{\i  et quelques autres Plantes palustres.} Villefranche-de-Rouergue. 1912. K.O.P.P. Graebner in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  2}({\b IV. 8}): 8-16 (1900).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The following hybrids have been recorded in nature and have been experimentally produced: {\i T}. × {\i argoviensis} Hausskn. ({\b 5} × {\b 6}), {\i T}. × {\i glauca} Godron ({\i T. elata} Boreau) ({\b 1} × {\b 5}),{\i  T}. × {\i provincialis} A. Camus ({\i T}. × {\i glauca} auct., non Godron) ({\b 2} × {\b 5}), {\i T}. × {\i bavarica} Graebner ({\b 1} × {\b 6}); also {\b 1} × {\b 2}. Varying degrees of fertility are found in these hybrids.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves not more than 3 mm wide; male flowers without 
\par
  hairs and scales; hairs of female flowers distinctly 
\par
  swollen at apex ............................................................................... {\b 3. minima} 
\par
1 Leaves usually more than 3 mm wide; male flowers with hairs or
\par
   scales; hairs of female flowers not or slightly swollen at apex
\par
2 Female flowers with scales
\par
3 Leaf-sheaths usually auriculate; scales of male flowers simple 
\par
   or forked; scales of female flowers dark brown, opaque ........ {\b 1. angustifolia}
\par
3 Leaf-sheaths usually tapering into lamina; scales of 
\par
  male flowers often laciniate at apex; scales of female
\par
  flowers light brown, translucent ............................................. {\b 2. domingensis}
\par
2 Female flowers without scales
\par
4 Leaf-sheaths auriculate; male part of inflorescence 
\par
  2-4 times as long as female ........................................................ {\b 4. laxmannii}
\par
4 Leaf-sheaths tapering into lamina; male part of inflorescence
\par
   not longer than female
\par
5 Female part of inflorescence dark brown when mature, 
\par
  about as long as male; seeds (0·9-)1·2-1·6 mm .............................. {\b 5. latifolia}
\par
5 Female part of inflorescence silvery-grey when mature
\par
  distinctly longer than male; seeds 0·7-0·9 mm ..................... {\b 6. shuttleworthii}
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. angustifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 971 (1753). Usually not more than 200 cm, slender. Leaf-sheaths usually closed at throat; sheath-margins free but parallel, usually auriculate above; lamina 3-6 mm wide, dark green. Flowering stems c. 2/3 as long as leaves. Male and female parts of inflorescence separated by (0·5-)3-8(-12) cm; female part 8-20 × 1·3-2·5 cm, 6-10 times as long as wide, dark or reddish-brown, becoming mottled with age.
\par

\par
275}
\par