{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Male flowers with hairs or linear scales entire or forked at apex; pollen-grains single. Female flowers with spathulate, dark brown, opaque, firm scales; stigmas broad, flat-topped, the same colour as the scales, exceeding scales and hairs. Seeds 1-1·3 mm. 2n = 30. {\i Most of Europe, northwards to} 63°{\i  N. in Finland}. All except ?Al Az Bl Cr Fa ?Gr Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Some of the records for S. Europe are perhaps referable to {\b 2}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. domingensis} (Pers.) Steudel,{\i  Nomencl. Bot.} 860 (1824) ({\i T. angustata} Bory & Chaub.). Up to 300 cm or more, robust. Leaf-sheaths usually open at throat; sheath-margins free, usually tapering into a pale to yellowish-green lamina 5-12 mm wide. Flowering stems equalling or slightly shorter than leaves. Male and female parts of inflorescence separated by 0·5-6 cm; female part 15-25 × 1·5-2·5 cm, 10 or more times as long as wide, light brown. Male flowers with linear scales often laciniate at apex; pollen-grains usually single. Female flowers with obovate-apiculate, pale brown, translucent, fragile scales; stigmas linear, darker than the scales, at least as long as scales and hairs. Seeds 0·8-1·2 mm. 2n = 30.{\i  S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu ?Rm Rs (W, E) Sa Si Tu [He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. T. minima} Funck in Hoppe, {\i Bot. Taschenb.}{\b  1794}: 118, 187 (1794). 25-75 cm, slender. Leaf-sheaths open at throat; lamina usually absent on flowering stems, the lamina of leaves on the non-flowering stems 1-2(-3) mm wide. Flowering stems shorter than leaves. Male and female parts of the inflorescence contiguous or separated; female part 1·5-4·5 cm, oblong-ovoid to cylindrical, dark brown, often subtended by a leaf-like bract. Male flowers without scales or hairs; pollen-grains in tetrads. Female flowers with spathulate scales; hairs with swollen, globose apex, as long as scales; stigmas linear, longer than hairs. Fruits indehiscent.{\i  Usually on river-gravels; somewhat calcicole. C. Europe, extending to E. Romania, Italy and S.E. France.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  T. lugdunensis} P. Chab.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Hort. Rhône}{\b  1850}: 49 (1850) ({\i T. martinii} Jordan, {\i T. gracilis} Jordan, non Rafin.), recorded from river-banks in E. France, W. Switzerland and S.W. Germany, is like {\b 3}, but a lamina is present in leaves on flowering stems. In Europe this plant appears to be distinct and flowers later than 3, but in S.W. & C. Asia similar plants are found which grade into{\b  3}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. T. laxmannii} Lepechin,{\i  Nova Acta Acad. Sci. Petrop. }{\b 12}: ,84 (1801) ({\i T. stenophylla} Fischer & C. A. Meyer). (70-)80-120 (-150) cm, slender. Leaf-sheaths usually open at throat; sheath-margins usually auriculate; lamina 2-4(-7) mm wide. Flowering stems shorter than leaves. Male and female parts of inflorescence separated by (0·5-)1-6 cm; female part (3-)4-9(-12) cm, ¼-½ as long as male part, oblong-ovoid to ovoid, pale brown. Male flowers with hairs and scales; pollen-grains single. Female flowers without scales; stigmas flattened, elliptical, longer than hairs. Seeds 0·95-1·1 mm.{\i  S.E. Europe.} ?Al Bu Gr Rm Rs (W, ?K, E) [Cz *Ga Ge Hu *It].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. T. latifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 971 (1753). Up to 200 cm or more, robust. Leaf-sheaths usually open at throat; sheath-margins free, usually tapering at throat into a pale green lamina 8-20 mm wide. Flowering stems somewhat shorter than leaves. Male and female parts of inflorescence usually contiguous or separated by not more than 2·5 cm; female part (5-)8-15(-21) × 1·8-3 cm, up to 6 times as long as wide, dark brown, blotched with white in age; male part (3-)6-14(-21) cm. Male flowers with simple hairs; pollen-grains in tetrads. Female flowers without scales; hairs 30-50, borne on a zone (0·7-)1-1·6(-3·5) mm long at base of gynophore; stigmas lanceolate to rhombic, fleshy, persistent, brown or dark brown, longer than hairs. Seeds (0·9-)1·2-1·5(-1·6) mm. 2n = 30.{\i  Almost throughout Europe}. All except Az Cr Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. T. shuttleworthii} Koch & Sonder in Koch,{\i  Syn. Fl. Germ.} ed. 2, 786 (1844). Usually not more than 150 cm, robust. Leaf-sheaths usually open at throat; sheath-margins free, usually tapering at throat into a pale green lamina 5-10(-15) mm wide. Flowering stems somewhat shorter than leaves. Male and female parts of inflorescence contiguous or very nearly so; female part (5-)6-14(-20) cm, brown when young, becoming silvery-grey with age; male part 1-9 cm. Male flowers with simple hairs; pollen grains in tetrads. Female flowers without scales; hairs 5-25, borne on a zone (0·3-)0·5-0·6(-1·2) mm long at base of gynophore; stigmas lanceolate, fleshy, persistent, about as long as the hairs. Seeds 0·7-0·9 mm.{\i  Somewhat calcifuge. S.C. & S.E. Europe, extending to E. France and N. Italy.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He ?Hu It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc  CYPERALES
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 199.   CYPERACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. S.M. Walters. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, usually glabrous and rhizomatous. Stems usually solid, often trigonous. Leaves often grass-like, sometimes reduced to sheaths. Flowers wind-pollinated, hermaphrodite or unisexual, each in the axil of a glume and arranged in 1- to many-flowered spikelets. Spikelets solitary or variously aggregated in compound, often bracteate inflorescences, and often with 1 or more empty glumes. Perianth absent, or composed of bristles (more rarely scales). Stamens usually 2 or 3, with basifixed anthers. Style simple; stigmas 2 or 3. Ovary unilocular, with solitary, erect ovule. Nut usually with 2 or 3 angles. Seed endospermic.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Two important new treatments of this family have appeared, wholly or in part, during the preparation of this account. These have been taken into consideration, but the reader is referred to them for more detailed, if occasionally divergent, information. These are T. V. Egorova in An. A. Fedorov,{\i  Fl. Part. Eur. URSS}{\b  2}: 83-219 (1976); and W. Schultze-Motel in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur}. ed. 3, {\b 2}({\b 1}): 1 (1966).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 All leaves reduced to sheaths
\par
2 Nut with a persistent, usually swollen style-base ..................... {\b 4. Eleocharis}
\par
2 Nut without a persistent style-base
\par
3 Glumes spirally arranged ............................................................... {\b 1. Scirpus}
\par
3 Glumes distichous ........................................................................ {\b 7. Cyperus}
\par
1 At least some leaves with well-developed lamina
\par
4 Perianth-bristles conspicuous, silky, much exceeding 
\par
  the glumes, at least in fruit
\par
5 Perianth-bristles numerous ..................................................... {\b 3. Eriophorum}
\par
5 Perianth-bristles 4-6 ....................................................................... {\b 1. Scirpus}
\par

\par
276}
\par