{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 4 Perianth-bristles absent, or inconspicuous and not 
\par
  exceeding the glumes
\par
6 Flowers unisexual; nut enclosed in a utricle or closely
\par
  enfolded by a scale
\par
7 Nut enfolded by a scale, the margins of which are free
\par
  or connate only at the base ......................................................... {\b 11. Kobresia}
\par
7 Nut enclosed in a utricle ................................................................ {\b 12. Carex}
\par
6 Flowers mostly hermaphrodite; nut neither enclosed in a
\par
  utricle nor enfolded by a scale
\par
8 Glumes distichous
\par
9 Glumes less than 4 mm ................................................................ {\b 7. Cyperus}
\par
9 Glumes more than 4 mm
\par
10 Plant with stout, creeping rhizome, rarely somewhat
\par
   caespitose ..................................................................................... {\b 7. Cyperus}
\par
10 Plant densely caespitose, without creeping rhizome .............. {\b 10. Schoenus}
\par
8  Glumes spirally arranged
\par
11 Style with long, patent hairs; annual (rarely perennial) ....... {\b 6. Fimbristylis}
\par
11 Style without long, patent hairs; usually perennial
\par
12 Spikelets distichously arranged in a spike .................................{\b  2. Blysmus}
\par
12 Spikelets not distichously arranged
\par
13 Spikelet solitary ........................................................................... {\b 1. Scirpus} 
\par
13 Spikelets 2 or more
\par
14 Spikelets with 1-3 flowers (though also with empty 
\par
   glumes at the base)
\par
15 Leaves 10-15 mm wide; perianth-bristles absent ...................... {\b 8. Cladium}
\par
15 Leaves 1-3 mm wide; perianth-bristles 5-13 ....................{\b  9. Rhynchospora}
\par
14 Spikelets with more than 3 flowers
\par
16 Glumes puberulent ......................................................................{\b  5. Fuirena}
\par
16 Glumes glabrous (though sometimes ciliate on keel, or scabrid)
\par
17 Glumes with a curved arista ....................................................... {\b 7. Cyperus}
\par
17 Glumes without a curved arista (sometimes shortly 
\par
   mucronate)
\par 18 Bracts 3-8 ............................................................. {\b 7. Cyperus}
\par
18 Bracts 1 or 2 ................................................................................. {\b 1. Scirpus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.          Scirpus}      L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  (Incl. {\i Bolboschoenus} (Ascherson) Palla, {\i Holoschoenus}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Link, {\i Isolepis} R. Br., {\i Schoenoplectus} (Reichenb.) Palla,
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\i Trichophorum} Pers.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By R.A. DeFilipps. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials or annuals. Stems terete or trigonous, usually leafy. Inflorescence of 1 or more variously arranged, but never distichous, spikelets, usually bracteate. Spikelets 1- to many-flowered, terete. Glumes spirally arranged. Flowers hermaphrodite; perianth of 0-6 bristles. Stamens 1-3. Stigmas 2-3. Nut trigonous or biconvex, usually apiculate, without a persistent style-base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b S. pendulus} Muhl., {\i Descr. Gram. Amer. Sept.} 44 (1817) ({\i S. lineatus} auct., non Michx), native of North America, has been recorded from N.E. Switzerland and S.E. Czechoslovakia, and is perhaps becoming naturalized; it is a caespitose perennial with robust, leafy stems 50-150 cm, bracts shorter than the inflorescence, numerous brownish spikelets on drooping pedicels in a lax inflorescence, with lateral inflorescences often present, and perianth-bristles scarcely exceeding the glumes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spikelets in globose heads ................................................ {\b 11. holoschoenus}
\par
1 Spikelets not in globose heads
\par
2 Stems branched, submerged or (in land form) procumbent ........ {\b 16. fluitans}
\par
2 Stems simple, erect or ascending
\par
3 Inflorescence obviously terminal
\par
4 Spikelet solitary, without bracts
\par
5 Plant with long stolons; perianth-bristles absent or 
\par
  less than ½ as long as nut ............................................................. {\b 19. pumilus}
\par
5 Plant without stolons; perianth-bristles longer than nut
\par
6 Stems terete, smooth; perianth-bristles not more than 4 mm .. {\b 18. cespitosus}
\par
6 Stems trigonous, scabrid at apex; perianth-bristles up
\par
  to 25 mm ............................................................................... {\b 17. hudsonianus}
\par
4 Spikelets more than 1, or solitary and with obvious,
\par
  leaflike bracts
\par
7 Spikelets more than 8 mm, few, in a ± condensed inflorescence
\par
   .................................................................................................... {\b 3. maritimus}
\par
7 Spikelets less than 8 mm, numerous, in a lax inflorescence
\par
8 Rooting, procumbent non-flowering shoots often present;
\par
  perianth-bristles flexuous, smooth ................................................ {\b 2. radicans}
\par
8 Rooting non-flowering shoots absent; perianth-bristles
\par
  straight, rough ............................................................................. {\b 1. sylvaticus}
\par
3 Inflorescence apparently lateral, with a stem-like bract
\par
  usually overtopping spikelets
\par
9 Annual; stems less than 2 mm in diameter
\par
10 Bract less than 2 cm
\par
11 Nut with concave sides and acute angles ...................... {\b 13. pseudosetaceus}
\par
11 Nut with convex sides and obtuse angles
\par
12 Nut usually shiny, with prominent longitudinal ribs ............... {\b 12. setaceus}
\par
12 Nut dull, smooth or finely papillose ......................................... {\b 14. cernuus}
\par
10 Bract more than 2 cm
\par
13 Nut c. 1 mm, prominently transversely rugose ............................ {\b 9. supinus}
\par
13 Nut c. 2 mm, smooth or obscurely rugose .............................. {\b 10. juncoides}
\par
9  Perennial, often robust or rhizomatous; stems usually
\par
   more than 2 mm in diameter
\par
14 Caespitose, with stems never more than 100 cm
\par
15 Stems not more than 1 mm in diameter
\par
16 Nut with convex sides and obtuse angles ................................ {\b 12. setaceus}
\par
16 Nut with concave sides and acute angles ...................... {\b 13. pseudosetaceus}
\par
15 Stems at least 2 mm in diameter
\par
17 Lowest bract exceeding inflorescence;
   perianth-bristles (4-)6 .............................................................. {\b 5. mucronatus}
\par
17 Lowest bract shorter than inflorescence; perianth-
\par
   bristles absent ............................................................................... {\b 15. prolifer}
\par
14 Rhizomatous, with stems often more than 100 cm
\par
18 Stems terete ................................................................................ {\b 4. lacustris}
\par
18 Stems trigonous
\par
19 Stems with 2 or 3 leaves; perianth-bristles absent or
\par
   rudimentary .................................................................................. {\b 6. pungens}
\par
19 Stems leafless except for uppermost sheath which 
\par
   usually bears a lamina; perianth-bristles well
\par
   developed 
\par
20 Perianth-bristles spathulate ......................................................... {\b 7. litoralis} 
\par
20 Perianth-bristles linear ............................................................... {\b 8. triqueter}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. SCIRPUS. Terrestrial, rhizomatous perennials. Stems simple, trigonous, leafy. Inflorescence terminal, compound. Perianth-bristles 6. Stamens and stigmas 3. Nut trigonous, smooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. sylvaticus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 51 (1753). Rooting non-flowering shoots absent. Stems 30-120 cm, glabrous, solitary. Leaves 5-20 mm wide, flat, scabrid on midvein and margin. Bracts 2-4, leaf-like to setaceous. Spikelets 3-4 mm, ovoid, obtuse, in fascicles of 2-5(-9) at apices of ultimate rays. Glumes 1·5-2·9 mm, ovate, obtuse, mucronulate, green or greenish-brown, ciliate on margin and apex. Perianth-bristles as long as or slightly longer than nut, retrorsely barbed, straight. Nut c. 1 mm, obovoid or subglobose, dull, yellowish-brown. 2n = 62, 64.{\i  Damp, usually shady places. Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par
277}
\par