{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs36\qc   PANDANALES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 197.     SPARGANIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. S.M. Walters. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious. Flowers in unisexual, sessile or pedunculate, globose capitula, the female capitula below, the male above. Perianth-segments scale-like, (1-)3-4(-6) in female flowers, 1 in male flowers. Stamens 1-8. Ovary superior, 1(-3)-locular. Fruit dry, indehiscent, 1-seeded; exocarp spongy; endocarp hard; style persistent (rarely minute or absent).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.       Sparganium}         L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.D.K. Cook. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, aquatic or semi-terrestrial perennial herbs, with fibrous roots and creeping rhizomes. Stems erect or floating. Leaves linear, distichous, sheathing at base, erect or floating, gradually passing into scale-like bracts.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All species occur in still or slowly running fresh water.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: K.O.P.P. Graebner in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  2(IV-10}): 10-24 (1900). W. Rothert, {\i Acta Horti Bot. Univ. Jurjev.}{\b  11}: 11-32 (1910).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perianth-segments thick, with dark brown to black apex;
\par
  seeds with 6-10 longitudinal ridges; inflorescence 
\par
  usually much branched ................................................................... {\b 1. erectum}
\par
1 Perianth-segments thin, uniformly light brown; seeds 
\par
  without longitudinal ridges; inflorescence simple or 
\par
  with a few branches at base
\par
2 Style in fruit deflexed; inflorescence usually with 1 or 2
\par
   branches at base, the branches bearing 2-3 female capitula ... {\b 2. gramineum}
\par
2 Style in fruit straight; inflorescence simple, the 
\par
  lower female capitula often stalked
\par
3 Leaves sharply keeled; female capitula crowded together;
\par
  male capitulum or capitula usually contiguous with 
\par
  uppermost female capitulum ................................................... {\b 5. glomeratum}
\par
3 Leaves 3-angled or flat, not keeled; female capitula 
\par
  remote; male capitulum or capitula remote from uppermost
\par
  female capitulum
\par
4 Male capitula more than 3, remote; leaves triangular in
\par
  transverse section near base ......................................................... {\b 3. emersum}
\par
4 Male capitula not more than 3, crowded together;
\par
  leaves not triangular in transverse section near base
\par
5 Style minute or absent; fruits broadly obovoid .................... {\b 7. hyperboreum}
\par
5 Style distinct, beak-like; fruits ellipsoid to obovoid 
\par
6 Leaf-like bract subtending lowest female capitulum 
\par
  10-60 cm, at least twice as long as inflorescence;
\par
  leaves inflated at base; male capitula usually 2,
\par
  contiguous and appearing as one elongated capitulum ........ {\b 4. angustifolium} 
\par
6 Leaf-like bract subtending lowest female capitulum 
\par
  1-5(-8) cm, scarcely exceeding inflorescence; leaves 
\par
  only slightly inflated at base; male capitulum usually
\par
  solitary, globose .......................................................................... {\b 6. minimum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Sparganium.} Perianth-segments thick, with dark brown to black apex. Seeds with 6-10 longitudinal ridges.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. erectum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 971 (1753) ({\i S. ramosum} Hudson). Semi-terrestrial herb (30-)50-150(-200) cm, robust, erect. Leaves usually erect, rarely floating, triangular in transverse section, keeled below. Inflorescence branched, very rarely simple, with male capitula borne above female capitula on lateral branches.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\i Throughout Europe except for some islands.} All except Az Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Fruit 7-9 mm (excluding style), 2-3·5 mm wide, ellipsoid,
\par
  the upper and lower parts both shiny, light brown,
\par
  almost terete; ovary 1-locular ........................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b neglectum}
\par
1 Fruit obpyramidal, the upper part dull, dark brown or 
\par
  black the lower part shiny, light brown, distinctly 
\par
  angled in transverse section
\par
2 Fruit (5-)6-8(-10) mm (excluding style), (3-)4-6(-7) mm wide,
\par
  the upper part flattened; ovary (1-)2(-3)-locular ................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b erectum}
\par
2 Fruit 6-7(-8) mm (excluding style), 2·5-4·5 mm wide, the
\par
  upper part domed and rugose below style; ovary usually
\par
  1-, rarely 2-locular ..................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b microcarpum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b erectum} ({\i S. ramosum} subsp. {\i polyedrum} Ascherson & Graebner, {\i S. erectum} subsp.{\i  polyedrum} (Ascherson & Graebner) Schinz & Thell., {\i S. polyedrum} (Ascherson & Graebner) Juz.): {\i Much of Europe, but absent from most of the north.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b microcarpum} (Neuman) Domin,{\i  Preslia}{\b  13-15}: 53 (1935), {\i S. erectum} subsp.{\i  neglectum} var.{\i  microcarpum} (Neuman) Hayek,{\i  S. microcarpum} (Neuman) Celak.):{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b neglectum} (Beeby) Schinz & Thell. in Schinz & R. Keller,{\i  Fl. Schweiz} ed. 3, {\b 2}: 14 (1914) ({\i S. neglectum} Beeby,{\i  S. ramosum} subsp. {\i neglectum} (Beeby) Neuman): 2n = 30.{\i  Most of Europe, northwards to }c. 58°{\i  N. in Sweden}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. erectum} subsp. {\b oocarpum} (Celak.) Domin, {\i Preslia }{\b 13-15}: 53 (1935) ({\i S. ramosum} var.{\i  oocarpum} (Celak.) Ascherson & Graebner,{\i  S. erectum} subsp. {\i neglectum} var.{\i  oocarpum} (Celak.) Hayek), with uniformly light brown, ovoid to globose fruit 5-8 × 4-7 mm, is only partly fertile and may be the hybrid{\i  S. erectum} subsp. {\i erectum} × subsp. {\i neglectum}; it occurs throughout most of Europe but is commonest in the south-east.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Subgen.{\b  Xanthosparganium} Holmberg. Perianth-segments thin, uniformly light brown. Seeds smooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Hybrids between all the species in this subgenus have been reported. {\b 2} × {\b 3} and {\b 2} × {\b 4} (both often called {\i S. speirocephalum} Neuman) are widespread and often replace the parents in parts of N. Fennoscandia. {\b 3} × {\b 4} is widespread and often locally abundant.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. gramineum} Georgi,{\i  Bemerk. Reise}{\b  1}: 232 (1775) ({\i S. friesii} Beurl.). Stem up to 100 cm, floating. Leaves very long, floating, plano-convex or semi-terete, not inflated at base. Inflorescence elongate, often branched at base; branches with 2-3 female capitula and often without male capitula; main axis with 3-7 female capitula and 2-6 male capitula. Lower bracts longer than inflorescence, usually floating. Capitula remote, axillary, sessile, or lower female capitula pedunculate. Fruit ovoid, dark grey to dark brown, pedicellate; style abruptly deflexed from base. 2n = 30.{\i  N. Europe, westwards to E. Norway}. Fe No Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. emersum} Rehmann,{\i  Verh. Naturf. Ver. Brünn }{\b 10}, {\i Abh.}: 80 (1871) ({\i S. diversifolium} Graebner, {\i S. simplex }Hudson). Stem 20-60 cm, erect or floating. Leaves both erect and floating, triangular in transverse section, sheathing but not inflated at base. Inflorescence simple. Lower bracts longer than the inflorescence,
\par

\par
274}
\par