{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. italicum} Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict}. ed. 8, no. 2 (1768). Plant 25-50(-70) cm. Tuber c. 5 cm, horizontal. Leaves appearing in autumn or early winter; lamina 15-35 cm, sagittate to hastate, shiny; petiole 15-40 cm. Peduncle usually 1/3-1/2 as long as petioles, rarely almost as long. Spathe 15-40 cm, drooping early at apex. Spadix 1/3(-1/2) as long as spathe; appendix stout, yellow. Sterile flowers present above and below the male. Fruiting spike 10-15 cm. Flowering in late spring or early summer.{\i  Hedges and disturbed ground. S. & W. Europe, northwards to S. England.} Al Az Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spathe tinged with purple, at least at the margin;
\par
  peduncle nearly as long as petioles .............................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b byzantinum}
\par
1 Spathe white or pale greenish-yellow, not tinged or 
\par
  edged with  purple, though rarely with purple spots;
\par
  peduncle much shorter than petioles   
\par
2 Spathe pure white inside ............................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b albispathum}
\par
2 Spathe pale greenish-yellow inside  
\par
3 Leaves with conspicuous whitish veins; lateral lobes
\par
  divergent .............................................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b italicum}
\par
3 Leaves concolorous or with dark spots; lateral lobes 
\par
  convergent, sometimes overlapping ............................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b neglectum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b italicum}: Leaves with conspicuous whitish veins; lateral lobes divergent. Peduncle much shorter than petioles. Spathe pale greenish-yellow. Seeds 3-4. 2n = 84.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species.} 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b neglectum} (Townsend) Prime, {\i Watsonia}{\b  5}: 107  (1961): Leaves concolorous, or rarely with dark spots; lateral lobes convergent, sometimes overlapping. Peduncle much shorter than petioles. Spathe pale greenish-yellow. Seeds 1-2. 2n = 84.{\i  W. Europe and W. Mediterranean region}. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b albispathum} (Steven) Prime, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 384 (1978) ({\i A. albispathum} Steven): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but spathe pure white inside, greenish outside.{\i  Krym}. ({\i S.W. Asia.}) 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b byzantinum} (Blume) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 755 (1882): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but peduncle nearly as long as petioles; spathe pale green, tinged with purple at least on the margin.{\i  E. part of Balkan peninsula, Kriti.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. maculatum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }966 (1753). Plant 25-40 cm. Tuber c. 2 cm, horizontal. Leaves appearing in spring; lamina (7-)10-20 cm, hastate to sagittate, often with blackish spots, usually shiny; petiole 15-25 cm. Peduncle at least 2/3 as long as petioles, sometimes about equalling them. Spathe 10-20(-25) cm, pale yellowish-green, often with purple margin and spots. Spadix c. ½ as long as spathe; appendix purple, rarely yellow. Sterile flowers present above and below the male. Fruiting spike 3-4 cm. Seeds 1-3. Flowering in late spring. 2n = 56.{\i  Woods and hedges; somewhat calcicole. W., C. & S. Europe, northwards to Scotland, and extending eastwards to W. Ukraine.} ?Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm  Rs (W) Sa ?Si ?Tu [Da].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The geographical limits in the east are uncertain owing to confusion with {\b 3}, and in parts of the south owing to confusion with {\b 1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. orientale} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 407 (1808). Plant 10-40 cm. Tuber 2·5-5 cm in diameter, vertical, more or less discoid. Leaves appearing in spring; lamina 10-30 cm, sagittate, not spotted; petiole 10-20 cm. Peduncle 8-25 cm. Spathe 7-15 cm, pale green, variably tinged with purple but not spotted. Spadix c. 2/3 as long as spathe; appendix dull purple. Sterile flowers present above and below the male. Fruiting spike c. 7 cm.  Flowering in late spring or early summer.{\i  Shady places. E.C. Europe and Balkan peninsula, extending locally northwards to S. Sweden, westwards to Sicilia and eastwards to Krym.} ?Al Au Bu Cz Da Gr Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K) Si Su ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The form of the tuber is the only certain character by which this species can be distinguished from {\b 2}, though other characters can give confirmatory evidence. The correlation between tuber-shape and chromosome-number has, however, been sufficiently demonstrated in several different parts of Europe to justify the maintenance of two distinct species.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Appendix of spadix narrowed below to a distinct stalk;
\par
  leaves shiny ....................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b orientale}
\par
1 Appendix of spadix without distinct stalk; leaves dull
\par
3 Appendix of spadix 3-4 mm in diameter .......................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b lucanum}
\par
3 Appendix of spadix 5-7 mm in diameter .......................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b danicum} 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b orientale} (incl.{\i  A. besseranum} Schott): 2n = 28.{\i  From Poland and E. Austria eastwards to Krym.}  
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lucanum} (Cavara & Grande) Prime,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 384 (1978) ({\i A. lucanum} Cavara & Grande): 2n = 28. {\i C. & S. Italy, Sicilia; S.W. Jugoslavia.}  
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b danicum} (Prime) Prime, {\i loc. cit}. (1978) ({\i A. maculatum} subsp.{\i  danicum} Prime): 2n = 28.{\i  E. Denmark, S. Sweden.}  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. elongatum} Steven, {\i Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  30}({\b 3}): 67 (1857) ({\i A. orientale} subsp.{\i  elongatum} (Steven) Engler). Like {\b 3}({\b a}) but leaves appearing in autumn; spathe up to 25 cm, brownish-purple inside; spadix about as long as spathe, with appendix indistinctly stalked; flowering in spring. Fruiting spike 5-7 cm.{\i  Woods and scrub. S. Ukraine; E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Rs (W, K, E) ?Tu.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. petteri} Schott, {\i Syn. Aroid.} 12 (1856) ({\i A. nigrum} Schott). Plant 25-50 cm. Tuber 5-7 cm in diameter, vertical, subglobose. Leaves appearing in autumn, dull green; lamina 10-20 cm, hastate to hastate-sagittate; petiole 20-30 cm. Peduncle c. 5 cm. Spathe 15-20 cm, purplish-black. Spadix much shorter than spathe; appendix stout, dark purplish-grey. Sterile flowers present above and below the male. Flowering in spring.{\i  Stony ground. • W. Jugoslavia, N. Greece.} Gr Ju.   
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A plant from S.E. Italy described as {\i A. nigrum} var. {\i apulum} Carano is probably a hybrid between {\b 1}({\b a}) and {\b 3}({\b b}). It has 2n = 56.   
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. longispathum} Reichenb.,{\i  Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  7}: 5 (1845) ({\i A. orientale} subsp. {\i longispathum} (Reichenb.) Engler), described from a single gathering from W. Jugoslavia, resembles{\b  5} in some features and {\b 1} in others, but differs from both in the narrow, long-acuminate lamina of the spathe. Assessment of its taxonomic status must await its rediscovery.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. creticum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 13}): 9 (1853). Plant 30-40 cm. Tuber 2-5 cm in diameter, vertical, subglobose. Leaves appearing in autumn; lamina 8-15 cm, hastate-sagittate, dark green, shiny, the basal lobes with an angular segment projecting outwards and a rounded segment overlapping the sinus; petiole c. 25 cm. Peduncle as long as petioles or longer. Spathe 7-12 cm, white, pale green or yellow, less constricted and more inflated at base than in other species. Spadix shorter or longer than spathe, dark purple or yellow. Sterile flowers often absent; if present, few and small. Flowering in spring. 2n = 28.{\i  Stony mountain sides. • Kriti.} Cr.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. pictum} L. fil.,{\i  Suppl.} 410 (1781). Plant 30-50 cm. Tuber c. 5 cm in diameter, vertical, subglobose. Leaves appearing in autumn, with or shortly after the inflorescence; lamina 15-30 cm, cordate-sagittate, shiny, delicately white-veined; petiole 20-25 cm, with wide, sheathing base. Peduncle 5-10 cm. Spathe 
\par

\par
270}
\par