{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 partly concealing upper part of spadix. Spadix shorter than or equalling spathe, with long appendix. Flowers unisexual, without perianth, the female 1-6, at extreme base of spadix, with c. 20 male flowers immediately above them; sterile flowers absent. Stamen 1. Ovary 1-locular; berry greenish.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Spathe acute to mucronate; appendix of spadix greenish,
\par
  with cylindrical, clavate or globular apex ...................................... {\b 1. vulgare}
\par
Spathe terminating in a long, filiform process much longer
\par
  than the remainder; appendix of spadix with whitish,
\par
  oblong lingulate apex ........................................................... {\b 2. proboscideum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. vulgare} Targ.-Tozz., {\i Ann. Mus. Firenze.}{\b  2}({\b 2}): 67 (1810). Stock an irregular, more or less ovoid tuber. Plant 20-40 cm. Leaves 6-12 × 4-10 cm, ovate to hastate-sagittate, obtuse or shortly mucronate, cordate at base; petiole long and slender, purple-spotted. Spathe 3-5 cm, erect, the basal part pale green with longitudinal stripes of dull reddish-purple, the upper part dark green to purplish-brown. Appendix of spadix greenish. Female flowers 4-5. Seeds 2-6.{\i  Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal, Açores.} Al Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b vulgare}: Scapes about equalling petioles. Upper part of spathe and spadix curved forward; appendix of spadix somewhat exserted from spathe, its apex cylindrical or somewhat clavate. 2n = 56.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b simorrhinum} (Durieu) Maire & Weiller in Maire,{\i  Fl. Afr. Nord }{\b 4}: 241 (1957): Scapes much shorter than petioles. Spathe and spadix erect, scarcely curved forward; apex of appendix of spadix enlarged to form a globular mass which more or less closes the mouth of the spathe.{\i  S.& E. Spain. }({\i N. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. proboscideum} (L.) Savi,{\i  Osserv. Div. Piante} 6 (1816). Stock a short, slender rhizome. Plant 12-20(-30) cm. Leaves 6-15 cm, sagittate, obtuse or mucronate; petioles not spotted. Scapes much shorter than petioles. Spathe dark brown or brownish-green distally, paler proximally, sometimes striped with dull purple, the apical part strongly cucullate, curved forward, and terminating in a filiform process 5-15 cm long. Appendix of spadix with swollen, oblong-lingulate, whitish apex, included in spathe. Female flowers 1- 3. Seeds numerous. 2n = 28.{\i  Shady places. • C. & S. Italy; S.W. Spain}. Hs It.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Cultivated in gardens as a curiosity, the upper part of the spathe (which is all that protrudes from beneath the leaves) bearing a striking resemblance to the tail and hind-quarters of a mouse.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 9.      Ambrosina}        Bassi      
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.T. Prime. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stock a short, tuberous rhizome. Leaves long-petiolate, entire. Spathe persistent, with free, somewhat overlapping margins, enfolding the whole spadix. Spadix winged, with wings adnate to the spathe, bearing a single female flower at the base and a few male flowers on the opposite side near the apex; appendix short, conical. Perianth absent. Anthers 2, sessile. Style present. Ovary 1-locular; fruit a rather dry berry; seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. bassii} L.,{\i  Gen. Pl.} ed. 6, 579 (1764). Petioles and inflorescence procumbent to ascending. Leaves 2-6 × 1·5-3 cm, broadly lanceolate to orbicular-oblong, sometimes veined and spotted with purplish-red; petiole slender. Scape shorter than leaves. Spathe and spadix more or less horizontal. Spathe c. 2 cm, green with purple spots, boat-shaped with margins directed upwards, abruptly narrowed to a purple, subulate, suberect apex. Spadix with lateral wings adnate to spathe, so as to divide the cavity of the latter into an upper and a lower chamber, the upper side bearing a female flower at the base and numerous slender papillae distal to it, the lower side bearing c. 8 male flowers in 2 rows.{\i  Grassland and low scrub. C. & S. Italy and islands of C. Mediterranean region.} Co It Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 10.         Dracunculus}        Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.T. Prime &  D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stock a tuber. Leaves long-petiolate, deeply divided pedately into more or less numerous segments. Spathe withering before fruit is ripe, the lower part convolute, with overlapping margins, closely enfolding the base of the spadix, the upper part more or less flat. Spadix about as long as spathe, with a short floral zone and a long, stout appendix. Flowers unisexual, without perianth; zones of male and female flowers of about equal length. Stamens 2-3. Ovary 1-locular; seeds few.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Adaxial surface of spathe and appendix of spadix smooth 
\par
  and glabrous ................................................................................... {\b 1. vulgaris} 
\par
Adaxial surface of spathe hairy; appendix of spadix 
\par
  covered with filiform processes ............................................... {\b 2. muscivorus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. vulgaris} Schott in Schott & Endl.,{\i  Melet. Bot.} 17 (1832) ({\i Arum dracunculus} L.). Plant up to 100 cm. Leaves 15-20 × 25-35 cm, more or less reniform in outline; segments 9-15, elliptical to oblong-lanceolate, acute; petiole with long, wide sheathing base, spotted with dark purple, concealing base of scape so as to make some leaves appear cauline. Spathe 20-40(-55) cm, glabrous, with abaxial surface greenish and adaxial dark brownish-purple; upper part lanceolate, erect; margins undulate. Spadix with male and female zones almost contiguous; sterile flowers few, sometimes absent; appendix with short, pale stalk, the remainder dark purple. Berry orange-red. 2n = 32. {\i Woods and scrub. E. & C. Mediterranean region, extending to S. Bulgaria; cultivated as a curiosity and occasionally naturalized elsewhere.} ?Al Bu Co Cr Gr It Ju Sa Si [Ga ?Hs Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. D. muscivorus} (L. fil.) Parl., {\i Fl. Ital.}{\b  2}: 253 (1857) ({\i Arum muscivorum} L. fil.). Like {\b 1} but leaves more irregularly divided, with shape and size of segments very variable (often with the median segment much wider than the others); petiole-base with lilac spots; upper part of spathe broadly ovate, more or less patent, with adaxial surface hairy, greenish with purple streaks; conspicuous sterile flowers present above and below the male flowers, those above gradually passing into slender, subulate processes which cover the appendix. 2n = 56.{\i  Scrub and grassy places, mostly near the sea. Islands of W. Mediterranean region.} Bl Co Sa.
\par

\par
272}
\par