{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. G. fibrosa} (Desf.) Schultes & Schultes fil., {\i op. cit.} 552 (1829) (incl.{\i  G. rigida }Boiss. & Spruner). Plants solitary. Stem 2-8 cm. Bulb usually covered with recurved fibrous roots and with a collar up to 0·8 cm. Basal leaf flat. Perianth segments 14-20 mm. {\i Dry, clayey slopes. Aegean region.} Gr. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Perhaps conspecific with {\b 5}; plants intermediate between {\b 5} & {\b 6} occur, and some of the variation may be due to ecological factors. Further study is required. Plants like {\b 6} but with the bulb bearing stolons terminating in bulbils have been called {\b G. commutata} C. Koch, {\i Linnaea }{\b 22}: 227 (1849). They occur in Kriti and may represent a distinct species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. G. taurica} Steven, {\i Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  30}({\b 3}): 83 (1857). Like {\b 6} but bulb without, or with an indistinct fibrous collar; basal leaf subterete perianth-segments 12-14 mm. {\i Dry hillsides. Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  G. ucrainica} Klokov,{\i  Ukr. Bot. Zur.}{\b  3}: 16 (1926), from S. & E.C. Ukraine, also with short perianth-segments, is otherwise intermediate between {\b 5} and {\b 6}, with a short collar and keeled basal leaf. Its status is obscure.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. G. bulbifera} (Pallas) Schultes & Schultes fil., {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  7}: 552 (1829). Bulb solitary. Stems grey-pubescent. Leaves crowded, alternate, the basal not distinct from the cauline, filiform, with bulbils. Flowers 1-3; pedicels glabrous. Perianth-segments 7-12 mm, lanceolate, attenuate at apex, the 3 inner with a claw and undulate margin. Capsule oblong-ovoid, obtuse; seeds compressed.{\i  Steppes and stony slopes. S.E. Europe, from E. Romania to W. Kazakhstan.} Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. G. graeca} (L.) A. Terracc., {\i Mém. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  2}: 25 (1905) ({\i Lloydia graeca} (L.) Endl. ex Kunth). Glabrous. Bulb solitary. Basal leaves 2-4, linear, cauline alternate, linear-lanceolate. Flowers (1-)3-5(-7). Perianth-segments 10-15 mm, obovate-oblong, white, with usually 3 purple stripes, glabrous. Style 1·8-2·5 mm. Anthers 0·5-1 mm, obtuse; seeds compressed.{\i  Rocky ground. S. Greece and Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. G. trinervia} (Viv.) W. Greuter, {\i Israel Jour. Bot.}{\b  19}: 159 (1970) ({\i Lloydia graeca} auct. ital., non (L.) Endl. ex Kunth). Like {\b 9}, but flowers 1(-3); style usually more than 2·5 mm; anthers 2-3 mm, with an acute apical appendage.{\i  Shady places. Sicilia}. Si. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. G. spathacea} (Hayne) Salisb.,{\i  Ann. Bot.} ({\i Konig & Sims}) {\b 2}: 556 (1806). Bulbs 2, in a common tunic. Stem glabrous. Basal leaves 2, narrowly linear, fistular; cauline solitary, oblong-lanceolate, cucullate, glabrous. Flowers 2-4; pedicels glabrous. Perianth-segments 10-13 mm, linear-lanceolate, obtuse. Capsule subglobose; seeds subglobose. 2n = 106.{\i  Woods and scrub. • From S. Sweden southwards to N.E. France, N.W. Jugoslavia and E.C. Ukraine; very local in the southern part of its range.} Au Be Cz Da Ga Ge Ho Hu ?It Ju Po ?Rm Rs (B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. G. fistulosa} (Ram. ex DC.) Ker-Gawler, {\i Jour. Sci. Arts }({\i London}) {\b 1}: 180 (1816) ({\i G. liotardii} (Sternb.) Schultes & Schultes fil.; incl. {\i G. mirabilis} Grossh., {\i G. samojedorum} Grossh.). Bulbs 2, in a common tunic. Stem glabrous. Basal leaves usually 2, linear, subterete, fistular; cauline 2, opposite, broadly lanceolate, acuminate, glabrous. Flowers (1-)3-5; pedicels more or less hairy. Perianth-segments 13-17(-20) mm, elliptic-lanceolate, obtuse to subacute. Capsule obovoid; seeds subglobose.{\i  Mountains of Europe, from E. Carpathians southwards to the Pyrenees, Sicilia, S. Greece and Krym; at low altitudes in N.E. Russia.} Au Bu Co Ga Gr He Hs It Rm Rs (N, W, K, ?E) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 13-15}). {\b G. arvensis} group. Bulbs 2, enclosed in a common tunic. Stem puberulent. Basal leaves. 2; cauline 2, opposite or almost so, lanceolate, pubescent. Pedicels hairy at least at the base. Capsule obovoid-oblong. Seeds subglobose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Outer perianth-segments glabrous or sparsely pubescent
\par
  outside, often ± deflexed at apex ................................................. {\b 13. arvensis}
\par
1 Outer perianth-segments ± densely hairy outside, not 
\par
  deflexed
\par
2 Bulbs not densely surrounded by recurved fibrous roots;
\par
  perianth-segments puberulent, bearded at apex; bulbils
\par
  usually absent .................................................................................. {\b 14. dubia}
\par
2 Bulbs densely surrounded by recurved fibrous roots;
\par
  perianth segments densely white-pubescent; bulbils 
\par
  usually present ........................................................................... {\b 15. granatelli}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. G. arvensis} (Pers.) Dumort., {\i Fl. Belg.} 140 (1827) ({\i G. villosa} (Bieb.) Duby). Bulb sometimes surrounded by recurved fibrous roots. Basal leaves narrowly linear, canaliculate; bulbils occasionally present. Flowers (1-)5-12. Perianth-segments 13-15 mm, lanceolate, subacute, glabrous or sparsely pubescent outside, often deflexed at apex. 2n = 48.{\i  Dry, open habitats. Europe northwards to the Netherlands, S. Sweden and W.C. Ukraine.} Au †Be ?Bl Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W, K, E) Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. G. dubia} A. Terracc., {\i Bull. Soc. Palermo}{\b  2}: 34 (1904) ({\i G. arvensis} subsp. {\i dubia} (A. Terracc.) Ascherson & Graebner). Bulb not surrounded by fibrous roots. Basal leaves linear, canaliculate; bulbils usually absent. Flowers 3-8(-19). Perianth-segments c. 12 mm, oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, not deflexed, puberulent outside and bearded at apex.{\i  Dry, open places. S.E. Europe.} ?Gr Rs (W, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. G. granatelli} (Parl.) Parl.,{\i  Fl. Palerm. }{\b 1}: 376 (1845) ({\i G. arvensis} subsp.{\i  granatellii} (Parl.) Ascherson & Graebner). Bulb densely surrounded by recurved fibrous roots. Basal leaves flat; bulbils usually present. Perianth-segments c. 12 mm, ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, rarely subacute, not deflexed, the outer densely white-pubescent outside.{\i  Mountain grassland. C. & E. Mediterranean region; Krym.} Co ?Ga Gr Hs It ?Rm Rs (K) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 16-20}). {\b G. foliosa} group. Bulbs 2, in a common tunic, more or less covered with recurved, fibrous roots. Cauline leaves usually 2, alternate. Seeds subglobose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Basal leaves flat, not differing markedly from the cauline
\par
2 Perianth-segments lanceolate; bulbils often present ..................... {\b 19. foliosa}
\par
2 Perianth-segments linear-oblong; bulbils absent ................. {\b 20. polymorpha} 
\par
1 Basal leaves filiform to narrowly linear, differing 
\par
  markedly from the wider cauline leaves
\par
3 Perianth-segments elliptical, ± obtuse ............................... {\b 18. amblyopetala}
\par
3 Perianth-segments lanceolate to linear-oblong, often acute
\par
4 Stem puberulent; perianth-segments 15-20 mm; capsule
\par
  obovoid ................................................................................ {\b 16. peduncularis}
\par
4 Stem glabrous or with a few long hairs; perianth-
\par
  segments c. 10 mm; capsule oblong ....................................... {\b 17. nevadensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. G. peduncularis} (J. & C. Presl) Pascher,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Deutsch. Naturw.-Med. Ver. Lotos} nov. ser.,{\b  14}: 112 (1904) ({\i G. polymorpha }Boiss. pro parte). Stems puberulent. Basal leaves 2, filiform to narrowly linear and canaliculate; cauline lanceolate-spathulate, acuminate, glabrous or ciliate; bulbils usually absent. Flowers 1-3; pedicels puberulent. Perianth-segments 15-20 mm, linear-oblong, obtuse to subacute. Capsule obovoid, emarginate.{\i  Dry hills and stony places. Balkan peninsula and Aegean region.} Bu Cr Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. G. nevadensis} Boiss., {\i Elenchus} 85 (1838) ({\i G. solierolii} F. W. Schultz). Stem glabrous or with a few long hairs. Basal
\par

\par
27}
\par
