{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. alba} (L.) Vahl,{\i  Enum. Pl.}{\b  2}: 236 (1805). Rhizome short; stems 10-40(-60) cm, somewhat caespitose. Basal leaves 10-15 cm × 1-2 mm, the cauline somewhat shorter, the basal and lower cauline often with axillary bulbils. Spikelets 5 mm, fusiform, white at anthesis, pale brown later, forming a dense, terminal, obpyramidal or semi-globose cluster up to 10 × 15 mm, often with 1 or 2 similar but smaller axillary clusters lower down the stem. Uppermost bract exceeding the terminal cluster, if at all, by not more than 15 mm. Perianth-bristles 9-13, retrorsely barbed. Nut smooth. 2n = 26, 42.{\i  On wet, acid peat. Most of Europe, except the Mediterranean region and the south-east.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs †Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E). Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. R. fusca} (L.) Aiton fil. in Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.} ed. 2,{\b  1}: 127 (1810). Rhizome far-creeping; stems 15-35 cm, scarcely caespitose. Leaves up to 15 cm × 1 mm; bulbils absent. Spikelets 6 mm, oblong-ovoid, reddish-brown, in a dense, terminal, ovoid cluster up to 12 × 10 mm, often with 1(-2) smaller axillary clusters below. Uppermost bract exceeding the terminal cluster by (10-)25-50 mm. Perianth-bristles 5-6, antrorsely barbed. Nut smooth. 2n = 32.{\i  Bog-pools. N., W. & C. Europe, extending southwards to N. Italy.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho It Ju No Po Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. R. rugosa} (Vahl) S. Gale,{\i  Rhodora}{\b  46}: 93 (1944). Rhizome short; stems 40-65 cm, caespitose. Leaves 20-35 cm × 1·5-3 mm, somewhat glaucous. Spikelets c. 4 mm, ovoid, dark brown, in an irregular, diffuse panicle. Uppermost bract shorter or longer than inflorescence. Perianth-bristles 6, antrorsely barbed. Nut transversely rugulose.{\i  Wet places. S.W. Spain, W. Portugal.} Hs Lu. ({\i Tropics and subtropics}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The records of this species from the Iberian peninsula and N.W. Africa are very few, and are very remote from the rest of its distribution-range, but there is no evidence to suggest that the plant has been introduced by man.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 10.       Schoenus}       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Stems terete. Leaves all basal. Inflorescence terminal, capitate, of 1-10 somewhat flattened, 1- to 4-flowered spikelets, subtended by 1 or 2 bracts with sheathing base and herbaceous lamina. Glumes distichous. Flowers hermaphrodite; perianth of 3-6 small bristles or absent. Stamens 3. Stigmas 3. Nut trigonous, without a persistent style-base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: G. Kükenthal, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  44}: 1-32, 65-101, 161-195 (1938).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Inflorescence of usually more than 4 spikelets; lower 
\par
  bract usually considerably exceeding the inflorescence,
\par
  its lamina longer than its sheathing base ....................................... {\b 1. nigricans} 
\par
Inflorescence of 1-3(-4) spikelets; lower bract usually
\par
  about equalling the inflorescence, its lamina shorter 
\par
  than or equalling its sheathing base ........................................... {\b 2. ferrugineus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. nigricans} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 43 (1753). Stems 15-60(-90) cm, densely caespitose. Leaves half as long as to slightly longer than stems; sheaths blackish at base, reddish-brown above; lamina narrowly linear, canaliculate, hard and wiry, greyish-green. Inflorescence (excluding bracts) 10-18 × 8-18 mm, with (2-)5-10 spikelets; lower bract usually considerably exceeding inflorescence, with lamina (7-)12-30(-90) mm, usually much longer than the sheathing base. Glumes c. 8 mm, blackish-brown; keel scabrid-denticulate. Perianth-bristles absent or very small. Nut c. 1·5 mm, obtusely trigonous, creamy-white. 2n = 44, 54.{\i  Usually in fens and other at least seasonally wet, base-rich habitats; less often on maritime sands or acid peat. Europe, northwards to N. Scotland, and eastwards to Estonia and Krym.} All except Az Fa Fe Is Rs (N, C, E): extinct in No.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. ferrugineus} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 43 (1753). Like {\b 1} but rather less robust; leaves often less than half as long as stems; sheaths reddish-brown, scarcely black at base; inflorescence 7-12 × 2-8 mm, with 1-3(-4) spikelets; lower bract usually about equalling inflorescence, with lamina 3-7 mm and shorter than or equalling the sheathing base; glumes 6-7 mm, with smooth keel; perianth-bristles (3-)6, exceeding the nut. 2n = 76. {\i Wet places on base-rich or slightly acid peat. From Fennoscandia and N.W. Russia southwards to S.E. France, C. Jugoslavia and S.E. Russia, but very local over much of its range.} ?Al Au †Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He ?Hu It Ju No Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su [Bu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b S. karpatii} Penzes,{\i  Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  8}: 333 (1962), described from the coast of S. Albania (near Diviaka), appears to differ from {\b 2} only in its shorter and somewhat wider bracts and glumes; other features mentioned in the diagnosis are less constant. It should probably be regarded as no more than a variety of {\b 2}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Hybrids between {\b 1} and {\b 2} are fairly frequent where these species grow together. They are closer to {\b 2} in habit and general appearance of the spikelets, but resemble {\b 1} in the long lamina of the bract and the darker glumes and leaf-sheaths.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 11.       Kobresia}       Willd.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  (incl.{\i  Elyna} Schrader)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.O. Chater. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Stems subterete, leafy at base. Inflorescence a single, simple spike-like panicle (called a spike for convenience in this account), or an elongated aggregation of such sessile spikes on an unbranched axis. Flowers unisexual, mostly in 1- or 2-flowered spikelets each with a basal glume; perianth absent. Stamens 3. Female flowers enfolded by a scale (perigynium), the margins of which are free or connate only at the base, stigmas usually 3. Nut trigonous; style more or less persistent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: G. Kükenthal in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich }{\b 38}({\b IV.20}) ({\i Cyperaceae-Caricoideae}): 33-50 (1909). N. A. Ivanova,{\i  Bot. Zur.}{\b  24}: 455-503 (1939).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Basal sheaths leafless; spike solitary; lateral spikelets
\par
  2-flowered ............................................................................... {\b 1. myosuroides} 
\par
Basal sheaths leafy; spikes 3-10; lateral spikelets 
\par
  1-flowered ............................................................................. {\b 2. simpliciuscula}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. K. myosuroides} (Vill.) Fiori in Fiori & Paol.,{\i  Fl. Anal. Ital.}{\b  1}: 125 (1896) ({\i K. bellardii} (All.) Degl. ex Loisel.,{\i  K scirpina} Willd., {\i Elyna myosuroides} (Vill.) Fritsch). Densely caespitose. Stems 5-30 cm, erect; basal sheaths leafless, brown, shining. Leaves equalling or longer than stems, 0·5-1·5(-2) mm wide, canaliculate. Spike solitary, 10-25(-30) × 2-3 mm, with 10-20 spikelets. Terminal spikelet of several male flowers; lateral each with 1 male flower above and 1 female flower below. Glumes brown, with scarious margin. Nut 1·5-2·5(-3) mm, brown, shining. 2n = 60.{\i  Dry places; calcicole. Iceland, Fennoscandia and N. Ural; mountains of C. & S. Europe,from the Pyrenees to the Carpathians and S.W. Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs Is It Ju No Rm Rs (N, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b K. sibirica} (Turcz. ex Ledeb.) Boeckeler, {\i Linnaea}{\b  39}: 7 (1875), differing from {\b 1} chiefly in having wider spikes with the lateral spikelets each containing 1 male and 2-5 female flowers, has
\par

\par
289}
\par