{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 each half-encircling. Stamens 3. Stigmas 2. Nut 1·2-2·2 mm, biconvex, obovate or elliptical, more or less finely punctate pale yellow to dark brown; stylopodium very variable, but always constricted at junction with nut. Bristles (0)4-8, variably developed.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   A widespread group in which taxonomic difficulty is partly attributable to polyploidy and hybridization. The following treatment distinguishes at least the more important European taxa.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Only the lowest glume of spikelet empty, encircling 
\par  base of spikelet
\par 2 Stylopodium minute, c. 1/4 as wide as nut; lowest glume
\par  up to 1/2 as long as spikelet ............................................................ {\b 13. oxylepis}
\par 2 Stylopodium at least 1/3 as wide as nut; lowest glume 
\par  rarely more than 1/3 as long as spikelet ..................................... {\b 12. uniglumis}
\par 1 Two lowest glumes of spikelet empty, subequal, and each
\par  half-encircling base of spikelet
\par 3 Stylopodium at least twice as long as wide ................................. {\b 10. austriaca}
\par 3 Stylopodium less than twice as long as wide
\par 4 Stylopodium longer than wide; bristles 4, rarely 0 ........................ {\b 8. palustris}
\par 4 Stylopodium wider than long; bristles 4-8
\par 5 Bristles 4(-5); glumes usually with wide hyaline margin ............ {\b 9. mitracarpa}
\par 5 Bristles (5-)6-8; glumes with narrow hyaline margin ............... {\b 11. mamillata}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. E. palustris} (L.) Roemer & Schultes, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 151 (1817) ({\i Scirpus palustris} L.; incl.{\i  Eleocharis boissieri} Podp.,{\i  E. crassa} Fischer & C. A. Meyer ex A. Becker). Stems pliable, not easily cracked, with more than 20 vascular bundles (not especially obvious as ridges when dry). Spikelet 5-30 mm, with 2 subequal, empty glumes, each half-encircling its base. Nut very finely punctate. Bristles (0)4, very variably developed.{\i  Wet meadows, marshes, and shallow water. Throughout Europe.} All except Sb.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable, especially in size of plant and development of rhizome.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b palustris} ({\i E. palustris} subsp.{\i  microcarpa} Walters; incl.{\i  E. intersita} Zinserl.): Spikelet usually with 40-70 florets. Glumes from middle of spikelet 2·75-3·5 mm. Nut 1·2-1·4(-1·5) mm. Stomatal length 35-56 µm. 2n = 16.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b vulgaris} Walters,{\i  Jour. Ecol. }{\b 37}: 194 (1949): Spikelet usually with 20-40 florets. Glumes from middle of spikelet 3·5-4·5 mm. Nut (1·3-)1·5-2 mm. Stomatal length 50-77 µm. 2n = (37) 38 (39, 40).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Both subspecies are widespread in N. &.C. Europe, but subsp. ({\b b}) seems to be rare in much of S. Europe, and subsp. ({\b a}) relatively rare in the British Isles. The taxonomic distinction is less easy to make in much of C. Europe than in Britain and Scandinavia, and other, as yet undistinguished, taxa may be present,
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. E. mitracarpa} Steudel, {\i Syn. Pl. Glum.}{\b  2}: 77 (1854) ({\i E. argyrolepidoides} Zinserl.). Like {\b 8} but glumes usually with a wide hyaline margin; stylopodium mitriform, wider than long; perianth-bristles 4(-5).{\i  S. part of U.S.S.R.} Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. E. austriaca} Hayek,{\i  Sched. Fl. Stir. Exsicc}.{\b  19-20}: 8 (1910) ({\i E. leptostylopodiata} Zinserl.). Stems weak and easily cracked, with 12-16 vascular bundles (visible especially in dried material as distinct ridges). Spikelet 8-20 mm, with 2 subequal, empty glumes each half-encircling its base, in ripe fruit broadly conical, usually yellowish-brown. Nut very finely punctate; stylopodium at least twice as long as wide, with small constriction at junction with nut. Bristles (4-)5(-6), well-developed and usually much longer than nut. 2n = 16.{\i  Marshes, lake-shores and stream-sides, mainly in upland regions; usually on base-rich soils. Scattered through a large part of Europe, from N. Norway to N. Spain, C. Jugoslavia and S. Ural.} Au Br Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. E. mamillata} H. Lindb. fil. in Dörfler, {\i Herb. Norm.}{\b  44}: 108 (1902). Like {\b 10} but stems with 8-12 vascular bundles as distinct ridges; spikelets in ripe fruit ovoid to broadly conical usually dark brown; stylopodium mammiform, much wider than long, with obvious constriction at junction with nut; bristles (5-)6-8, well-developed and usually much longer than nut. 2n = 16.{\i  Peat-bogs, ditches, and lake margins; calcifuge. N. & C. Europe, extending to N. Ukraine.} Au Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hu Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, ?W) Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10} is treated by Strandhede as a subspecies of {\b 11}. The articifial hybrid (produced by Strandhede) is fully fertile, and morphological intermediates of presumed hybrid origin certainly occur in nature. They are rare, however, apparently because even where the species are sympatric the ecological separation is quite marked.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. E. uniglumis} (Link) Schultes in Schultes & Schultes fil.,{\i  Mantissa}{\b  2}: 88 (1824) ({\i Scirpus uniglumis} Link; incl.{\i  E. klingei} (Meinsh.) B. Fedtsch.,{\i  E. korshinskyana} Zinserl.). Rhizome usually well developed; stems up to 60 cm, and up to 1·5 mm in diameter, firm but slender, smooth, often shiny, with 15-20 vascular bundles (not especially obvious as ridges when dry). Base of stems, rhizome and leaf-sheaths reddish-purple. Spikelet up to 12 mm, ovoid-lanceolate, dark brown, with 10-30 florets more widely spaced than in other species of the group; lowest glume empty, encircling base of spikelet. Nut coarsely punctate. Bristles 0-4(-5), often poorly developed, and rarely much longer than nut. 2n = (40-44) 46 (54-92).{\i  Saline or base-rich marshes. Most of Europe, but rare in much of the south.} All except ?Al Az Bl Co Lu Sb Si Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    Variable, but usually less so than{\b  8}. The cytological variation is to some extent correlated with variation in fruit size, and Strandhede has distinguished subsp.{\b  sterneri} Strandhede, {\i Bot. Not. }{\b 114}: 433 (1961), from Öland and Gotland, with larger fruit, pollen and stomata than the type, and with 2n = 74-82. Large-fruited, high polyploid variants occur elsewhere in Europe, but apparently only sporadically. Fertile intermediates with {\b 8}({\b b}) with various chromosome numbers between 38 and 46, occur not infrequently where the two species grow together, and are almost certainly of hybrid origin. {\b 8}({\b b}) itself is intermediate between {\b 8}({\b a}) and {\b 12}, and may be of ancient hybrid origin from these two widespread taxa.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. E. oxylepis} (Meinsh.) B. Fedtsch., {\i Rast. Turkestan }165 (1915). Like {\b 12} but stems weak and easily cracked; lowest glume up to half as long as spikelet, usually pale brown; stylopodium minute, mammiform to conical, c. 1/4 as wide as nut.{\i  E.C. Ukraine to W. Kazakhstan}. Rs (W, E). ({\i Siberia, C. Asia}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. E. multicaulis} (Sm.) Desv., {\i Obs. Pl. Angers} 74 (1818) ({\i Scirpus multicaulis} Sm.). Densely caespitose perennial with slender stems up to 30 cm and 1-1·5 mm in diameter. Base of stem and leaf-sheaths straw-coloured or pale brown; uppermost sheath very obliquely truncate and acute. Spikelet 5-15 mm, ovoid-lanceolate, usually acute, 10- to 30-flowered, brown, often proliferating vegetatively. Lowest glume empty, usually c. 1/4 as long as spikelet, encircling its base. Stamens 3- stigmas 3. Nut 1·3-1·5 mm, triquetrous, smooth, yellowish- or olive-brown;
\par
\par 283}
\par