{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 4-20 mm wide, subequalling the stems. Bracts 5-7, exceeding the inflorescence. Inflorescence a compound umbel; rays 6-10, up to 18 cm. Spikelets 8-12 × 0·5-1 mm, linear, with 14-20 flowers, patent. Rhachilla winged. Glumes 1·8-2 × c. 1 mm, ovate or elliptical, obtuse, often with a mucro c. 0·1 mm, reddish, straw-coloured or golden-yellow towards the margin. Stamens 3. Nut ½-¾ as long as the glumes, brown.{\i  Naturalized in N.E. Spain} ({\i by the R. Tordera}). [Hs.] ({\i Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. longus} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 45 (1753) ({\i Pycreus longus} (L.) Hayek; incl. {\i C. badius} Desf.). Perennial; rhizomes long, 3-10 mm wide, knotted, covered with broad scales; tubers absent; stems 20-150 cm, solitary. Leaves 2-10 mm wide, shorter than to equalling the stems. Bracts 2-6, the outer exceeding the inflorescence. Inflorescence a simple or compound umbel; rays 2-10, up to 35 cm. Spikelets 4-25(-60)x 1-2 mm, linear to oblong, with 6-32 flowers, ascending to patent. Rhachilla broadly winged. Glumes 2-3 × 1·5-2 mm, ovate or elliptical, obtuse, dark brown or reddish with greenish keel. Stamens 3. Nut 1/3-3/4 as long as the glumes, brownish to black.{\i  S., W. & C. Europe, northwards to S. England.} Al Au Az Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga †Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Variable in length of stems, rays and spikelets, width of leaves, and number of bracts and rays. Variants having 2-5 rays which are up to 5 cm long and spikelets 4-12 mm, which occur almost throughout the European range of the species, have been named subsp.{\b  badius} (Desf.) Murb.,{\i  Contr. Fl. Nord-Ouest Afr.}{\b  3}: 27 (1899) ({\i Pycreus badius} (Desf.) Hayek), but intermediates are frequent and the plants in question are worth no more than varietal rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. rotundus} L., {\i Sp.Pl}. 45 (1753) ({\i Pycreus rotundus} (L.) Hayek). Like {\b 3} but rhizomes c. 1 mm wide, with rather remote, narrow scales, sometimes with tubers 10-15 × 5-10 mm; stems 10-60 cm; rays not more than 10 cm.{\i  S. & W.C. Europe.} Al Au Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. esculentus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 45 (1753) ({\i C. melanorhizus} Delile, {\i Pycreus esculentus} (L.) Hayek; incl.{\i  C. aureus} Ten., non Georgi). Annual or perennial; rhizomes long, slender, scaly, sometimes with tubers up to 15 mm; stems 5-60(-90) cm, solitary. Leaves 2-10 mm wide, shorter than to exceeding the stems. Bracts 2-9, usually several exceeding the inflorescence. Inflorescence a simple or compound umbel; rays 4-10, up to 10 cm. Spikelets 5-16 × 1-2·5 mm, linear to oblong, with 6-22 flowers, ascending to patent. Rhachilla broadly winged. Glumes 2-3 × c. 2 mm, lanceolate to ovate, obtuse, concave, pale yellow to yellowish-brown. Stamens 3. Nut ½ as long as the glumes, reddish or dark grey.{\i  Mediterranean region and S.W. Europe; cultivated here and locally in S.C. Europe for its edible tubers} ({\i tiger nuts}). Al Az Bu Co Ga Gr It Lu Si [Au Bl *Cr *Hs Rs (W)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The cultivated plant is var. {\i sativus} Boeckeler; it has larger, more elongate tubers marked with conspicuous bands, and seldom flowers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. glomeratus} L., {\i Cent. Pl.}{\b  2}: 5 (1756) ({\i Pycreus glomeratus} (L.) Hayek). Annual or perennial; rhizomes absent or creeping; stems 10-80 cm, solitary or caespitose. Leaves 2-10 mm wide, shorter than to exceeding the stems. Bracts 2-6, exceeding the inflorescence. Inflorescence a compound umbel or a sessile,, dense head; rays up to 9, up to 10 cm. Spikelets 5-12 × 1-1·5 mm, linear, with 8-20 flowers, ascending to patent. Rhachilla narrowly winged. Glumes (1·5-)2-2·3 × 0·5 mm, linear or linear-lanceolate, obtuse, pale- or reddish-brown, with greenish keel. Stamens 3. Nut 3/5 as long to as long as the glumes, linear-oblong, dark brown.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe.} Au Bu Cz Ga Gr He Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. glaber} L., {\i Mantissa Alt. }179 (1771) ({\i Pycreus glaber} (L.) Hayek). Caespitose annual; stems 8-50 cm. Leaves 2-6 mm wide, shorter than to exceeding the stems. Bracts 2-5, exceeding the inflorescence. Inflorescence a simple umbel of dense heads; rays up to 8, up to 6 cm. Spikelets 6-15 × 2 mm, linear or oblong-lanceolate, with 10-24 flowers, patent. Rhachilla narrowly winged. Glumes 2-2·5 × c. 1·5 mm, elliptical or ovate, acute, reddish, straw-coloured or brownish, with a wide greenish centre and a narrow hyaline margin. Stamens (2)3. Nut 1/2-3/5 as long as the glumes, obovoid, brown or blackish.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe.} Au Bu Gr It Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. eragrostis} Lam.,{\i  Tabl. Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 146 (1791) ({\i C. vegetus} Willd.). Perennial; rhizomes short, thick; stems 25-90 cm, solitary. Leaves 4-10 mm wide, shorter than to as long as the stems. Bracts 5-11, exceeding the inflorescence. Inflorescence a simple to compound umbel of dense heads; rays 8-10, up to 12 cm. Spikelets 8-13 × 1·8-3 mm, narrowly lanceolate, with 14-30 flowers, patent. Rhachilla not winged. Glumes 2-3 × 1-1·5 mm, lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, acuminate straw-coloured or yellowish-red, with greenish centre. Stamen 1. Nut c. ½ as long as the glumes, grey. 2n = 42.{\i  Naturalized in S.W. Europe.} [Az Ga Hs Lu.] ({\i Tropical America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. textilis} Thunb.,{\i  Prodr. Pl. Cap.} 18 (1794). Caespitose, leafless perennial; rhizomes short, thick, woody; stems 60-90 cm. Bracts 8-12, with revolute margins, exceeding the inflorescence. Inflorescence a compound umbel of rather dense heads; rays 8-12, up to 6 cm. Spikelets 6-8 × 1·5-2 mm, lanceolate, with 8-20 flowers, patent. Rhachilla not winged. Glumes 1·5-2 × c. 1 mm, ovate, acute, with a mucro c. 0·1 mm, pale yellow or brown, often with a greenish centre. Stamens 3. Nut c. ½ as long as the glumes, brown.{\i  Naturalized in Açores }({\i Sao Miguel}). [Az.] ({\i S. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. alternifolius} L., {\i Mantissa }28 (1767). Like {\b 9} but bracts 11-25, flat; rays 20-25.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and naturalized in C. Portugal and Açores.} [Az Lu.] ({\i Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   This widely naturalized plant, including the material from Açores and Portugal, has recently been identified as{\b  C. involucratus} Rottb., {\i Descr. Icon. Rar. Pl.} 22 (1773) ({\i C. alternifolius} L. subsp.{\i  flabelliformis} (Rottb.) Kük.). See H. Baijnath,{\i  Kew Bull.}{\b  30}: 522-526 (1975).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. fuscus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 46 (1753). Caespitose annual; stems 2-35(-50) cm. Leaves 1-5 mm wide, shorter than to exceeding the stems. Bracts 2-5, exceeding the inflorescence. Inflorescence a simple or compound umbel; rays (1-)3-8(-15) up to 4 cm. Spikelets 3-6(-12) × 1-2 mm, linear or oblong, with 10-20(-40) flowers, patent. Rhachilla not winged. Glumes 1-1·3 × 0·7-0·8 mm, ovate, acute to obtuse, often with a mucro 0·1 mm, dark- or reddish-brown, with greenish keel. Stamens 2. Nut ¾ as long to as long as the glumes, trigonous or rarely plano-convex, white. 2n = 72. {\i Most of Europe except parts of the north.} All except Az Fa Fe Hb Is No Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. difformis} L., {\i Cent. Pl.}{\b  2}: 6 (1756). Caespitose annual; stems 20-75 cm. Leaves 2-7 mm wide, shorter than the stems. Bracts 2-4, exceeding the inflorescence. Inflorescence a simple or compound umbel of dense heads; rays 3-8, up to 5 cm. Spikelets 2-8 × c. 1 mm, linear, with 10-40 flowers, patent. Rhachilla not winged. Glumes 0·5-0·7 × 0·5 mm, obovate or suborbicular, obtuse, reddish or brownish with paler centre.
\par

\par
286}
\par