{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  All species, unless there is all indication to the contrary, grow on river-banks or in marshes or wet grassland.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: G. Kükenthal in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  101}({\b IV.20}) (1935-1936).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Inflorescence with 100-200 rays; stems 200-500 cm ..................... {\b 1. papyrus}
\par
1 Inflorescence with 0-25 rays; stems 1-150(-200) cm
\par
2 Glumes spirally arranged or irregularly distichous
\par
3 Inflorescence of one sessile head; bracts 3-8; glumes 
\par
  with a mucro 0·2-0·5 mm ....................................................... {\b 14. michelianus}
\par
3 Inflorescence usually of several heads, at least 1 pedunculate;
\par
  bracts 2-4, glumes with a curved arista 1 mm .......................... {\b 24. hamulosus}
\par
2 Glumes regularly distichous
\par
4 Spikelets with 1-2 flowers 
\par
5 Nut trigonous; glumes smooth ..................................................... {\b 26. ovularis} 
\par
5 Nut lenticular; glumes minutely setulose on keel .................... {\b 27. brevifolius}
\par
4 Spikelets with more than 2 flowers 
\par
6 Nut lenticular or plano-convex; stigmas usually 2
\par
7 Inflorescence apparently lateral, of sessile spikelets;
\par
  bracts 2-3, the lower one erect, forming an apparent 
\par
  prolongation of the stem; stem leafless, or the upper-
\par
  most sheaths with a lamina not more than 10 cm
\par
8 Spikelets broadly lanceolate or ovate, obtuse; bracts
\par
  conspicuously dilated at the base; glumes with a pale 
\par
  green area c. 1 mm wide on back ............................................ {\b 16. pannonicus}
\par
8 Spikelets oblong or oblong-lanceolate, acute; bracts 
\par
  not conspicuously dilated at the base; glumes with a 
\par
  pale green area 0·2-0·5 mm wide on back ................................. {\b 17. laevigatus}
\par
7 Inflorescence terminal, a simple or compound umbel of 
\par
  pedunculate heads, or of 1 head; bracts 2-25, the lower
\par
  not forming an apparent prolongation of the stem; stem 
\par
  usually leafy
\par
9 Nut with a broad side (face) against the rhachilla
\par
10 Rhizomatous perennial; stems 30-120 cm, solitary;
\par
   glumes 1·5-2 mm wide; nut dark brown or black ...................... {\b 15. serotinus}
\par
10 Annual, without rhizomes; stems 1-35(-50) cm, caespitose;
\par
   glumes 0·5-0·8 mm wide; nut white or pale brown
\par
11 Inflorescence a simple to compound umbel; glumes 1-
\par
   1·3 mm, often with an erect mucro 0·1 mm; nut white;
\par
   bracts not dilated at the base ........................................................... {\b 11. fuscus}
\par
11 Inflorescence of 1 sessile head; glumes 1·2-2·5 mm,
\par
   with an ascending to patent mucro 0·2-0·5 mm;
\par
   nut pale brown; bracts dilated at the base .............................. {\b 14. michelianus}
\par
9  Nut with a narrow side (angle) against the rhachilla
\par
12 Glumes conspicuously sulcate .................................................... {\b 20. mundtii}
\par
12 Glumes not sulcate
\par
13 Glumes with a 3-veined keel .............................................. {\b 19. polystachyos}
\par
13 Glumes with a 1-veined keel
\par
14 Glumes dark or reddish-brown ................................................... {\b 18. flavidus}
\par
14 Glumes yellowish ................................................................... {\b 21. flavescens}
\par
6  Nut trigonous; stigmas usually 3
\par
15 Spikelets with 2-3 flowers .......................................................... {\b 26. ovularis}
\par
15 Spikelets with 4-40 flowers
\par
16 Stamen 1
\par
17 Glumes with an ascending to curved mucro or arista 0·2-1 mm;
\par
   leaves 0·5-2 mm wide
\par
18 Glumes with a curved arista 1 mm; inflorescence usually
\par
   of several pedunculate heads ................................................... {\b 25. squarrosus}
\par
18 Glumes with an ascending to patent mucro 0·2-0·5 mm; 
\par
   inflorescence of 1 sessile head ............................................... {\b 14. michelianus}
\par
17 Glumes without a mucro or arista; leaves 2-10 mm wide
\par
19 Glumes 2-3 mm, lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate ....................... {\b 8. eragrostis}
\par
19 Glumes 0·5-0·7 mm, obovate or suborbicular ......................... {\b 12. difformis}
\par
16 Stamens 2 or 3
\par
20 Glumes with a conspicuous mucro 0·2-3 mm
\par
21 Rhizomes present; leaves and bracts with revolute
\par
   margins; glumes 5-8 mm, with a mucro 1-3 mm ....................... {\b 13. capitatus}
\par
21 Rhizomes absent; leaves and bracts flat; glumes
\par
   1·2-2·5 mm, with a mucro up to 0·5 mm ............................... {\b 14. michelianus}
\par
20 Glumes not mucronate, or with a minute mucro up to 0·1 mm
\par
22 Plant leafless
\par
23 Bracts 8-12, with revolute margins; rays 8-12 ............................... {\b 9. textilis}
\par
23 Bracts 12-25, flat; rays 20-25 .............................................. {\b 10. alternifolius}
\par
22 Plant with leaves
\par
24 Rhachilla not winged; glumes 0·5-1·3 mm
\par
25 Glumes 1-1·3 mm, ovate, acute to obtuse, often with a 
\par
   mucro 0·1 mm; nut white; stems usually 2-35 cm .......................... {\b 11. fuscus}
\par
25 Glumes 0·5-0·7 mm, obovate or suborbicular, obtuse, 
\par
    not mucronate; nut pale yellow or yellowish-green;
\par
    stems 20-75 cm ......................................................................... {\b 12. difformis}
\par
24 Rhachilla winged; glumes 1·5-5 mm
\par
26 Glumes persistent and falling with the articulated rhachilla
\par
27 Glumes straw-coloured or golden-brown; nut linear-
\par
   oblong, reddish-grey; perennial .................................................. {\b 22. strigosus}
\par
27 Glumes purplish red; nut ± obovoid, black; annual ................ {\b 23. congestus}
\par
26 Glumes deciduous from the persistent, not articulated
\par
   rhachilla
\par
28 Spikelets aggregated into dense heads; rhizomes absent
\par
29 Nut linear-oblong; glumes 0·5 mm wide, linear or linear-
\par
   lanceolate .................................................................................. {\b 6. glomeratus}
\par
29 Nut obovoid; glumes c. 1·5 mm wide, elliptical or ovate ............... {\b 7. glaber}
\par
28 Spikelets not in heads, ± laxly arranged; rhizomes present
\par
30 Spikelets 0·5-1 mm wide, linear; glumes c. 1 mm wide;
\par
   rhizomes very short; tubers absent; wings of rhachilla
\par
   pale yellow, deciduous ............................................................... {\b 2. auricomus}
\par
30 Spikelets 1-2·5 mm wide, linear to oblong; glumes 
\par
   1·5-2 mm wide; rhizomes long; tubers sometimes present;
\par
   wings of rhachilla white, persistent
\par
31 Glumes concave, pale yellow to yellowish-brown, with 
\par
   prominently raised veins ............................................................ {\b 5. esculentus}
\par
31 Glumes keeled, dark brown or reddish, with rather 
\par
   inconspicuously raised veins or lines
\par
32 Rhizomes 3-10 mm wide, covered with broad scales;
\par
   tubers absent; rays often more than 10 cm ....................................... {\b 3. longus}
\par
32 Rhizomes c. 1 mm wide, with ± remote, narrow scales,
\par
   sometimes bearing tubers; rays not more than 10 cm ................... {\b 4. rotundus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CYPERUS. Rhachilla not articulated. Glumes deciduous. Spikelets with 4-many flowers. Stigmas 3 (rarely 2). Nut trigonous (rarely plano-convex), with a face against the rhachilla.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. papyrus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }47 (1753). Caespitose, leafless perennial; rhizomes short, thick, woody; stems 200-500 cm. Bracts 4-10, much shorter than the inflorescence. Inflorescence a compound umbel; rays c. 100-200, 12-21 cm. Spikelets 8-11(-20) × 0·8-1 mm, linear, with 6-22 flowers, patent. Rhachilla winged. Glumes 1·5-2 × c. 1 mm, elliptic-ovate, obtuse, reddish to straw-coloured or pale brown, with a hyaline margin. Stamens 3. Nut 1/2-3/5 as long as the glumes, yellowish-brown.{\i  Naturalized in E. Sicilia.} [Si.] ({\i C. Africa and Nile valley}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. auricomus} Sieber ex Sprengel, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  1}: 230 (1824). Subcaespitose perennial; rhizomes short; stems 50-150 cm
\par

\par
285}
\par