{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 yellowish-brown, with greenish midvein, the lowest with leaf-like apex about equalling the spikelet. Perianth-bristles 4-6, up to 25 mm in fruit, smooth, white. Nut 1-1·5 mm, obovoid, shining, dark brown.{\i  Damp places, usually on base-rich peat. N. & C. Europe, extending locally southwards in the mountains to S. Spain, N. Italy and S. Ural; a few lowland stations in C. Russia.} Au †Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hs †Hu It Ju No Po ?Rm Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. S. cespitosus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 48 (1753). Densely caespitose or tussock-forming, without rhizomes or stolons. Stems 5-35(-60) cm, terete, smooth. Leaf-lamina 0·3-1 cm. Spikelet 3-6(-8) × c. 3 mm, obovoid to linear, with 3-20 flowers. Glumes linear-lanceolate, acute, yellowish- to reddish-brown, with greenish midvein, the 2 lowest with obtuse, leaflike apex about equalling the spikelet. Perianth-bristles 5-6, c. 1½ times as long as nut, smooth or papillose at apex, brownish. Nut 1·5-2 mm, obovoid-trigonous, dull, greyish- to yellowish-brown. 2n = 104.{\i  Damp, peaty places. Europe, southwards to C. Spain, Corse and S. Bulgaria, but only in the N. & N.W. parts of the U.S.S.R}. Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge ?Gr Hb He Ho Hs ?Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cespitosus} ({\i Trichophorum cespitosum} (L.) Hartman subsp.{\i  austriacum }(Palla) Hegi): Basal sheaths shining; uppermost sheath with suborbicular opening c. 1 mm and narrow scarious margin clasping the stem. Spikelets with 3-10 flowers. Perianth bristles usually smooth.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b germanicus} (Palla) Broddeson,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1912}: 82 (1912) ({\i Trichophorum cespitosum} subsp.{\i  germanicum} (Palla) Hegi): Basal sheaths dull; uppermost sheath with oblanceolate opening 2-3 mm and reddish scarious margin loosely surrounding the stem. Spikelets with 8-20 flowers. Perianth-bristles usually papillose at apex. {\i W. Europe, extending eastwards to Bornholm}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. S. pumilus} Vahl, {\i Enum. Pl.}{\b  2}: 243 (1805) ({\i Trichophorum pumilum} (Vahl) Schinz & Thell., {\i Scirpus alpinus} Schleicher ex Gaudin). Densely caespitose, with long stolons. Stems 3-15 cm, terete, smooth. Leaf-lamina 0·5-1·5 cm. Spikelet 2-3 × 2 mm, ovoid, with 2-4 flowers. Glumes ovate, apiculate or subobtuse, reddish-brown, with paler or greenish midvein, the 2 lowest sometimes with obtuse apex about equalling the spikelet. Perianth-bristles 3 or absent, less than ½ as long as nut. Nut c. 1·5 mm, obovoid to ellipsoid, scarcely shiny, yellowish- to blackish-brown. {\i Damp places; calcicole. Norway; Alps; W. Carpathians; C. & S. Ural; everywhere very local and rare.} Cz Ga He It No Rs (E). ({\i Temperate Asia and North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.     Blysmus}       Panzer
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By R.A. DeFilipps. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Stems terete, sometimes trigonous above, leafy mostly below. Inflorescence a simple or compound terminal spike of sessile, distichously arranged spikelets, sometimes bracteate. Spikelets several-flowered, terete. Glumes spirally arranged. Flowers hermaphrodite; perianth absent or of 3-6 barbed bristles. Stamens 3. Stigmas 2. Nut plano-convex or biconvex, without a persistent style-base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Perianth-bristles at least twice as long as the nut, 
\par
  retrorsely barbed, brown; nut 1·5-2 mm; leaves flat;
\par
  spikelets usually 10-25 per spike ............................................. {\b 1. compressus}
\par
Perianth-bristles much shorter than the nut, antrorsely 
\par
  barbed, white, or absent; nut 3-4 mm; leaves involute;
\par
  spikelets 3-8 per spike ........................................................................ {\b 2. rufus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. compressus} (L.)Panzer ex Link,{\i  Hort. Berol.}{\b  1}: 278 (1827) ({\i Scirpus compressus} (L.) Pers., non Moench). Rhizome long, scaly. Stems 3·5-45 cm, solitary or caespitose. Leaves 1-4 mm wide, flat, with the margin scabrid especially near apex. Spikelets 4-10 × 2-3 mm, ovate-lanceolate, (3-)10-25 in each spike. Glumes 3-5 × 2-3 mm, ovate to lanceolate, obtuse to acute, keeled, 2- to 9-veined, yellowish- or reddish-brown. Perianth-bristles 3-6, at least twice as long as the nut, retrorsely barbed brown. Nut 1·5-2 mm, obovoid, dark brown, shining, smooth.{\i  Marshes and other damp places. Europe except the south-west and most of the islands.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. rufus} (Hudson) Link,{\i  loc. cit.} (1827). Like {\b 1} but leaves involute, smooth; spikelets 3-8 per spike; glumes dark brown; perianth-bristles much shorter than the nut, antrorsely barbed, white, or absent; nut 3-4 mm, yellow or yellowish-brown.{\i  Marshes, usually saline. Coasts of N. Europe, southwards to Wales and the Netherlands; inland in N. Germany.} Br ?Cz Da Fe Ge Hb Ho No Po Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.        Eriophorum}       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.C. Jermy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Stems terete or trigonous, leafy. Inflorescence a solitary, compact, terminal, erect spikelet, or an umbel of many-flowered, bracteate spikelets often with long and flexuous peduncles. Glumes spirally arranged. Flowers hermaphrodite; perianth of numerous soft hairs (bristles) which elongate after anthesis. Stamens and stigmas 3. Nut trigonous, more or less compressed, without a persistent style-base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: M. Raymond, {\i Svensk Bot. Tidskr.}{\b  48}: 65-82 (1954).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spikelets several, pedunculate, subtended at the base 
\par
  by 1-3 ± leaf-like bracts 
\par
2 Peduncles smooth; stems subterete except at apex; 
\par
  anthers 2·5-5 mm .................................................................. {\b 1. angustifolium} 
\par
2 Peduncles scabrid; stems trigonous throughout (at least
\par
  when fresh); anthers 1·5-2 mm
\par
3 Plant caespitose; leaves 3-8 mm wide, the uppermost 
\par
  cauline without a ligule; glumes 1-veined, with hyaline
\par
  margin ......................................................................................... {\b 2. latifolium}
\par
3 Plant rhizomatous; leaves 1-2 mm wide, the cauline with
\par
  a short ligule; glumes with several veins, without a 
\par
  hyaline margin ................................................................................. {\b 3. gracile} 
\par
1 Spikelet 1, sessile, erect, without leaf-like bracts
\par
4 Plant caespitose
\par
5 Glumes grey, translucent, the lowest not bract-like;
\par
  anthers 2·5-3 mm, linear; bristles pure white ............................. {\b 4. vaginatum}
\par
5 Glumes blackish, ± opaque, the lowest bract-like;
\par
  anthers 0·5-1·5 mm, narrowly elliptical; bristles 
\par
  tinged with brown ............................................................. {\b 5. brachyantherum} 
\par
4 Plant rhizomatous
\par
6 Lower leaf-sheaths reddish; bristles reddish-brown,
\par
  ± erect; anthers 2-3 mm, linear .................................................. {\b 6. russeolum}
\par
6 Lower leaf-sheaths yellowish-brown; bristles pure white,
\par
  patent; anthers c. 1 mm, ovate ................................................. {\b 7. scheuchzeri}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. angustifolium} Honckeny,{\i  Vollst. Syst. Verz.} 153 (1782). Plant rhizomatous; stems 15-75 cm, subterete, trigonous only at apex, leafy. Leaves (2-)3-5(-7) mm wide, canaliculate, narrowed into a long triquetrous apex; lamina of uppermost cauline leaf usually at least 1½ times as long as the more or less inflated sheath; ligule short. Spikelets (1-)3-7, more or less drooping; peduncles smooth; bracts 1-2, shortly sheathing, about equalling spikelet. Lower glumes ovate-lanceolate, the upper lanceolate, 1-veined, reddish-brown below, greyish-brown or sometimes black above; margins broadly hyaline. Bristles 40-50 mm, white, entire at apex; anthers 2·5-5 mm. Nut 1-3 × 0·75-1 mm, ob-
\par

\par
280}
\par