{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 leaves (1-)2, filiform; cauline lanceolate; bulbils absent. Flowers 1-3; pedicels usually glabrous. Perianth-segments c. 10 mm, lanceolate, usually acute. Capsule oblong. 2n = 36.{\i  Rocky and grassy slopes. • Mountains of S.W. Europe.} Bl Co Ga Hs Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. G. amblyopetala} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b 1}({\b 7}): 107 (1846) (incl. {\i G. heldreichii} A. Terracc.). Stem glabrous. Basal leaves 2, narrowly linear, canaliculate; cauline lanceolate, glabrous or ciliate at base. Flowers 1-7; pedicels glabrous. Perianth-segments c. 10 mm, broadly elliptical, more or less obtuse. Capsule obovoid, truncate at apex.{\i  Mountain scrub and open woodland. S.E. Europe, from W.C. Macedonia and S.E. Greece to Krym.} Cr Gr Ju Rs (W, K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. G. foliosa} (J. & C. Presl) Schultes & Schultes fil., {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  7}: 1703 (1829). Stem glabrous. Basal leaves (1-)2, linear-lanceolate, more or less flat; cauline 2-5; bulbils usually present. Flowers 1-5; pedicels pubescent. Perianth-segments c. 15 mm, lanceolate, pubescent.{\i  Mountain scrub. Mediterranean region, from S. France to S.E. Italy.} Co Ga It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from Sicilia and S.W. Italy, like {\b 19} but with glabrous pedicels and perianth-segments, have been called {\b G. chrysantha} Schultes & Schultes fil., {\i op. cit. }{\b 7}: 545 (1829). They may be nearer to {\b 18} but further study is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. G. polymorpha} Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 611 (1842). Stem glabrous. Basal leaves (1-)2, linear, flat; bulbils usually absent. Flowers 1-3(-7); pedicels glabrous or hairy. Perianth-segments 15-20 mm, oblong, obtuse.{\i  Rocky places. • Spain and E. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 21-23}). {\b G. bohemica} group. Bulbs 2, in a common tunic. Basal leaves 2, filiform; cauline alternate, more or less glabrous. Seeds subglobose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A group of closely allied taxa which may warrant no more than subspecific status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem usually less than 2 cm; perianth-segments 13-17 mm .... {\b 21. bohemica}
\par
1 Stem up to 10 cm; perianth-segments 12-13 mm
\par
2 Capsule ovoid, truncate ............................................................... {\b 22. saxatilis}
\par
2 Capsule obovoid, emarginate ...................................................... {\b 23. szovitzii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. G. bohemica} (Zauschner) Schultes & Schultes fil., {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  7}: 549 (1829) ({\i G. bohemica} subsp. {\i zauschneri} (Pohl) Pascher). Stems c. 2 cm. Basal leaves often flexuous; cauline lanceolate, acuminate. Flowers 1-3. Perianth-segments 13-17 mm, obovate-oblong, obtuse. Capsule obovoid, emarginate. 2n = 60.{\i  Dry grassland. C. & S. Europe, eastwards from E.C. Germany and Sardegna; W. France; Wales.} Au Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr Hu It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem velutinous; basal leaves white-pubescent .................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b gallica}
\par
1 Stem glabrous; basal leaves glabrous
\par
2 Pedicels and perianth-segments hairy ............................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b bohemica}
\par
2 Pedicels and perianth-segments glabrous ................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b nebrodensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b bohemica}: {\i Throughout the range of the species except France and Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b nebrodensis} (Tod. ex Guss.) I.B.K. Richardson,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 356 (1978) ({\i Ornithogalum nebrodense} Tod. ex Guss.): •{\i  N. Sicilia} ({\i Nebrodi}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b gallica} (Rouy) I.B.K. Richardson,{\i  loc. cit. }(1978) ({\i G. bohemica} var.{\i  gallica} Rouy): •{\i  W. France}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. G. saxatilis} (Mert. & Koch) Schultes & Schultes fil.{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  7}: 549 (1829) ({\i G. bohemica} subsp.{\i  saxatilis} (Mert. & Koch) Pascher). Stem up to 8 cm, glabrous. Basal leaves often circinate; cauline broadly lanceolate, acuminate. Flowers 1-3. Perianth-segments 11-13 mm, oblanceolate-oblong, obtuse to subacute. Capsule ovoid, truncate.{\i  Dry, stony ground. From N.E. Germany to N.E. Portugal, Sicilia and Macedonia; very local in the southern part of its range.} Ga Ge ?Gr He It Ju Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from the mountains of W.C. Spain and C. Portugal may key out here. They are robust (up to 15 cm tall), usually sparsely pubescent and have 1(-3) cauline leaves. Their strongest affinity is probably with {\b 17}, but further study is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. G. szovitzii} (A. F. Láng) Besser in Schultes & Schultes fil., {\i op. cit.} 550 (1829) (incl. {\i G. callieri} Pascher). Stem 3-10 cm. Cauline leaves 2(-4), narrowly lanceolate. Flowers 1-4. Perianth-segments c. 12 mm, oblong-lanceolate to subspathulate. Capsule obovoid, emarginate.{\i  Dry, stony slopes. • C. & S. Ukraine, E. Romania}. Rm Rs (W, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 21.     Erythronium}        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By I.B.K. Richardson. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, bulbous perennials. Stems leafy. Flowers usually solitary, nodding. Perianth of 6 free segments, the inner 3 with a small, transverse, adaxial fold and 2 small patent teeth near the base. Stamens 6, free; anthers basifixed. Style deeply 3-fid. Fruit a capsule with few seeds.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. dens-canis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 305 (1753). Bulb ovoid-cylindrical. Stem 10-30 cm. Leaves 5-9 × 1·5-4 cm, usually 2, opposite, ovate-elliptical, reddish-spotted; petiole 2-4 cm, amplexicaul. Perianth-segments 18-30 × 4-10 mm, oblong-lanceolate, subobtuse, strongly deflexed from near the base, bright purplish-pink, sometimes spotted at the base. Filaments fusiform; anthers linear-oblong,bluish. Capsule ovoid-trigonous. 2n = 24. {\i Woods, scrub and mountain grassland. • S. & S.C. Europe, from C. Czechoslovakia southwards to C. Portugal, C. Italy and Turkey-in-Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from S.W. Romania with yellow-spotted leaves and white perianth-segments 40-50 mm have been distinguished as var. niveum Baumg. Further information is required, especially to discover whether similar variation occurs elsewhere within the range of the species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 22.       Tulipa}           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  C. Grey-Wilson & V.A. Matthews. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Bulbous perennials. Bulb-tunics usually lined inside with hairs, occasionally glabrous. Leaves cauline, few, alternate, somewhat fleshy, decreasing in size up the stem. Flowers usually solitary, occasionally up to 4. Perianth-segments 6, free, petaloid, caducous. Nectaries absent. Anthers basifixed, introrse; filaments dilated towards the base. Style short or absent. Fruit a globose or ellipsoid capsule. Seeds flat, numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   This genus exhibits the taxonomic difficulties which arise from long-established cultivation, hybridization and selection and subsequent naturalization in various areas. Many populations, especially in S.E. France, W. Switzerland and N. Italy, are certainly naturalized, but their exact origins are obscure. More cytological information is needed to help solve this difficult problem, which also involves numerous nomenclatural difficulties.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: E. Levier, {\i Bull. Soc. Neuchâtel. Sci. Nat. }{\b 14}: 201-312 (1884). W. R. Dykes, {\i Notes on Tulip Species.} London. 1930. A. D. Hall,{\i  The Genus} Tulipa. London. 1940.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Filaments glabrous; perianth not abruptly narrowed near
\par
  the base (Sect.{\i  Tulipa})
\par

\par
28}
\par