{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 5 Stems less than 0·5 mm in diameter, capillary; spikelet
\par
  with only the lowest glume empty, completely encircling
\par
  its base ........................................................................................... {\b 3. acicularis}
\par
5 Stems 0·5-1 mm in diameter; spikelet with 2 lowest
\par
  glumes empty, each half-encircling its base .............................. {\b 4. bonariensis}
\par
4 Nut smooth or ± punctate, not longitudinally ribbed;
\par
  plants rarely growing submerged
\par
6 Rhizomatous; spikelet subglobose .............................. ({\b 8-13}).{\b  palustris} group
\par
6 Densely caespitose; spikelet ovoid-lanceolate ........................ {\b 14. multicaulis} 
\par
3 Nut compressed, ± biconvex
\par
7 Rhizomatous perennial; uppermost leaf-sheath almost
\par
  transversely truncate .................................................... ({\b 8-13}). {\b palustris} group
\par
7 Densely caespitose annual or perennial; uppermost leaf-
\par
  sheath obliquely truncate
\par
8 Perennial; spikelet with only the lowest glume empty,
\par
  completely encircling its base, often proliferating
\par
  vegetatively ................................................................................ {\b 15. carniolica}
\par
8 Annual; spikelet with the 2 lowest glumes empty, each half 
\par
  encircling its base, never proliferating vegetatively
\par
9 Nut shiny, black; stylopodium minute ................................... {\b 7. atropurpurea}
\par
9 Nut dull, brown; stylopodium at least half as wide as nut
\par
10 Stylopodium c. 2/3 as wide as nut; stems usually not
\par
   more than 1 mm in diameter ............................................................... {\b 5. ovata}
\par
10 Stylopodium nearly as wide as nut; stems up to 1-5 mm
\par
   in diameter ........................................................................................ {\b 6. obtusa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. quinqueflora} (F. X. Hartmann) O. Schwarz, {\i Mitt. Thur. Bot. Ges.}{\b  1}: 89 (1949) ({\i E. pauciflora} (Lightf.) Link, {\i E. vierhapperi }Bojko,{\i  Scirpus pauciflorus} Lightf.). Caespitose perennial, with short, stout rhizome and slender underground stolons. Stems up to 30 cm, 0·5-1 mm in diameter; uppermost sheath pale brownish, obliquely truncate. Spikelet 4-10 mm, 3- to 7-flowered, brown; lowest glume often with floret, obtuse, more than half as long as spikelet, and encircling its base. Stamens and stigmas 3. Nut c. 2 mm, trigonous, finely striate, black when fresh, turning grey when dry; stylopodium elongate, very slightly constricted at junction with nut. Bristles 4-6, about as long as nut. 2n = 132 (134).{\i  Wet, peaty ground, usually base-rich. Much of Europe, but rare in the south.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho ?Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. parvula} (Roemer & Schultes) Link ex Bluff, Nees & Schauer,{\i  Comp. Fl. Germ}. ed. 2,{\b  1}({\b 1}): 93 (1836) ({\i E. pygmaea} Torrey, {\i Scirpus parvulus} Roemer & Schultes). Very delicate, caespitose perennial with capillary stolons terminating in easily detached, whitish tubers. Stems capillary, up to 8 cm; uppermost sheath very thin, pale brownish. Spikelet 2-3(-5) mm, 3- to 5(-8)-flowered, greenish; lowest glume obtuse, empty, c. ¾ as long as spikelet and encircling its base. Stamens and stigmas 3. Nut c. 1 mm, triquetrous, smooth, pale yellow; stylopodium not constricted at junction with nut. Bristles usually longer than nut. 2n = 10.{\i  Tidal mud; rarely by inland saline lakes. From C. Fennoscandia southwards to Portugal, C. Jugoslavia & S.E. Russia; very local over much of its range.} Br Da Fe Ga Ge Hb †He Hs It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, ?K, E) Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. E. acicularis} (L.) Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 154 (1817) ({\i Scripus acicularis} L.). Slender, rhizomatous perennial with capillary, angled stems usually few together; in non-flowering, submerged state up to 50 cm, in flowering, terrestrial state (on mud) not more than 10 cm. Uppermost sheath thin, brownish, truncate, somewhat inflated. Spikelet 2-4 mm, 3- to 11(-15) flowered, dark brown; lowest glume usually empty, obtuse, not more than half as long as spikelet and encircling its base. Stamens and stigmas 3. Nut c. 1 mm, weakly trigonous or subterete, finely longitudinally ribbed, pale brown or whitish; stylopodium small, subconical, clearly constricted at junction with nut. Bristles 0-1, absent or caducous, never more than half as long as nut. 2n = 20.{\i  Shallow water, or on sand or gravel subject to intermittent flooding. Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region.} All except ?Al Az Bl Cr Fa Rs (K) Sa Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Often occurring in a totally submerged and persistently vegetative state.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. E. bonariensis} Nees, {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i Hooker}) {\b 2}: 398 (1840) ({\i Scirpus striatulus }(Desv.) Coste). Like {\b 3} but larger, with flowering stems up to 40 cm; uppermost sheath firm in texture, very obliquely truncate; spikelet 4-12 mm, pale brown, with 2 subequal empty glumes each half-encircling its base; bristles 3-4, about equalling nut, persistent.{\i  Naturalized on estuarine river-banks in W. France}. [Ga.] ({\i South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. E. ovata} (Roth) Roemer & Schultes, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 152 (1817) ({\i Scirpus ovatus} Roth). Densely caespitose annual with stems up to 40 cm and c. 1 mm in diameter. Uppermost leaf-sheath greenish, very obliquely truncate and sometimes with a rudimentary lamina; other sheaths purplish. Spikelet 4-8 mm, ovoid to subconical, many-flowered, reddish-brown; glumes ovate-orbicular, the lowest 2 small, empty, subequal, each half-encircling base of spikelet. Stamens 2 or 3; stigmas 2. Nut c. 1 mm, biconvex, broadly obovate, smooth, brown; stylopodium mammiform, c. 2/3 as wide as nut, clearly constricted at junction with nut. Bristles 4-7, much longer than nut. {\i Open, marshy ground, seasonally inundated; usually impermanent and rare. C. Europe, extending locally to the Netherlands, W. France, Sicilia and E.C. Russia.} Au Be Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. E. obtusa} (Willd.) Schultes in Schultes & Schultes fil.,{\i  Mantissa}{\b  2}: 89 (1824). Like {\b 5} but more robust, with stems up to 1·5 mm in diameter; stamens 3; stylopodium nearly as wide as nut.{\i  Naturalized in rice-fields in N. Italy and S.W. Portugal}. [It Lu.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. E. atropurpurea} (Retz.) C. Presl,{\i  Reliq. Haenk.}{\b  1}: 196 (1828). Like {\b 5} but more delicate, with stems up to 10 cm and not more than 0·3 mm in diameter; spikelet 2-4 mm; nut c. 0·5 mm, shining, black; stylopodium minute, flattened and c. ¼ as wide as nut; bristles never as long as fruit, often rudimentary or absent.{\i  Sandy ground, seasonally inundated. Italy, S. Switzerland.} *He *It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Widespread in the tropics and subtropics and perhaps introduced in Europe, where it was first recorded in 1830.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    A related species,{\b  E. geniculata} (L.) Roemer & Schultes, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 150 (1817) ({\i E. caduca} (Delile) Schultes), also widespread in the tropics, has been recorded from Italy, Sicilia and Sardegna. It differs most clearly in the larger nut (c. 1 mm).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b E. olivacea} Torrey,{\i  Ann. Lyc. New York}{\b  3}: 300 (1836), from E. North America, and{\b  E. flavescens} (Poiret) Urban, {\i Symb. Antill.}{\b  4}: 116 (1903), from Central America, have both been recorded as weeds in rice-fields in N. Italy and Portugal; they have a greenish-brown nut c. 1 mm, with a conical stylopodium.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 8-13}). {\b E. palustris} group. Perennial, rhizomatous plants very variable in size; stems up to 100 cm, 1-8 mm in diameter. Uppermost leaf-sheath almost transversely truncate; leaf-sheaths and stem-bases often reddish or purplish. Spikelet 3-30 mm, many-flowered, pale straw-coloured to dark brown; lowest glume empty, encircling base of spikelet, or 2 lowest glumes empty,
\par

\par
282}
\par