{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 ovoid, dark brown. 2n = 58. {\i Wet peat or shallow water; calcifuge. Most of Europe, but absent from much of the Mediterranean region and the south-east.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable. Several arctic and alpine variants have been described, of which the most distinctive is{\b  E. triste }(Th. Fries) Á. Löve & Hadac,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1950}: 34 (1950) ({\i E. angustifolium} subsp. {\i triste} (Th. Fries) Hultén); it has narrow leaves and nearly capitate inflorescence with blackish scales and needs further investigation; it has 2n = 60, and has been recorded from Svalbard and Iceland.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. latifolium} Hoppe, {\i Bot. Taschenb. }{\b 1800}: 108 (1800). Plant laxly caespitose; stems 20-70 cm, trigonous throughout, leafy. Leaves 3-8 mm wide, flat, with a short triquetrous apex; lamina of uppermost cauline leaf about equalling the close-fitting sheath; ligule absent. Spikelets 2-12, more or less drooping; peduncles usually trigonous, scabrid; bracts 2-3, very shortly sheathing, black at least below, about equalling spikelet. Lower glumes ovate-lanceolate, the upper lanceolate, 1-veined, reddish-brown below, greyish-brown or sometimes black above; margins very narrowly hyaline. Bristles c. 25 mm, white, branched at apex; anthers 1·5-2 mm. Nut 3-3·5 × 1-1·4 mm, narrowly obovoid, trigonous, reddish-brown. 2n = 54, 72.{\i  Marshes and bogs, usually with moderately base-rich water. Most of Europe, but local in the south and mainly on mountains.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. E. gracile} Koch ex Roth, {\i Catalecta Bot.}{\b  2}: 259 (1800). Plant rhizomatous; stems 25-60 cm, slender, trigonous, leafy only in lower half. Leaves 1-2 mm wide, 3-angled, slightly canaliculate on adaxial side; lamina of cauline leaf rarely more than half as long as the close-fitting sheath; ligule short. Spikelets 3-6, more or less drooping; peduncles trigonous, finely scabrid; bracts 1-2, shorter than spike, brownish. Glumes ovate, several veined, yellowish- or greenish-brown tinged with grey; margins not hyaline. Bristles c. 20 mm, white, entire at apex; anthers 1·5-2 mm. Nut 2·5-3 mm, ellipsoid-cylindrical, yellowish-brown.{\i  Marshes, bogs, lake-margins and wet woods. Europe southwards to the Pyrenees, N. Italy and S. Bulgaria.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. E. vaginatum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 52 (1753). Plant forming large, compact tussocks; stems (15-)30-60(-80) cm, terete below, trigonous above, leafy in lower half. Leaves c. 1 mm wide, shorter than the stems, trigonous, with brown fibrous sheaths; lamina of cauline leaf absent or a dark, membranous apex to the strongly inflated sheath; ligule absent. Spikelet 1; bracts absent. Glumes ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, 1-veined, grey, translucent, the lower 10-15 darker and sterile, deflexed after anthesis. Bristles c. 25 mm, white; anthers 2·5-3 mm, linear. Nut 2-3 mm, ovoid. 2n = 58.{\i  Bogs and moorland. N., N.E. & C. Europe, extending southwards locally, and mainly in the mountains, to S. Spain, N. Italy and Macedonia.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. E. brachyantherum} Trautv. & C. A. Meyer in Middendorff,{\i  Reise Nord. Öst. Sibir.}{\b  1}({\b 2}), 3: 98 (1856). Like {\b 4} but tussocks smaller and less compact; glumes darker, less membranous, the lowest larger and bract-like, opaque, 3-veined; bristles c. 20 mm, often brown-tinged; anthers 0·5-1·5 mm, narrowly elliptical.{\i  Tundra and bogs. Fennoscandia and N. Russia, southwards to} c. 62°{\i  N.} Fe No Rs (N, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. E. russeolum} Fries ex Hartman,{\i  Handb. Skand. Fl.} ed. 3,{\b  2}: 13 (1838). Plant rhizomatous; stems 10-80 cm, terete, leafy in lower half. Leaves c. 1 mm wide, as long as or longer than stems, trigonous, more or less canaliculate on adaxial surface; lower sheaths reddish; lamina of cauline leaves absent or a dark, membranous apex to the slightly inflated sheath. Spikelet 1; bracts absent, or lowest glume bract-like, 3-veined. Glumes ovate-lanceolate, dark greyish-brown to blackish, with wide hyaline margin, the lowest 2-6 empty. Bristles c. 30 mm, reddish-brown, usually erect; anthers 2-3 mm, linear. Nut c. 2 mm, oblong-obovoid, with distinct beak.{\i  Tundra, bogs and lake-shores. Arctic and subarctic Fennoscandia, arctic Russia.} Fe ?Is No Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  E}. ×{\b  medium} N. J. Andersson, {\i Bot. Not.}{\b  1857}({\b 4}): 62 (1857) ({\i E. russeolum} subsp.{\i  rufescens} (N. J. Andersson) Hyl.), is morphologically intermediate between{\b  6} and{\b  7}, and is possibly a hybrid since it is recorded from the area of the putative parents.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. E. scheuchzeri} Hoppe,{\i  Bot. Taschenb.}{\b  1800}: 104 (1800). Plant rhizomatous; stems 8-40 cm, terete, leafy towards base. Leaves 1-2 mm wide, shorter than stems, linear and canaliculate at base, trigonous above; lower sheaths yellowish-brown; cauline leaves with inflated sheath, without or with a short lamina. Spikelet 1; bracts absent, or lowest glume bract-like, 3-veined. Glumes ovate-lanceolate, greyish-brown to blackish, with narrow hyaline margin, the lowest 2-6 empty. Bristles up to 30 mm, pure white, often patent or deflexed; anthers c. 1 mm, ovate. Nut c. 2 mm, oblong, subterete. {\i Wet bogs and tundra and muddy or peaty lake-margins. N. Europe, southwards to S. Norway and C. Ural; mountains of C. & S. Europe from the Carpathians to the Pyrenees, N. Appennini and Macedonia.} Au ?Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs Is It Ju No Rm Rs (N, W, C) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.       Eleocharis}      R.Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By S.M. Walters. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous perennials (rarely annuals). Stems simple, green, leafless except for basal sheaths. Inflorescence a single, usually many-flowered, terete terminal spikelet. Glumes spirally arranged. Flowers hermaphrodite; perianth of 0-8 bristles. Stamens 2 or 3. Stigmas 2 or 3. Nut usually trigonous or biconvex, with a persistent, usually swollen style-base (stylopodium).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Measurements of the nut exclude the stylopodium. Ripe fruit is necessary for the determination of several species. The shape of the uppermost leaf-sheath provides a constant and valuable character.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   All the species grow in wet places.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: S.-O. Strandhede,{\i  Op. Bot.} ({\i Lund}) {\b 10}({\b 2}): 1-187 (1966) ({\i E. palustris} group). S.-O. Strandhede & R. Dahlgren,{\b  Bot. Not.}{\b  121}: 1-10, 145-152, 305-311, 465-470 (1968) (illustrations and cytology of all Scandinavian species).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spikelet with 2-7(-8) flowers; stylopodium not swollen,
\par
  not or scarcely constricted at junction with nut, and 
\par
  therefore not clearly demarcated from it
\par
2 Stems less than 0·5 mm in diameter, capillary; plant
\par
  reproducing freely by whitish tubers terminating capillary
\par
  stolons .............................................................................................. {\b 2. parvula} 
\par
2 Stems 0·5-1 mm in diameter; plant without tubers ................ {\b 1. quinqueflora} 
\par
1 Spikelet usually with more than 7 flowers; stylopodium
\par
  clearly demarcated from nut and usually swollen and
\par
  constricted at base
\par
3 Nut triquetrous or trigonous, rarely subterete
\par
4 Nut longitudinally ribbed; plants often growing ± submerged
\par

\par
281}
\par