{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Stamen 1(2-3). Nut subequalling the glumes, pale yellow or yellowish-green.{\i  S. Europe.} Al Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W) Si Tu [Az.]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Widespread as a weed in rice-fields; its European distribution as a native is for this reason uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. C. capitatus} Vandelli,{\i  Fasc. Pl.} 5 (1771) ({\i C. schoenoides} Griseb.,{\i  Galilea mucronata} (L.) Parl.). Perennial; roots lanate; rhizomes long, thick, with broad scales; stems 10-50 cm, solitary. Leaves 1-6 mm wide, with revolute margins. Bracts 3-6, with revolute margins, conspicuously dilated and often reddish at the base, exceeding the inflorescence. Inflorescence a dense, sessile, hemispherical to globose head. Spikelets 8-20 × 3-4 mm, lanceolate, with 8-12 flowers, patent. Rhachilla not winged. Glumes 5-8 × 2·5-4 mm, broadly lanceolate or ovate, obtuse but with a rigid mucro 1-3 mm, reddish or purplish, but yellowish-green in apical half, with a wide hyaline margin. Stamens 3. Nut c. 2/5 as long as glumes, brownish-yellow. 2n = 72. {\i Coastal sandy places. S. Europe}. Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. C. michelianus} (L.) Link,{\i  Hort. Berol. }{\b 1}: 303 (1827) ({\i Scirpus michelianus} L.). Caespitose annual; stems 1-28 cm. Leaves 0·5-2 mm wide, flat, shorter than to exceeding the stems. Bracts 3-8, dilated at the base, exceeding the inflorescence. Inflorescence a dense, sessile, ovoid to globose head. Spikelets 2-4 × 1-2 mm, lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, with 8-20 flowers, patent. Rhachilla not winged. Glumes 1·2-2·5 × 0·5-0·6 mm, lanceolate, ovate-lanceolate or elliptical, acuminate, with an ascending to patent mucro 0·2-0·5 mm, hyaline or whitish-yellow, with greenish keel. Stamens 1-3. Nut 1/3-1/2 as long as the glumes, plano-convex or trigonous, pale brown.{\i  S. & C. Europe.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr †He Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b michelianus} ({\i Dichostylis michelianus} (L.) Nees): Glumes in 3 rows. {\i Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pygmaeus} (Rottb.) Ascherson & Graebner,{\i  Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  2}({\b 2}): 273 (1904) ({\i C. pygmaeus} Rottb.,{\i  Dichostylis pygmaeus} (Rottb.) Nees): Glumes distichous.{\i  N. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp. ({\b a}) usually has 2 stigmas and a plano-convex nut, but trigonous nuts with 2 or 3 stigmas are occasionally found; subsp. ({\b b}) can have both plano-convex nuts with 2 stigmas and trigonous nuts with 3 stigmas, sometimes even in the same inflorescence.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. JUNCELLUS Griseb. Rhachilla not articulated. Glumes deciduous. Spikelets with 5-many flowers. Stigmas 2. Nut plano-convex, with a face against the rhachilla.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. C. serotinus} Rottb., {\i Descr. Icon. Rar. Pl.} 31 (1773) ({\i Pycreus serotinus} (Rottb.) Hayek). Perennial; rhizomes long; stems 30-120 cm, solitary. Leaves 4-10 mm wide, subequalling to exceeding the stems. Bracts 3-5, exceeding the inflorescence. Inflorescence a compound umbel; rays 5-10, up to 15 cm. Spikelets 5-20(-30) × 2-3·5 mm, lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, with 8-30 flowers, patent. Rhachilla not winged. Glumes 2-2·5 × 1·5-2 mm, broadly ovate to orbicular, obtuse, reddish-brown, with a greenish centre and a wide hyaline margin. Stamens 3. Nut ¾ as long as to subequalling the glumes, dark brown or black. {\i S. & E. Europe.} Al Au Bu Co Ga †He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. C. pannonicus} Jacq.,{\i  Fl. Austr.}{\b  5}: 29 (1778) ({\i Acorellus pannonicus} (Jacq.) Palla). Caespitose, usually leafless annual or perennial; rhizomes very short; stems 1-40 cm; uppermost sheath sometimes with a lamina up to 5 cm × 1 mm. Bracts 2-3, conspicuously dilated at the base, the lower erect, forming an apparent prolongation of the stem, exceeding the inflorescence, the upper patent, shorter than to exceeding the inflorescence. Inflorescence a fascicle of 2-8 sessile spikelets. Spikelets 5-15 × 2-4 mm, broadly lanceolate or ovate, obtuse, with 10-40 flowers, ascending. Rhachilla not winged. Glumes 1·5-2 × 1·5-2·5 mm, ovate or suborbicular, obtuse, reddish or purplish-brown, with pale greenish stripe c. 1 mm wide in the centre. Stamens 3. Nut ¾ as long as to equalling the glumes, yellowish-brown.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. C. laevigatus} L., {\i Mantissa Alt.} 179 (1771). Perennial, often leafless; rhizomes slender, inconspicuous, usually long; stems 5-50 cm, caespitose or solitary, the sheaths sometimes with a lamina up to 10 cm × 2 mm. Bracts 2, not conspicuously dilated at the base, the lower erect, forming an apparent prolongation of the stem and exceeding the inflorescence, the upper patent, shorter than the inflorescence. Inflorescence a fascicle of 1-40 sessile spikelets. Spikelets 5-23 × 2 mm, oblong or oblong-lanceolate, acute, with 20-50 flowers, ascending. Rhachilla not winged. Glumes 2-2·5 × 1·5-1·8 mm, ovate or suborbicular obtuse, pale green to blackish with paler greenish stripe 0·2-0·5 mm wide in the centre. Stamens 3. Nut 1/3-2/3 as long as the glumes, yellowish- or greyish-brown.{\i  Mediterranean region, S. Portugal}. Bl Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b laevigatus}: Spikelets not more than 10 mm, up to 40 in the inflorescence. Glumes pale green or straw-coloured.{\i  Pantelleria.} ({\i Widespread in tropics and subtropics.})
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b distachyos} (All.) Maire & Weiller in Maire,{\i  Fl. Afr. Nord }{\b 4}: 35 (1957) ({\i C. distachyos} All., {\i Acorellus distachyos} (All.) Palla): Spikelets up to 23 mm, not more than 6 in the inflorescence. Glumes purplish-brown or blackish.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. PYCREUS (Beauv.) Griseb. Rhachilla not articulated. Glumes deciduous. Spikelets with 10-many flowers. Stigmas 2. Nut lenticular, with an angle against the rhachilla.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. C. flavidus} Retz.,{\i  Obs. Bot.}{\b  5}: 13 (1788) ({\i C. globosus} All., non Forskål,{\i  Pycreus globosus} (All.) Reichenb.). Caespitose annual, biennial or perennial; rhizomes absent or short; stems 10-65 cm. Leaves 0·5-3 mm wide, shorter than the stems. Bracts 2-5, exceeding the inflorescence. Inflorescence simple (rarely compound), a sessile dense to lax head of spikelets or an umbel of several subsessile or rayed heads; rays up to 5, up to 3 cm. Spikelets 5-35 × 2-2·5 mm, linear or oblong-lanceolate, broadly acute to obtuse, with 10-60 flowers, patent. Rhachilla not winged. Glumes 2-3 × 1·5-2 mm, lanceolate or ovate obtuse, without a mucro, dark- or reddish-brown, with a 1-veined greenish keel and conspicuous, narrow hyaline margin. Stamens 2. Nut 1/3-1/2 as long as the glumes, brown.{\i  S. Europe.} Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. C. polystachyos} Rottb.,{\i  Descr. Icon. Rar. Pl.} 39 (1773). Like {\b 18} but perennial; spikelets up to 15 mm, narrowly acute; glumes yellowish, straw-coloured or yellowish-brown, acute with a 3-veined keel and a mucro 0·1 mm.{\i  Naturalized in S. Italy} ({\i Ischia}). [It.] ({\i Tropics.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. C. mundtii} (Nees) Kunth,{\i  Enum. Pl.}{\b  2}: 17 (1837) ({\i C. eragrostis }sensu Willk., non Lam.). Perennial; rhizomes long; stems 15-50 cm, solitary. Leaves 3-5 mm wide, shorter than the Stems. Bracts 3-5, shorter than to slightly exceeding the inflorescence. Inflorescence a simple or compound umbel; rays 4-10, up to 5 cm. Spikelets 5-15 × 2 mm, lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, With 10-36 flowers, patent. Rhachilla not
\par

\par
287}
\par