{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 stylopodium broadly triangular-pyramidal, clearly demarcated from nut but fitting closely to it. Bristles 4-6, longer than nut. 2n = 20.{\i  Peat-bogs and wet, sandy heaths; calcifuge. W. Europe, northwards to} 61° 30' {\i in Norway, and extending eastwards to S.E. Sweden, S.W. Poland and N.W. Jugoslavia; isolated stations in the E. Carpathians and Kriti.} Az Be Br Co Cr Da Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs It Ju Lu No Po Rs (W) Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. E. carniolica} Koch,{\i  Syn. Fl. Germ.} ed. 2, 853 (1844). Caespitose perennial with almost capillary stems up to 30 cm and c. 0·5 mm in diameter. Leaf-sheaths pale brown; uppermost very obliquely truncate and acute. Spikelet 3-13 mm, many-flowered, pale brown, often proliferating vegetatively. Lowest glume empty, usually less than ¼ as long as spikelet, encircling its base. Stamens 2(3); stigmas 2. Nut 1-1·5 mm, obovate, biconvex with acute margins, narrowed into a short neck, pale brown, shiny; stylopodium narrowly compressed-conical, acute, clearly demarcated from nut. Bristles 6 or 7, longer than nut. 2n = 20.{\i  Riverbanks and seasonally flooded grassy places. E.C. Europe and N. part of the Balkan peninsula, extending to N. Italy and W. Ukraine.} Au Bu Cz Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W). ({\i Afghanistan}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.      Fuirena}      Rottb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By R.A. DeFilipps. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Stems trigonous, leafy. Inflorescence bracteate, of many-flowered, terete spikelets arranged in panicles or fascicles. Glumes spirally arranged, puberulent. Flowers hermaphrodite; perianth usually absent, sometimes represented by minute scales or bristles. Stamens and stigmas 3. Nut sharply trigonous, sometimes with small, persistent style-base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. pubescens} (Poiret) Kunth,{\i  Enum. Pl.} {\b 2}: 182 (1837). Rhizomatous perennial. Stems 20-70 cm, pubescent at nodes and at apex. Leaves 2-7 mm wide, pubescent near the apex; sheaths pubescent at ligule. Inflorescence a subsessile fascicle of 2-8 spikelets, or a panicle of several to many spikelets, with unequal, puberulent rays. Spikelets 6-11 × 4-5 mm, ellipsoid to ovoid. Glumes 3-5 × 1·5-2 mm, ovate to elliptical, obtuse, keeled, 3-veined, puberulent, greyish-brown, with an awn 1-2·5 mm. Perianth absent, or of 3 bristles up to 0·3 mm. Nut 0·8-1·5 mm, obovoid, white to yellowish-brown, smooth or rugulose. {\i W. Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal; Kriti.} Bl Co Cr Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 6.      Fimbristylis}      Vahl
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By R.A. DeFilipps. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals (rarely perennials). Stems more or less trigonous, leafy below. Inflorescence a simple or compound, bracteate umbel of 1-many spikelets. Spikelets many-flowered. Glumes spirally arranged. Flowers hermaphrodite, or the upper male; perianth absent. Stamens 1-3. Stigmas 2 (rarely 3). Style with long, patent hairs. Nut biconvex (rarely trigonous); style-base deciduous (sometimes tardily).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Measurements of glumes refer to those in the middle of the spikelet.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All species occur in wet places.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b F. cioniana} Savi, {\i Mém. Valdarn.}{\b  3} (Sci.): 98 (1842), an annual species described from N. Italy, and widespread in Tropical Africa, has not been recently seen in Europe and may be extinct. It differs from the other European species in having 3 stigmas and a trigonous nut.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perennial with stems at least 1·5 mm in diameter ....................... {\b 4. ferruginea} 
\par
1 Annual with stems rarely more than 1 mm in diameter
\par
2 Style-base with deflexed hairs; nut smooth or nearly so;
\par
  glumes with an arista 0·5-1 mm .................................................... {\b 3. squarrosa} 
\par
2 Style-base glabrous; nut with longitudinal ribs; glumes
\par
  with a mucro not more than 0·5 mm
\par
3 Spikelets 1-1·5 mm wide; nut with 6 or 7 vertical rows
\par
  of cells on each face ................................................................. {\b 1. bisumbellata}
\par
3 Spikelets 2-4 mm wide; nut with 9(-12) vertical rows of
\par
  cells on each face ................................................................................ {\b 2. annua}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. bisumbellata} (Forskål) Bubani,{\i  Dodecanthea} 30 (1850) ({\i F. dichotoma} auct., non (L.) Vahl). Glaucous, caespitose, semiprocumbent to erect annual. Stems up to 25 cm, c. 1 mm in diameter. Leaves up to 2 mm wide, flat, apically serrulate and obtuse. Inflorescence usually spreading, with many spikelets. Spikelets 3-5 × 1-1·5 mm, narrowly ovoid, sharply angled. Glumes 2-3 mm, light reddish-brown, matt, thin, ovate, keeled with a narrow, 1-veined green midrib. Nut c. 0·75 × 0·6 mm, biconvex, yellowish, with 6 or 7 vertical rows of cells on each face; style-base glabrous, deciduous.{\i  River-banks and rice-fields. S. Europe.} Al Bu Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. F. annua} (All.) Roemer & Schultes, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 95 (1817) ({\i F. dichotoma} auct., ?an (L.) Vahl). Like {\b 1} but inflorescence narrow, with few spikelets; spikelets 4-7 × 2-4 mm, ovoid, subacute; glumes shining, firm, with a wide 3-veined midrib; nut 1-1·25 × 0·8 mm, with 9-12 vertical rows of cells on each face. {\i Wet places, probably introduced.} Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. F. squarrosa} Vahl,{\i  Enum. Pl.}{\b  2}: 289 (1805). Caespitose annual. Stems 2-18 cm, less than 1 mm in diameter. Leaves not more than 0·5 mm wide, glabrous or puberulent. Bracts 3-6. Inflorescence usually with more than 10 spikelets. Spikelets 5-7 × 0·5-1 mm, lanceolate or oblong. Glumes c. 1·5 × 1 mm (including arista), lanceolate, acuminate with a more or less recurved arista 0·5-1 mm, glabrous, the lowest puberulent on the midvein, brown. Stamen 1. Stigmas 2. Nut 0·5-0·8 mm, biconvex, smooth or sometimes minutely longitudinally striate, yellowish to reddish-brown; style-base with deflexed hairs, somewhat persistent. {\i Wet places. Naturalized in N.W. & W.C. Italy}. [It.] ({\i Tropics and subtropics.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. F. ferruginea} (L.) Vahl, {\i op. cit.} 291 (1805) (incl.{\i  F. sieberana} Kunth). Caespitose perennial with short rhizomes. Stems 20-80 cm, 1·5-3 mm in diameter, rigid, striate, with few rigid cauline leaves and more or less coriaceous, brownish basal sheaths. Bracts 2 or 3. Inflorescence with (1-)5-10(-25) spikelets. Spikelets 5-20 × 3-4 mm, ovoid to oblong-ovoid, dull brown. Glumes 3-5 × 2-3 mm, oblong to broadly ovate, more or less hairy distally. Stamens 3. Stigmas 2. Nut 1-1·5 × 0·75-1·25 mm, biconvex, smooth, brownish; style-base deciduous.{\i  Kriti; S. Spain.} Cr *Hs. ({\i Tropics and subtropics}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    A widespread, variable species only recently recorded from Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 7.       Cyperus}         L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By R.A. DeFilipps. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals, biennials or perennials. Stems terete or trigonous, leafy. Inflorescence of spikelets arranged in umbels or fascicles, bracteate. Spikelets with 1-many flowers, terete or compressed. Glumes distichously or, more rarely, spirally arranged. Flowers hermaphrodite; perianth absent. Stamens 1-3. Stigmas 2-3. Nut lenticular, plano-convex or trigonous, without a persistent style-base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Measurements and numbers of rays refer in the case of a compound inflorescence to the primary rays.
\par

\par
284}
\par