{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 winged. Glumes 1·5-2 × 1-1·5 mm, ovate, obtuse, conspicuously sulcate, brown or reddish-brown with yellowish-green centre. Stamens 3. Nut c. ½ as long as the glumes, brown.{\i  S.W. Spain.} Hs. ({\i Africa, India}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. C. flavescens} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 46 (1753) ({\i Pycreus flavescens} (L.) Reichenb.). Caespitose annual; rhizomes absent or short; stems 1-50 cm. Leaves 0·5-3 mm wide, shorter than to exceeding the stems. Bracts 2-5, exceeding the inflorescence. Inflorescence a lax head of sessile spikelets, or a simple umbel with 1-4 rays, up to 5·5 cm long. Spikelets 5-15 × 2-3 mm, lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, with 10-28 flowers, patent. Rhachilla not winged. Glumes 1·5-2·2 × 1-1·5 mm, elliptical or ovate, obtuse, yellowish, with greenish keel, without a conspicuously differentiated margin. Stamens 2-3. Nut 1/3-1/2 as long as the glumes, brownish-black.{\i  Europe, except for much of the north.} Al Au Be Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Az].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. MARISCUS (Gaertner) Endl. Rhachilla articulated near its base. Glumes persistent. Spikelets with (2-)6-many flowers. Stigmas 3. Nut trigonous, with a face against the rhachilla.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. C. strigosus} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 47 (1753). Caespitose perennial; rhizomes short; stems 15-120 cm. Leaves 2-12 mm wide, equalling or exceeding the stems. Bracts 4-6, the outer exceeding the inflorescence. Inflorescence a simple or compound umbel of lax or dense, ovoid-cylindrical heads; rays 2-12, up to 8 cm. Spikelets 8-30 × 1 mm, linear, with (3-)6-25 flowers, ascending to patent. Rhachilla winged. Glumes 3·5-5 × c. 1·5 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, often with a mucro 0·1 mm, straw-coloured or golden-brown, with a greenish keel and a narrow hyaline margin. Stamens 3. Nut c. 25 as long as the glumes, linear to linear-oblong, reddish-grey.{\i  Naturalized in N.W. Italy.} [It.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. C. congestus} Vahl,{\i  Enum. Pl.}{\b  2}: 358 (1805) ({\i Pycreus congestus} (Vahl) Hayek). Like {\b 22} but annual; glumes purplish-red; nut more or less obovoid, black.{\i  Naturalized in C. Portugal }({\i near Coimbra});{\i  casual elsewhere in S. Europe.} [Lu.] ({\i S. Africa, Australia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. C. hamulosus} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 35 (1808) ({\i Dichostylis hamulosa} (Bieb.) Nees). Caespitose annual; stems 2-15 cm. Leaves 0·5-1 mm wide, shorter than to equalling the stems. Bracts 2-4, exceeding the inflorescence. Inflorescence usually of several dense heads, the central sessile, the lateral rayed; rays 1-3, up to 1 cm. Spikelets 3-4 × 1·5-2 mm, ovoid-oblong, with 6-8 flowers. Rhachilla not winged. Glumes c. 0·8 × 0·5 mm (excluding arista), in 3 rows or irregularly distichous, lanceolate, acuminate, with a curved arista 1 mm, 5-veined, purplish-brown, with greenish keel. Stamen 1. Nut c. 2/3 as long as to equalling the glumes, oblong, brown.{\i  E. Europe.} Bu Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. C. squarrosus} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl.}{\b  2}: 6 (1756) ({\i C. aristatus} Rottb.). Like {\b 24} but rays up to 5 cm; spikelets 3-9 mm, linear-oblong, with 6-18 flowers; glumes distichous, 7- to 9-veined; nut 1/3-1/2 as long as the glumes.{\i  Naturalized in N. Italy} ({\i near Pavia}). [It.] ({\i Tropics.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. C. ovularis} (Michx) Torrey, {\i Ann. Lyc. New York}{\b  3}: 278 (1836). Perennial; rhizomes short; stems 20-60 cm, solitary or caespitose. Leaves 3-10 mm wide, usually shorter than the stems. Bracts 4-7, exceeding the inflorescence. Inflorescence a simple umbel of dense heads; rays 1-11, up to 10 cm. Spikelets 3-8 × 1 mm, linear-lanceolate, with 2-3 flowers, patent. Rhachilla winged. Glumes 3-4 × 1 mm, lanceolate, acute, often with a mucro 0·1 mm, prominently 7- to 13-veined, reddish or straw-coloured, with greenish keel. Stamens 3. Nut c. 3/5 as long as the glumes, ellipsoid or oblong, brown.{\i  Naturalized in Açores.} [Az.] (E.{\i  North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. KYLLINGA (Rottb.) Endl. Rhachilla articulated near its base, minute. Glumes persistent. Spikelets with 1-2 flowers. Stigmas 2. Nut lenticular, with an angle against the rhachilla.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. C. brevifolius} (Rottb.) Hassk.,{\i  Cat. Horto Bogor.} 24 (1844). Perennial; rhizomes slender; stems 3-40 cm, solitary or caespitose. Leaves 1·5-3 mm wide, shorter than to exceeding the stems. Bracts 3-4, exceeding the inflorescence. Inflorescence of 1(-3) dense heads. Spikelets 2-3·5 × 0·8-1 mm, lanceolate, with 1 flower. Rhachilla not winged. Glumes 2-3·5 × 2-2·5 mm, unequal, lanceolate, acuminate, with a mucro 0·2-0·4 mm, whitish or yellowish, with minutely setulose greenish keel. Stamens 1-3. Nut c. ½ as long as the glumes, yellowish to brown. {\i Naturalized in Açores and W. Portugal.} [Az Lu.] ({\i Tropical America, Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 8.          Cladium}       Browne
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Stems terete. Inflorescence a terminal panicle of terete, 1- to 3-flowered spikelets aggregated into dense clusters. Glumes spirally arranged. Flowers mostly hermaphrodite; perianth absent. Stamens 2(-3). Stigmas (2-)3. Nut ovoid-trigonous, with small, persistent style-base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: G. Kükenthal,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  51}: 1-17, 139-193 (1942).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. mariscus} (L.) Pohl,{\i  Tent. Fl. Bohem.}{\b  1}: 32 (1809). Plant robust, with far-creeping rhizomes, forming extensive pure stands. Stems 125-250 cm, hollow, leafy. Leaves up to 200 cm, persisting for several years; sheath broad, brown, fibrous; lamina 10-15 mm wide at base, tapered to a narrow, triquetrous apex, glaucous, hard and rigid, sharply keeled, with cutting, serrulate margins. Panicle 30-70 × 5-12 cm, with sheathing bracts; clusters with 5-10 spikelets. Spikelets 3-4 mm, ovoid; uppermost flower usually male. Upper 1-3 glumes fertile, the lower 2-4 sterile and smaller. Nut c. 3 mm, shining brown. 2n = 36, c. 60.{\i  Fens and lake-margins, usually in base-rich water. Europe, northwards to} 62° 15' {\i N. in C. Finland.} All except Fa Is Rs (N) Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 9.       Rhynchospora}       Vahl
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Stems terete or trigonous, leafy. Spikelets terete 2- or 3-flowered, in terminal, and usually also in axillary, pedunculate clusters or panicles. Glumes spirally arranged. Flowers hermaphrodite; perianth of 5-13 scabrid bristles. Stamens 2-3. Stigmas 2. Nut lenticular or trigonous, with a persistent, beaklike style-base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: G. Kükenthal,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  74}: 375-509 (1949); {\b 75}: 90-195 (1950); 273-314 (1951).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spikelets irregularly arranged in a slender, diffuse 
\par
  panicle; nut transversely rugulose ..................................................... {\b 3. rugosa}
\par
1 Spikelets aggregated in 1-3 compact clusters; nut smooth
\par
2 Spikelets white at anthesis; bract usually not exceeding
\par
  the terminal cluster of spikelets (rarely exceeding it
\par
  by up to 15 mm) .................................................................................... {\b 1. alba}
\par
2 Spikelets reddish-brown at anthesis; bract exceeding the
\par
  terminal cluster of spikelets by (10-)25-50 mm .................................. {\b 2. fusca}
\par

\par
288}
\par