{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 110 Utricles 5 mm or more
\par
118 Leaf-sheaths hairy
\par
119 Stems 3-5 mm wide at base; lowest bract usually shorter 
\par
    than inflorescence; utricles with a scabrid beak ............................... {\b 48. hirta}
\par
119 Stems 7-10 mm wide at base; lowest bract usually 
\par
    exceeding inflorescence; utricles with a smooth beak ............. {\b 49. atherodes}
\par
118 Leaf-sheaths glabrous
\par
120 Utricles 8-12 mm ............................................................. {\b 82. hordeistichos}
\par
120 Utricles 5-7·5 mm
\par
121 Leaves 0·5-2 mm wide, with inrolled margins
\par
122 Female spikes 5-8 mm wide ................................................. {\b 50. lasiocarpa}
\par
122 Female spikes 3-4 mm wide ............................................ {\b 133. kitaibeliana}
\par
121 Leaves 1-7 mm wide, flat
\par
123 Lowest bract with a sheath less than 10 mm .................... {\b 134. macrolepis}
\par
123 Lowest bract with a sheath at least 10 mm
\par
124 Male spike 2-3 mm wide .............................................. {\b 131. sempervirens}
\par
124 Male spike 5-10 mm wide
\par
125 Densely caespitose; beak of utricle 1-1·5 mm .................... {\b 79. brevicollis}
\par
125 Not caespitose; beak of utricle 2-3 mm .................................. {\b 80. michelii}
\par
109 Utricles without or with a short, usually conical,
\par
    entire or emarginate beak not more than 0·5 mm
\par
126 Plant not or only laxly caespitose, with creeping rhizomes
\par
127 Female spikes lax
\par
128 Lowest bract shorter than spike ........................................ {\b 108. pediformis}
\par
128 Lowest bract exceeding spike ..................................................... {\b 72. flacca}
\par
127 Female spikes dense
\par
129 Utricles with prominent veins
\par
130 Lowest spike with a filiform peduncle arising from base 
\par
    of stem; stems smooth ............................................................. {\b 105. rorulenta}
\par
130 Lowest spike not arising from base of stem; stems 
\par
    scabrid at least above
\par
131 Utricles 3-3·5 mm; female glumes dark brown .................. {\b 116. globularis}
\par
131 Utricles 1·5-2·5 mm; female glumes whitish or pale 
\par
    greenish-brown ......................................................................... {\b 118. grioletii}
\par
129 Utricles ± veinless
\par
132 Utricles 4-5 mm, plano-convex, hispid-denticulate on
\par
    margin with teeth c. 0·1 mm ........................................................ {\b 73. hispida}
\par
132 Utricles 1·5-4 mm, biconvex or subterete, without 
\par
    teeth on margin or with teeth less than 0·1 mm
\par
133 Male spikes usually 2 or more; basal sheaths 
\par
    remaining entire ............................................................................. {\b 72. flacca}
\par
133 Male spike solitary; basal sheaths becoming fibrous
\par
134 Lowest bract exceeding spike; leaves ± glaucous ............. {\b 117. tomentosa}
\par
134 Lowest bract usually much shorter than spike; leaves
\par
    not glaucous
\par
135 Lowest bract with a sheath 3-5 mm; female glumes 
\par
    equalling utricles, without or with a narrow scarious
\par
    margin ............................................................................... {\b 111. caryophyllea}
\par
135 Lowest bract not sheathing or with a sheath less than
\par
    2 mm; female glumes usually shorter than utricles,
\par
    with a wide scarious margin
\par
136 Female glumes glabrous; utricles 2-2·5(-3) mm, gradually
\par
    narrowed into a beak not scarious at apex ............................ {\b 119. ericetorum}
\par
136 Female glumes sparsely puberulent; utricles 1·5-2 mm,
\par
    ± abruptly contracted into a beak scarious at apex ........... {\b 120. melanocarpa}
\par
126 Plant ± densely caespitose, without creeping rhizomes
\par
137 Lowest spike with a long, filiform peduncle arising 
\par
    from base of stem
\par
138 Utricles equalling or exceeding glumes, abruptly contracted 
\par
    into beak ................................................................................. {\b 104. hallerana}
\par
138 Utricles shorter than glumes, gradually narrowed into 
\par
    an obscure beak ....................................................................... {\b 113. depressa}
\par
137 Lowest spike not with a long peduncle arising from 
\par
    base of stem
\par
139 Inflorescence comprising ± all of stem; female spikes
\par
    with 2-4 flowers ........................................................................ {\b 109. humilis}
\par
139 Inflorescence comprising not more than 2/3 of stem;
\par
    female spikes with usually more than 4 flowers
\par
140 Female spikes lax
\par
141 Flowering stems terminal in middle of leaf rosettes,
\par
    usually leafy below .............................................................. {\b 108. pediformis}
\par
141 Flowering stems lateral, leafless
\par
142 Utricles 3-4(-4·5) mm, ± equalling glumes ............................ {\b 106. digitata}
\par
142 Utricles 2-3 mm, 1½-2 times as long as glumes ............. {\b 107. ornithopoda}
\par
140 Female spikes dense
\par
143 Lowest bract with a sheath at least 5 mm ............................. {\b 112. umbrosa}
\par
143 Lowest bract not sheathing, or with a sheath less than 5 mm
\par
144 Lowest bract glumaceous or setaceous, brown
\par
145 Male spike c. 5 mm wide, subclavate; female glumes 
\par
    brown or reddish-brown ............................................................ {\b 122. fritschii}
\par
145 Male spike c. 2 mm wide, linear-ellipsoid; female 
\par
    glumes blackish or dark purplish-brown
\par
146 Utricles 3-4·5 mm; leaves 1·5-2 mm wide ............................ {\b 121. montana}
\par
146 Utricles 2-2·5(-3) mm; leaves 2-4 mm wide ..................... {\b 119. ericetorum}
\par
144 Lowest bract ± leaf-like, green
\par
147 Lowest spike with a peduncle 1-1·5 cm ............................. {\b 123. markgrafii}
\par
147 Lowest spike sessile
\par
148 Leaves with ± revolute margins; female glumes with wide 
\par
    scarious margin ................................................................... {\b 126. amgunensis}
\par
148 Leaves flat or ± canaliculate; female glumes with 
\par
    narrow scarious margin 
\par
149 Male spike c. 5 mm wide, subclavate ..................................... {\b 122. fritschii}
\par
149 Male spike c. 2 mm wide, linear-ellipsoid ........................... {\b 124. pilulifera}
\par
108 Utricles glabrous on surface of body, though sometimes
\par
    ciliate or hispid-denticulate on margin or on beak 
\par
150 At least the lowest spike pendent 
\par
151 Male spikes 2 or more
\par
152 Utricles without or with an entire or weakly emarginate
\par
    beak less than 0·5 mm
\par
153 Leaves more than 7 mm wide .................................................. {\b 62. pendula}
\par
153 Leaves less than 7 mm wide ....................................................... {\b 72. flacca}
\par
152 Utricles with a usually strongly 2-fid beak more than 0·5 mm
\par
154 Plants with creeping rhizomes and stout stems, not caespitose
\par
155 Utricles ovoid-globose, abruptly contracted into beak,
\par
    patent ................................................................................. {\b 56. rhynchophysa}
\par
155 Utricles ovoid to ovoid-ellipsoid, gradually narrowed
\par
    into beak, ascending
\par
156 Female glumes exceeding utricles ............................................. {\b 53. riparia}
\par
156 Female glumes shorter than utricles ....................................... {\b 57. vesicaria}
\par
154 Caespitose plants, without or with very short creeping
\par
    rhizomes, usually with ± slender stems
\par
157 Female spikes 6-10 mm wide
\par
158 Leaves 6-12 mm wide ............................................................ {\b 84. laevigata}
\par
158 Leaves 2-4 mm wide
\par
159 Male spike 7-12 mm; female glumes usually purplish-black;
\par
    utricles 3·5-5 mm .................................................................... {\b 140. atrofusca}
\par
159 Male spikes 12-20 mm; female glumes dark reddish-brown; 
\par
    utricles 5-6(-7) mm ..................................................................... {\b 141. frigida}
\par
157 Female spikes 3-5 mm wide
\par
160 Female spikes 10-20 mm, oblong-ovoid ....................... {\b 131. sempervirens}
\par
160 Female spikes 20-70 mm, cylindrical
\par
161 Utricles with prominent veins and scabrid beak ........... {\b 86. hochstetterana}
\par
161 Utricles ± veinless, with smooth beak
\par

\par
293}
\par