{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 70 Utricles weakly to strongly convex on adaxial side,
\par
   strongly convex on abaxial side; spikes brown (or 
\par
   rarely pale yellowish-brown) even at anthesis
\par
71 Basal sheaths fibrous ......................................................... {\b 4. appropinquata}
\par
71 Basal sheaths entire
\par
72 Tussock-forming; lower clusters of spikes ± pedunculate ....... {\b 3. paniculata}
\par
72 Not tussock-forming; lower spikes or clusters of spikes sessile .. {\b 5. diandra} 
\par
64 Not or laxly caespitose, with creeping rhizomes
\par
73 Female glumes blackish; utricles 1·5-2·5 mm
\par
74 Stems curved, decumbent, longer than leaves; utricles
\par
   rounded at apex, not scabrid ........................................................ {\b 153. bicolor}
\par
74 Stems straight, erect, shorter than leaves; utricles 
\par
   with a very short, scabrid beak ...................................................... {\b 154. rufina}
\par
73 Female glumes not blackish
\par
75 Utricles 10-20 mm ................................................................... {\b 22. physodes}
\par
75 Utricles less than 6 mm
\par
76 Body of utricle distinctly winged for at least part of its length
\par
77 Middle spikes entirely male; terminal or upper spikes
\par
   entirely female .............................................................................. {\b 15. disticha}
\par
77 Middle spikes with both male and female flowers;terminal
\par
   or upper spikes with at least some male flowers
\par
78 Middle spikes with female flowers above and male 
\par
   flowers below ...................................................................... {\b 14. reichenbachii}
\par
78 Middle spikes with male flowers above and female below
\par
79 Utricles conspicuously veined ................................................... {\b 12. arenaria}
\par
79 Utricles obscurely veined ............................................................. {\b 16. repens}
\par
76 Utricles unwinged, except sometimes narrowly so on the beak
\par
80 At least the lower spikes ± distant, not overlapping ................ {\b 45. disperma}
\par
80 All spikes overlapping
\par
81 Stems smooth
\par
82 Utricles with prominent veins, usually shorter than glumes  {\b 21. stenophylla}
\par
82 Utricles with faint veins, exceeding glumes
\par
83 Stems 2-18 cm; utricles gradually narrowed into beak ............ {\b 24. maritima}
\par
83 Stems (5-)15-30 cm; utricles abruptly contracted into a beak
\par
    .............................................................................................. {\b 19. chordorrhiza}
\par
81 Stems scabrid at least at apex
\par
84 Laxly caespitose, with short, creeping rhizomes
\par
85 Inflorescence less than 2 cm, ovoid to pyramidal, dense ............ {\b 23. foetida}
\par
85 Inflorescence at least 2 cm, oblong to cylindrical ........................ {\b 5. diandra}
\par
84 Not caespitose, with long, creeping rhizomes
\par
86 Inflorescence oblong to oblong-ovoid, not lobed, the
\par
   separate spikes scarcely evident; female glumes acute .......... {\b 21. stenophylla}
\par
86 Inflorescence distinctly lobed, the separate spikes clearly
\par
    evident at least at the base; female glumes cuspidate or aristate ... {\b 20. divisa}
\par
17 Spikes dissimilar in appearance, the terminal or upper
\par
   usually entirely male, the lower usually entirely female 
\par
87 Stigmas 2; utricles usually ± biconvex or plano-convex
\par
88 Utricles inflated, patent ............................................................. {\b 58. saxatilis}
\par
88 Utricles not inflated, erect or erecto-patent
\par
89 Utricles with a long, 2-fid beak
\par
90 Lowest spike with a peduncle 4-12 cm ...................................... {\b 71. vulcani}
\par
90 Lowest spike sessile ............................................................ {\b 135. mucronata}
\par
89 Utricles not beaked, or with a short, emarginate beak
\par
91 At least the lowest spike pendent with a long, filiform
\par
   peduncle ............................................................... ({\b 155-161}). {\b paleacea} group
\par
91 Spikes erect or drooping, but not pendent
\par
92 At least the lower female glumes 3-veined
\par
93 Densely caespitose and tussock-forming, without 
\par
   creeping rhizomes ........................................................................... {\b 164. elata}
\par
93 Not or laxly caespitose, with creeping rhizomes
\par
94 Utricles 3·5-5 mm, prominently veined
\par
95 Leaves (4-)7-10 mm wide .................................................... {\b 51. acutiformis}
\par
95 Leaves 1·5-2(-3) mm side ......................................................... {\b 169. trinervis}
\par
94 Utricles 2·5-3·5(-4) mm, veinless or faintly veined
\par
96 Utricles faintly veined ........................................ ({\b 155-161}). {\b paleacea} group
\par
96 Utricles veinless
\par
97 Stems 3-5(-20) cm; female spikes 5-15 mm ...... ({\b 155-161}). {\b paleacea} group
\par
97 Stems 20-100(-130) cm; female spikes (15-)40-70(-100) mm {\b 162. aquatilis}
\par
92 Female glumes 1-veined
\par
98 Densely caespitose, sometimes tussock-forming, without
\par
   creeping rhizomes
\par
99 Utricles puberulent ................................................................. {\b 124. pilulifera}
\par
99 Utricles glabrous
\par
100 Margins of leaves rolling inwards on drying; basal 
\par
    sheaths brown or reddish-brown ................................................... {\b 167. nigra}
\par
100 Margins of leaves rolling outwards on drying
\par
101 Basal sheaths dark reddish-brown or -black; leaves green;
\par
    utricles 2-2·5 mm .................................................................. {\b 165. caespitosa}
\par
101 Basal sheaths yellowish-brown; leaves glaucous;
\par
    utricles 2·5-4 mm ........................................................................... {\b 164. elata}
\par
98 Not or laxly caespitose, with creeping rhizomes
\par
102 Stems 3-5(-20) cm; lowest bract dilated and ± enfolding stem 
\par
    at base; utricles with a beak c. 0·4 mm wide ...... ({\b 155-161}). {\b paleacea }group
\par
102 Stems usually more than 5 cm; lowest bract not 
\par
    dilated or enfolding stem; utricles with a beak not 
\par
    more than 0·3 mm wide, or ± without a beak
\par
103 Utricles veined, sometimes obscurely so
\par
104 Utricles 3·5-5 mm, uniformly greyish-green, with a 
\par
    prominent, emarginate beak c. 0·3 mm wide ........................ {\b 51. acutiformis}
\par
104 Utricles 2-3·5 mm, green or tinged with black or brown in 
\par
    part, with a minute, entire beak not more than 0·2 mm wide
\par
105 Leaves 1-3(-5) mm wide, the margins rolling inwards 
\par
    on drying; male spike usually solitary ........................................... {\b 167. nigra}
\par
105 Leaves (3-)5-10 mm wide, the margins rolling outwards
\par
    on drying; male spikes usually 2-4 ................................................ {\b 168. acuta}
\par
103 Utricles veinless
\par
106 Lowest bract exceeding inflorescence; stems obtusely 
\par
    trigonous, brittle ....................................................................... {\b 162. aquatilis}
\par
106 Lowest bract not exceeding inflorescence; stems 
\par
    sharply trigonous, not brittle
\par
107 Stems 5-40 cm; basal sheaths entire .................................... {\b 163. bigelowii}
\par
107 Stems 4-120 cm; basal sheaths reticulately fibrous .................. {\b 166. buekii} 
\par
87  Stigmas 3; utricles usually trigonous or terete in section
\par
108 Utricles hairy on at least part of the surface of the body
\par
109 Utricles with a prominent, ± 2-fid beak usually more than 0·5 mm
\par
110 Utricles less than 5 mm
\par
111 Utricles densely tomentose ................................................... {\b 50. lasiocarpa}
\par
111 Utricles puberulent to scabrid-pubescent
\par
112 Lowest spike sessile, with glumaceous or setaceous bract
\par
113 Female glumes dark reddish-brown ........................................ {\b 125. tricolor}
\par
113 Female glumes pale reddish-brown ................................ {\b 126. amgunensis}
\par
112 Lowest spike pedunculate, with leaf-like bract
\par
114 Basal sheaths with lamina
\par
115 Leaves 0·5-1 mm wide, with inrolled margins ................ {\b 133. kitaibeliana}
\par
115 Leaves 1-4 mm wide, flat .............................................. {\b 131. sempervirens}
\par
114 Basal sheaths without lamina
\par
116 Lowest spike pendent ......................................................... {\b 137. ferruginea}
\par
116 Lowest spike erect
\par
117 Female glumes dark reddish- or purplish-brown;
\par
    utricles 3-4 mm ........................................................................ {\b 139. fimbriata}
\par
117 Female glumes whitish to pale greenish-brown;
\par
    utricles 1·5-2·5 mm ................................................................... {\b 118. grioletii}
\par

\par
292}
\par