{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 than stems. Spikes globose to ovoid. Lowest bract shorter than spike to exceeding inflorescence. Female glumes ovate, acuminate and often aristate, with a usually narrow scarious margin. Utricles 3-6 mm, lanceolate to ovate, veinless or with faint veins at base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A very difficult group in need of comprehensive study through  out its range. The exact distribution of several of the taxa recognized here is uncertain. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Roots and often basal sheaths and base of stems purplish-tinged; 
\par
  ligule distinctly longer than wide; utricles corky and 
\par
  thickened at base .............................................................................. {\b 9. spicata}
\par
1 Roots, basal sheaths and base of stems not purplish-
\par
  tinged; ligule not longer than wide; utricles completely
\par
  filled by the nut, not corky and thickened at base  
\par
2 Lowest 3-4 spikes or branches separated from each other
\par
  by a gap of much more than their own length ................................ {\b 11. divulsa}
\par
2 Lowest spikes overlapping or separated from each other 
\par
  by a gap of not more than their own length  
\par
3 Ligule usually wider than long; inflorescence 3-5(-8) cm;
\par
  utricles ± equally narrowed at both ends ....................................... {\b 11. divulsa}
\par
3 Ligule about as wide as long; inflorescence 2-3(-4) cm;
\par
  utricles truncate or rounded at base ............................................. {\b 10. muricata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. spicata} Hudson,{\i  Fl. Angl. }349 (1762) ({\i C. contigua} Hoppe; incl. {\i C. lumnitzeri} (Rouy) V. Krecz.). Roots purplish-brown. Basal sheaths on stems often purplish-tinged. Leaves with lanceolate, acute ligule which is distinctly longer than wide. Spikes 3-10, crowded (or the lowest slightly remote) into a dense, oblong inflorescence 2-3·5(-5) cm. Female glumes pale, often purplish-brown. Utricles 4·5-5·5(-6) mm, ovate-lanceolate, at least twice as long as wide, corky and thickened at base, greenish or pale yellowish-brown, patent, gradually narrowed into beak. 2n = 58, 60.{\i  Grassy, usually damp places. Europe northwards to} c. 62°{\i  N. in Norway and Russia, but absent from much of the Mediterranean region.} ?Al Au Be Br Bu Cr Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. muricata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 974 (1753). Roots blackish-brown. Basal sheaths on stems brown, becoming blackish. Leaves with suborbicular or triangular, obtuse ligule which is about as wide as long. Spikes 4-7, crowded (or the lowest slightly remote) into a dense, oblong inflorescence 2-3(-4) cm. Female glumes pale to blackish-brown. Utricles 3-4·5 mm, ovate, less than twice as long as wide, not corky or thickened at base, yellowish- to blackish-brown, rather abruptly narrowed into beak. 2n = c. 56, 58.{\i  Dry places. Most of Europe except for parts of the north-east.} All except Bl Cr Fa Is ?Rs (N) Sa Si Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b muricata} ({\i C. pairaei} subsp.{\i  borealis} Hyl.): Comparatively robust plants; stems usually strongly scabrid above. Spikes globose. Female glumes blackish- or dark reddish-brown, much darker and shorter than the greenish or brownish utricles. Utricles (3·5-)4·4-5 mm, rounded at base, prominently flanged at the margin, strongly patent.{\i  Usually calcicole. Mainly in N. & E. Europe.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lamprocarpa} Celak., {\i Anal. Kvet. Ceska} 88 (1819) ({\i C. pairaei} F. W. Schultz, {\i C. cuprina} auct., non Nendtvich ex A. Kerner): Comparatively slender plants; stems usually weakly scabrid. Spikes ovoid. Female glumes pale brown, similar in colour to or paler than, and almost as long as the utricles. Utricles 3-3·5 mm, truncate at base, scarcely flanged at the margin, erecto-patent.{\i  Usually calcifuge. Mainly in S. & W. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. divulsa} Stokes in With., {\i Arr. Brit. Pl.} ed. 2,{\b  2}: 1035 (1787). Roots brown or blackish-brown. Basal sheaths on stems pale brown, becoming dark to blackish-brown. Leaves with suborbicular, triangular or depressed, obtuse ligule which is about as wide as or wider than long. Spikes 5-8, at least the lowest usually well-separated from each other, and often on 1-3 short, lateral branches, in an inflorescence 3-10(-20) cm. Female glumes whitish- or pale greenish-brown. Utricles 3·5-5(-5·5) mm, ovate to ovate-elliptical, almost equally narrowed at both ends, not corky or thickened at base, pale to dark brown, with faint veins at base, gradually narrowed into beak. 2n = 56, 58.{\i  Europe northwards to} 59° {\i N. in Sweden, but only on the western and southern margins of the U.S.S.R}. All except Fa Fe Is Rs (N, ?C) Sa Sb.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b divulsa}: Stems comparatively weak. Leaves 2-3 mm wide, with suborbicular or triangular ligule about as wide as long. Inflorescence 5-10(-20) cm; lowest 3-4 spikes or branches separated from each other by a gap of much more than their own length, at least one branch usually present at base of inflorescence axis. Utricles 3·5-4(-4·5) mm, pale to yellowish-brown, appressed to erecto-patent.{\i  Grassy, usually shady places. Mainly in the southern and western parts of the range of the species.} 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b leersii} (Kneucker) Walo Koch, {\i Mitt. Bad. Landesver. Naturk. Natursch. Freiburg} nov. ser., {\b 11}: 259 (1923) ({\i C. pairaei} var.{\i  leersii} (Kneucker) Kük., {\i C. polyphylla} Kar. & Kir.): Stems comparatively robust. Leaves 3-4(-5) mm wide, with depressed ligule usually wider than long. Inflorescence 3-5(-8) cm; lowest 2 spikes separated from each other by a gap of not more than their own length, usually all sessile on the main axis of the inflorescence. Utricles 4·5-5(-5·5) mm, dark brown, patent.{\i  Dry places; calcicole. Throughout most of the range of the species but absent from parts of the south-west}.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C. chabertii} F.W. Schultz,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  54}: 21 (1871), described from W. Germany and recorded from several other countries, is like subsp. ({\b b}), with a short, rather dense inflorescence, but has erecto-patent utricles 5-5·5 mm; it is probably of little taxonomic significance and can readily be distinguished from {\b 9} by the absence of corky thickening at the base of the utricle.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. AMMOGLOCHIN Dumort. Rhizomes far-creeping. Stems sharply trigonous, scabrid above. Inflorescence simple, lobed; spikes 3-30, male above and female below, or female above and male below, or some entirely male or entirely female, linear-oblong to ovoid; lowest bract setaceous to leaf-like. Female glumes usually equalling or slightly shorter than utricles, ovate to oblong-lanceolate, subacute to acuminate, with narrow scarious margin. Utricles ovate to oblong-lanceolate, planoconvex, with a scabrid, 2-fid beak. Stigmas 2. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. arenaria} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 973 (1753). Stems 10-40(-90) cm; basal sheaths dark brown, prominent; dead leaves persistent. Leaves 1·5-4(-5) mm wide, about as long as stems. Spikes 5-18, the terminal male, the middle male above and female below, the lower female, crowded into an irregularly ovoid-oblong, lobed inflorescence 3-8 cm, the lowest spike sometimes rather remote. Female glumes yellowish or pale reddish-brown. Utricles 4·5-5 mm, pale yellowish- or greenish-brown, conspicuously veined, with a broad scarious, denticulate or ciliolate margin, winged throughout or at least in the upper ½, more or less abruptly contracted into a long beak. 2n = 58, 64.{\i  Sandy places, mainly on the coast. N., N.C. & W. Europe, northwards to} c. 63° {\i N. in Norway and eastwards to near Leningrad.} Be Br Da Fe Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs Lu No Po Rs (B, C) Su. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    The distribution of male and female flowers in the middle spikes is sometimes variable and the distinction from {\b 14} is thus not always clear. 
\par

\par
298}
\par