{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 206 Leaves usually exceeding stems, flat; utricles 
\par
    blackish-purple at least in part, ± veinless ............................... {\b 60. stenolepis}
\par
188 Lowest bract sheathing
\par
207 Plant not or only laxly caespitose, with long,
\par
    creeping rhizomes
\par
208 Lowest bract equalling or exceeding inflorescence
\par
209 Utricles papillose on surface of body; male spikes 
\par
    usually more than 1
\par
210 Utricles 1·5-4 mm, biconvex or subterete, without 
\par
    teeth on margin or with teeth less than 0·1 mm ............................. {\b 72. flacca}
\par
210 Utricles 4-5 mm, plano-convex, hispid-denticulate on
\par
    margin with teeth c. 0·1 mm ........................................................ {\b 73. hispida}
\par
209 Utricles smooth on surface of body
\par
211 Utricles 7-9 mm ................................................................ {\b 78. depauperata}
\par
211 Utricles 3-4 mm .............................................................. {\b 130. liparocarpos}
\par
208 Lowest bract shorter than inflorescence
\par
212 Utricles without or with a smooth, usually truncate 
\par
    or emarginate beak
\par
213 Female glumes whitish ................................................................ {\b 128. alba}
\par
213 Female glumes reddish- to blackish-brown
\par
214 Utricles shining; basal sheaths purplish-brown
\par
215 Female glumes reddish-brown; utricles 3-4 mm, with 
\par
    distinct veins at base .......................................................... {\b 130. liparocarpos}
\par
215 Female glumes dark purplish- or blackish brown;
\par
    utricles 4-5 mm, obscurely veined .............................................. {\b 77. asturica}
\par
214 Utricles not shining; basal sheaths very pale brown
\par
216 Sheath of lowest bract inflated; leaves yellowish to dark 
\par
    green; utricles gradually narrowed into a beak 0·5-1 mm .......... {\b 75. vaginata}
\par
216 Sheath of lowest bract not inflated; leaves glaucous;
\par
    utricle scarcely beaked, or abruptly contracted into 
\par
    a beak c. 0·5 mm
\par
217 Leaves shorter than stems, flat; female spikes usually
\par
    not overlapping ........................................................................... {\b 74. panicea}
\par
217 Leaves usually equalling or exceeding stems; female 
\par
    spikes usually overlapping ............................................................. {\b 76. livida}
\par
212 Utricles with a scabrid, usually 2-fid beak
\par
218 Utricles 7-9 mm, with obliquely truncate beak ................ {\b 78. depauperata}
\par
218 Utricles 3-7 mm, with ± 2-fid beak
\par
219 Female spikes less than 5 mm wide
\par
220 Leaves less than ½ as long as stems, tapered from base; 
\par
    male spikes 5-10 mm .................................................................... {\b 132. firma}
\par
220 Leaves at least ½ as long as stems, linear; male 
\par
    spike 15-50 mm
\par
221 Stems obtusely trigonous, smooth; male spike 30-50 mm . {\b 137. ferruginea}
\par
221 Stems sharply trigonous, usually scabrid above; male
\par
    spike 15-25 mm ...................................................................... {\b 139. fimbriata}
\par
219 Female spikes at least 5 mm wide
\par
222 Utricles blackish-brown ........................................................... {\b 141. frigida}
\par
222 Utricles green or pale brownish-green
\par
223 Utricles 3-4(-5) mm; male spike 2-3 mm wide ....................... {\b 94. hostiana}
\par
223 Utricles 5-7 mm; male spike 5-10 mm wide 
\par
224 Leaves 3-5(-7) mm wide; utricles with a beak 1-1·5 mm .... {\b 79. brevicollis}
\par
224 Leaves 2-3 mm wide; utricle with a beak 2-3 mm .................. {\b 80. michelii}
\par
207 Plant ± densely caespitose, without or with very short
\par
    creeping rhizomes
\par
225 Stems lateral, leafless ...................................................... {\b 107. ornithopoda}
\par
225 Stems terminal in middle of leaf-rosettes, usually 
\par
    leafy at base
\par
226 Utricles without or with an entire, truncate, obliquely 
\par
    truncate or emarginate beak
\par
227 Utricles 7-9 mm ................................................................. {\b 78. depauperata}
\par
227 Utricles less than 7 mm
\par
228 Female spikes (25-)40-100(-120) mm; leaves 5-13 mm wide
\par
229 Spikes 3-6 mm wide, dense; utricles purplish-brown ........ {\b 63. microcarpa}
\par
229 Spikes 2-3 mm wide, lax; utricles green .................................. {\b 70. strigosa}
\par
228 Female spikes 3-35 mm; leaves 0·5-8 mm wide
\par
230 Male spike usually more than 3 mm wide
\par
231 Basal sheaths pale to blackish-brown; lowest bract
\par
    with a sheath 5-10 mm ............................................................ {\b 112. umbrosa}
\par
231 Basal sheaths reddish or purplish; lowest bract with
\par
    a sheath less than 5 mm ............................................................ {\b 122. fritschii}
\par
230 Male spike not more than 3 mm wide
\par
232 Female spikes lax
\par
233 Utricles 2-2·5 mm; leaves 0·5-1(1·5) mm wide .................... {\b 110. glacialis}
\par
233 Utricles 4-5 mm; leaves 3-8 mm wide ................................. {\b 127. olbiensis}
\par
232 Female spikes dense
\par
234 Leaves canaliculate or with inrolled margins, glaucous
\par
    or greyish-green
\par
235 Utricles 2·5-4 mm ..................................................................... {\b 92. extensa}
\par
235 Utricles 1·75-2 mm ................................................... ({\b 96-102}). {\b flava }group
\par
234 Leaves flat, green, yellowish- or greyish-green
\par
236 Utricles ascending ....................................................................... {\b 91. diluta}
\par
236 Utricles patent or deflexed ....................................... ({\b 96-102}). {\b flava} group
\par
226 Utricles with a ± 2-fid beak
\par
237 Utricles 8-12 mm ............................................................ {\b 82. hordeistichos}
\par
237 Utricles 1·5-7 mm
\par
238 Lowest bract equalling or exceeding inflorescence
\par
239 Male spikes 2-5
\par
240 Stems 5-50 cm; utricles 5-7 mm, with a narrow, serrulate wing
\par
    ..................................................................................................... {\b 83. secalina}
\par
240 Stems 50-100 cm; utricles 4-5 mm, unwinged .............. {\b 86. hochstetterana}
\par
239 Male spike usually solitary; utricles not winged
\par
241 Male spike 5-10 mm wide ................................................... {\b 79. brevicollis}
\par
241 Male spike less than 5 mm wide
\par
242 Beak of utricle strongly aculeolate with patent 
\par
    pricklets at least some of which are 0·1 mm .................................. {\b 93. mairii}
\par
242 Beak of utricle smooth, or weakly scabrid with 
\par
    ascending teeth or cilia less than 0·1 mm
\par
243 Utricles patent or deflexed
\par
244 Utricles not shining; spikes ovoid ............................ ({\b 96-102}). {\b flava} group
\par
244 Utricles shining; spikes oblong to cylindrical ........................ {\b 90. punctata}
\par
243 Utricles ascending
\par
245 Leaves canaliculate or with inrolled margins, glaucous
\par
    or greyish-green ........................................................................... {\b 92. extensa}
\par
245 Leaves flat, green, yellowish- or greyish-green 
\par
246 Utricles 2·5-3 mm, veinless ....................................................... {\b 89. cretica} 
\par
246 Utricles 3-4·5 mm, prominently veined ...................................... {\b 91. diluta}
\par
238 Lowest bract shorter than inflorescence
\par
247 Most or all female spikes crowded near apex of stem,
\par
    the lower with their peduncles not or scarcely exserted
\par
    from sheath of bract, or female spike solitary
\par
248 Utricles narrowly winged .......................................................... {\b 95. durieui}
\par
248 Utricles not winged
\par
249 Beak of utricle strongly aculeolate with patent 
\par
    pricklets at least some of which are 0·1 mm ................................. {\b 93. mairii}
\par

\par
295}
\par