{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 been recorded from the C. Ural at 59° 40' N.. very close to the boundary of Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. K. simpliciuscula} (Wahlenb.) Mackenzie,{\i  Bull. Torrey Bot. Club}{\b  50}: 349 (1923) ({\i K. caricina} Willd.). Densely caespitose. Stems 3-20(-30) cm, erect; basal sheaths leafy, pale orange-brown, not shining. Leaves usually about half as long as stems, 0·5-1·5(-2) mm wide, more or less canaliculate. Spikes 3-10, 6-8 × 2-3 mm, sessile in an ovoid-oblong inflorescence, each with 4-8 spikelets. Spikelets 1-flowered, the upper male, the lower female. Glumes reddish-brown, with scarious margin. Nut 2-3 mm, pale brown, not shining. 2n = 76.{\i  Damp places; calcicole. N. Europe, from N. England to} c. 66°{\i  N. in Fennoscandia; Pyrenees, Alps, Carpathians.} Au Br Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs It No Po Rm Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 12.           Carex}           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.O. Chater. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Stems simple, usually leafy, often trigonous in section. Leaf-base usually sheathing, with a ligule at junction of leaf and sheath. Inflorescence of one or more spike-like panicles (called spikes for convenience in this account). Flowers unisexual, in 1-flowered spikelets, each subtended by a glume; perianth absent. Male flowers with 2-3 stamens. Female flowers enclosed in a utricle (perigynium) from which the stigmas (and rarely also the prolonged axis of the spikelet) project. Stigmas 2-3. Nut biconvex or trigonous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   In this account measurements of stems include the inflorescence; characters of leaves refer to those on the non-flowering shoots; the length of the ligule (which can, however, best be seen on flowering stems) is measured from the level at which the leaf-sheath joins the leaf-lamina to the apex of the ligule (and is not just the length of the free part of the ligule); characters of the inflorescence refer to the time when the fruit is ripe, and characters of male and female spikes, in Subgen.{\i  Carex,} refer to the terminal and the lowest spike respectively unless otherwise indicated; characters of glumes and utricles refer to those in the middle of the spike, and the female glumes usually have a pale or greenish midrib which is normally not mentioned in the descriptions; measurements of length of utricles include the beak when present; unless otherwise indicated descriptions of the venation of utricles refer only to the abaxial surface and exclude the 2 or 3 often prominent veins that may be present on the edges or angles of the utricle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The habit of the plant supplies important diagnostic characters; many species are caespitose but emit creeping rhizomes, and inadequate material may fail to show this.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Abnormalities in the arrangement of the inflorescence, particularly with regard to the positions of male and female flowers, are not uncommon; it is not practicable to allow for any but the most common of these in the key and descriptions. Spikes on long peduncles arising from the base of the stem, characteristic of certain species, occur as rare abnormalities in many others.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Hybrids,occur between many of the species; they are usually intermediate morphologically between the parents and sterile, with empty utricles, and with anthers remaining undehisced and concealed beneath the male glumes. Hybrids that are at least partially fertile occur, however, especially in the {\i C. flava} group ({\b 96-102}) and in Sect.{\i  Phacocystis} ({\b 154-169}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: G. Kükenthal in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich}{\b  38}({\b IV. 20}) {\i Cyperaceae-Caricoideae}: 67-767 (1909). T.V.Egorova,{\i  Osoki SSSR, Vidy Podroda Vignea.} Moskva & Leningrad. 1966. (Subgen.{\i  Vignea} in the U.S.S.R.);{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  9}: 64-95 (1972). (Subgen.{\i  Carex} in the U.S.S.R.). B. Achtarov,{\i  Rodat} Carex ({\i Ostrica}){\i  v Balgarija.} Sofija. 1957. (Bulgaria.) L. Fenaroli, {\i Ann. Sperim. Agraria }({\i Roma}) nov. ser.,{\b  3}: 621-684 (1949). (Italy.) A. C. Jermy & T.G. Tutin, {\i British Sedges.} London. 1968. (British Isles.) C. Vicioso,{\i  Estudio  Monografico sobre el Genero} 'Carex'{\i  en España} ({\i Bol. Inst. For. Inv. Exper. Madrid,} No. 79). Madrid. 1959. (Spain.) 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spike solitary  
\par
2 Stigmas 3  
\par
3 Utricles densely pubescent ..................................................... {\b 176. scirpoidea}
\par
3 Utricles glabrous   
\par
4 Without creeping rhizomes, densely caespitose   
\par
5 Lower female glumes less than 5 mm ..................................... {\b 177. pyrenaica}
\par
5 Lower female glumes more than 50 mm .............................. {\b 1. phyllostachys}
\par
4 With creeping rhizomes, usually not caespitose    
\par
6 Utricles patent-deflexed  
\par
7 Utricles (2·5-)3·5-4·5(-6) mm, with a bristle protruding
\par
  from aperture of beak ......................................................... {\b 170. microglochin}
\par
7 Utricles 5-7 mm, without a bristle .......................................... {\b 171. pauciflora}
\par
6 Utricles erecto-patent to erect  
\par
8 Leaves circinnate towards apex; female glumes equalling
\par
  or exceeding utricles .................................................................. {\b 172. rupestris}
\par
8 Leaves straight; female glumes c. ½ as long as utricles ............ {\b 173. obtusata}
\par
2 Stigmas 2   
\par
9 Monoecious, with male flowers at base of spike ............................ {\b 36. ursina}
\par
9 Dioecious, or monoecious with male flowers at apex of spike
\par
10 Female glumes persistent, the utricles falling first
\par
11 Monoecious; utricles pale brown or greenish
\par
12 Stems terete, smooth; utricles with faint veins ......................... {\b 174. nardina}
\par
12 Stems trigonous, scabrid above; utricles veinless .................... {\b 175. capitata}
\par
11 Usually dioecious; utricles dark brown or dark reddish-
\par
   or blackish-brown  
\par
13 Densely caespitose, without creeping rhizomes .................... {\b 32. davalliana}
\par
13 Not or laxly caespitose, with creeping rhizomes .......................... {\b 30. dioica}
\par
10 Female glumes caducous, falling before the utricles    
\par
14 Utricles 3-4 mm .................................................................... {\b 177. pyrenaica}
\par
14 Utricles 4·5-7 mm  
\par
15 Utricles acute, not beaked; lower male glumes acute;
\par
   laxly caespitose ......................................................................... {\b 178. pulicaris}
\par
15 Utricles with a long beak; lower male glumes obtuse;
\par
   densely caespitose  
\par
16 Stems (12-)20-40 cm; spike (20-)25-30 mm; female glumes
\par
   pale brown ............................................................................... {\b 179. peregrina}
\par
16 Stems 5-25 cm; spike 15-25 mm; female glumes reddish-brown
\par
   ............................................................................................. {\b 180. macrostylon}
\par
1  Spikes 2 or more  
\par
17 Spikes all ± similar in appearance, the terminal
\par
   usually at least partly female
\par
18 Stigmas 3
\par
19 At least the terminal spike male at apex
\par
20 Lateral spikes pendent  
\par
21 Terminal spike 7-12 mm; female glumes usually purplish-
\par
   black, utricles 3·5-5 mm .......................................................... {\b 140. atrofusca}
\par
21 Terminal spike 12-20 mm; female glumes dark reddish-
\par
   brown; utricles 5-6(-7) mm .......................................................... {\b 141. frigida}
\par
20 All spikes erect  
\par
22 Spikes dense  
\par
23 Inflorescence whitish or pale yellowish .................................. {\b 46. baldensis}
\par
23 Inflorescence brown to blackish
\par
24 Utricles 5-8 mm .......................................................................... {\b 47. curvula}
\par
24 Utricles 3-4 mm  
\par
25 Female spikes 10-20 mm; female glumes exceeding utricles ..... {\b 146. atrata}
\par
25 Female spikes 5-8 mm; female glumes shorter than utricles  {\b 147. parviflora}
\par
22 Spikes lax  
\par
26 Lowest spike sessile or shortly pedunculate, not
\par
   arising from base of stem  
\par

\par
290}
\par