{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 27 Lower female glumes at least 50 mm ............................... {\b 1. phyllostachys}
\par 27 Lower female glumes less than 50 mm ..................................... {\b 2. distachya}
\par 26 Lowest spike with a long peduncle arising from base 
\par   of stem
\par 28 Utricles 3-4·5 mm; female glumes exceeding utricles ....... {\b 114. oedipostyla}
\par 28 Utricles 6-7 mm; female glumes shorter than utricles .......... {\b 115. illegitima}
\par 19 At least the terminal spike male at base
\par 29 Lowest spike erect, sessile or with a peduncle less than 1 cm
\par 30 Spikes in a dense cluster
\par 31 Utricles black or blackish-purple (sometimes with pale
\par   margins) .................................................................................. {\b 147. parviflora}
\par 31 Utricles greenish-brown ....................................................... {\b 150. norvegica}
\par 30 At least the lowest spike 1 cm or more from the one above
\par 32 Terminal spike clavate; lateral spikes ovoid or obovoid ..... {\b 148. buxbaumii}
\par 32 All spikes cylindrical ............................................................. {\b 149. hartmanii}
\par 29 Lowest spike pendent, with a peduncle at least 1 cm
\par 33 Utricles 1·5-2 mm ....................................................................... {\b 68. krausei}
\par 33 Utricles 3-5·5 mm
\par 34 Lowest bract usually exceeding spike, not sheathing 
\par   or with a sheath less than 5 mm
\par 35 Lowest spike entirely female; female glumes scarcely 
\par   longer than and about as wide as utricles ....................................... {\b 146. atrata}
\par 35 Lowest spike with at least one male flower at base;
\par   female glumes about twice as long as and c. 2/3 as 
\par   wide as utricles .................................................................... {\b 144. magellanica}
\par 34 Lowest bract with a sheath 5-25 mm, usually shorter 
\par   than spike
\par 36 Densely caespitose, without creeping rhizomes;
\par   utricles gradually narrowed into beak .................................... {\b 136. fuliginosa}
\par 36 Laxly caespitose, with short, creeping rhizomes;
\par   utricles abruptly contracted into beak ...................................... {\b 140. atrofusca} 
\par 18 Stigmas 2
\par 37 All spikes with female flowers at top
\par 38 Body of utricle distinctly winged for at least part of
\par   its length
\par 39 Caespitose, without or with short creeping rhizomes
\par 40 Inflorescence pale green or yellowish; utricles 7-10 mm ....... {\b 26. bohemica}
\par 40 Inflorescence brown; utricles 3-5 mm
\par 41 Inflorescence (1·5-)2-4 cm, oblong to irregularly 
\par   cylindrical, pale brown ................................................................... {\b 27. ovalis}
\par 41 Inflorescence 1-2 cm, ovoid to pyramidal, dark brown ....... {\b 28. macloviana}
\par 39 Not caespitose, with long, creeping rhizomes
\par 42 Utricles conspicuously veined
\par 43 Leaves 1-2 mm wide, usually shorter than stems; female
\par   glumes dark brown ....................................................................... {\b 13. ligerica}
\par 43 Leaves 2-3 mm wide, exceeding stems; female glumes pale
\par   yellowish-brown ................................................................. {\b 14. reichenbachii}
\par 42 Utricles obscurely veined
\par 44 Leaves not more than 1/2 as long as stems; spikes 
\par   reddish-brown .............................................................................. {\b 17. praecox}
\par 44 Leaves exceeding stems; spikes pale greenish-brown ............. {\b 18. brizoides}
\par 38 Utricles unwinged, except sometimes narrowly so on the beak
\par 45 Female glumes blackish
\par 46 Stems curved, decumbent, longer than leaves; utricles
\par   rounded at apex, not scabrid ........................................................ {\b 153. bicolor}
\par 46 Stems straight, erect, shorter than leaves; utricles 
\par   with a very short, scabrid beak ...................................................... {\b 154. rufina}
\par 45 Female glumes greenish, whitish, or pale to reddish-brown
\par 47 Lowest bract exceeding inflorescence, leaf-like .......................... {\b 25. remota}
\par 47 Lowest bract shorter than inflorescence, usually not leaf-like
\par 48 Utricles patent
\par 49 Utricles with a distinct beak
\par 50 Spikes subglobose; utricles with 2-fid beak .............................. {\b 29. echinata}
\par 50 Spikes oblong-ovoid to oblong; utricles with entire beak ......... {\b 33. elongata}
\par 49 Utricles beakless
\par 51 Lower spikes separated by at least 1 cm; utricles
\par   prominently veined ....................................................................... {\b 43. loliacea}
\par 51 Spikes contiguous or separated by not more than 0·5 cm;
\par   utricles obscurely veined ........................................................... {\b 44. tenuiflora}
\par 48 Utricles erect
\par 52 Terminal spike clavate, male for at least half its 
\par   length; female glumes equalling or exceeding and 
\par   concealing utricles
\par 53 Leaves 2-3 mm wide, flat ..................................................... {\b 37. mackenziei}
\par 53 Leaves 0·5-1(-2) mm wide, canaliculate or flat ........................ {\b 35. glareosa}
\par 52 Terminal spike not or scarcely clavate, male for less
\par   than half its length; female glumes shorter than and 
\par   not concealing utricles
\par 54 Spikes greenish or pale brown, at least the lower 
\par   usually ± distant and not overlapping
\par 55 Utricles with a long, asymmetrical slit down the back
\par   of the beak ............................................................................. {\b 42. brunnescens}
\par 55 Utricles without a slit down the back of the beak
\par 56 Inflorescence 0·5-1 cm; utricles with inconspicuous veins .... {\b 44. tenuiflora}
\par 56 Inflorescence 1·5-5 cm; utricles with prominent veins 
\par 57 Utricles with scabrid, straight-sided beak ....................................... {\b 40. curta} 
\par 57 Utricles with smooth, concave-sided beak .............................. {\b 41. lapponica}
\par 54 Spikes dark brown, usually all overlapping
\par 58 Spikes (5-)8-12(-18) .................................................................. {\b 33. elongata}
\par 58 Spikes 2-4(-6)
\par 59 Lateral spikes entirely female ................................................... {\b 35. glareosa}
\par 59 Lateral spikes with male flowers at base 
\par 60 Utricles c. 2 mm
\par 61 Leaves exceeding and usually concealing stems .......................... {\b 36. ursina}
\par 61 Leaves shorter than stems ....................................................... {\b 34. lachenalii}
\par 60 Utricles at least 2·5 mm
\par 62 Stems usually smooth; spikes usually ellipsoid;
\par   utricles with a parallel-sided beak 0·75-1 mm .......................... {\b 34. lachenalii}
\par 62 Stems scabrid above; spikes ovoid-globose to ovoid or oblong-
\par   clavate; utricles with a conical beak not more than 0·5 mm
\par 63 Spikes 5-10 mm, ovoid-globose .......................................... {\b 38. heleonastes}
\par 63 Spikes 3-5 mm, oblong-clavate .................................................. {\b 39. marina}
\par 37 At least one spike with male flowers at top
\par 64 Densely caespitose, without creeping rhizomes
\par 65 Utricles patent
\par 66 Utricles 2-2·5 mm .................................................................. {\b 8. vulpinoidea}
\par 66 Utricles 3-6 mm
\par 67 Stems less than 2 mm thick; leaves 2-4(-5) mm wide;
\par   utricles veinless except for faint veins at base ............ ({\b 9-11}). {\b muricata} group
\par 67 Stems more than 2 mm thick; leaves (2-)4-8(-10) mm
\par   wide; utricles distinctly veined ± throughout
\par 68 Ligule longer than wide, not overlapping edges of leaf;
\par   utricles shining, smooth, with oblong, thin-walled 
\par   epidermal cells ................................................................................ {\b 7. otrubae}
\par 68 Ligule wider than long, overlapping edges of leaf;
\par   utricles not shining, papillose, with isodiametric,
\par   thick-walled epidermal cells ........................................................... {\b 6. vulpina} 
\par 65 Utricles erect or erecto-patent
\par 69 Inflorescence very dense, capitate ............................................... {\b 23. foetida}
\par 69 Inflorescence ± lax, oblong, cylindrical or very interrupted
\par 70 Utricles plane on adaxial side, weakly convex on abaxial 
\par   side; spikes greenish at least at anthesis .................... ({\b 9-11}). {\b muricata} group
\par
\par 291}
\par