{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 equalling or slightly shorter than utricles. Utricles ovoid-orbicular to -pyriform, erect or erecto-patent, weakly to strongly convex on adaxial side, strongly convex on abaxial side, with a serrulate or scabrid 2-fid beak. Stigmas 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. paniculata} L., {\i Cent. Pl.}{\b  1}: 32 (1755). Forming dense tussocks; roots stout, felted. Stems 40-100(-150) cm; basal sheaths pale to blackish-brown, entire. Leaves 3-7 mm wide. Inflorescence 5-15(-20) cm, lax and irregularly lobed, usually much-branched below, with ovoid spikes, the lower sometimes entirely female. Female glumes pale to orange-brown, with wide scarious margin. Utricles 2·5-3(-4) mm, dark brown, weakly to strongly veined, gradually narrowed into an often almost winged beak. 2n = 60, 62, 64.{\i  Wet places; usually in base-rich habitats. Europe northwards to} c. 63°{\i  N. in Russia, but absent from most of the Mediterranean region and the south-east.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b paniculata}: Inflorescence 5-15(-20) cm. Female glumes brown or orange-brown, smooth on keel. Utricles 2·5-3 mm, weakly veined. {\i Throughout the range of the species except Portugal and S.W. Spain.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lusitanica} (Schkuhr) Maire,{\i  Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Afr. Nord}{\b  20}: 205 (1929): Inflorescence 10-20 cm. Female glumes whitish or very pale brown, the lowest scabrid-ciliate on keel. Utricles 3-4 mm, strongly veined.{\i  W. part of Iberian peninsula}. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. szovitsii} V. Krecz. in Komarov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  3}: 593 (1935), a very closely related plant from the Caucasus, has been reported from Krym. It differs from subsp. ({\b b}) chiefly in having leaves up to 10 mm wide and utricles up to 4·5 mm, and its relationship with this subspecies is uncertain.
\par

\par
{\b   C}. × {\b boenninghausiana} Weihe ({\b 3} × {\b 25}) is a frequent hybrid in many parts of Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. appropinquata} Schumacher,{\i  Enum. Pl. Saell.}{\b  1}: 266 (1801) ({\i C. paradoxa} Willd., non J. F. Gmelin). Forming dense tussocks; roots slender or stout, not felted. Stems 30-80(-100) cm; basal sheaths blackish, becoming fibrous. Leaves 1-3 mm wide. Inflorescence 4-8 cm, lax and irregularly lobed, branched below, with narrowly ovoid spikes. Female glumes reddish-brown, with wide scarious margin. Utricles 2·5-3 mm, dark brown, prominently veined almost throughout, abruptly contracted into a rather narrow, pale brown beak. 2n = 64. {\i Wet places; usually calcicole. Most of Europe from C. France, N. Italy and C. Greece northwards.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. diandra} Schrank,{\i  Cent. Bot. Anmerk. }57 [49] (1781) ({\i C. teretiuscula} Good.). Laxly caespitose, with short ascending rhizomes; roots slender, not felted. Stems 20-60(-100) cm; basal sheaths greyish- to blackish-brown, more or less shiny and entire. Leaves 1-2(-5) mm wide. Inflorescence 2-3(-5) cm, oblong to cylindrical, lobed, usually branched below, with 5-10 ovoid, overlapping spikes or clusters of spikes. Female glumes pale to dark reddish-brown, with wide scarious margin. Utricles 2·5-3 mm, dark brown, prominently veined near base, narrowed into a wide, pale-brown, usually curved beak. 2n = 60.{\i  Fens and marshes. Europe, from S. France, N. Italy and Crna Gora northwards.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N,B,C,W,E)Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. VULPINAE (J. Carey) Christ. Caespitose, without creeping rhizomes, sometimes forming tussocks. Stems trigonous with sharp or winged angles, scabrid above. Inflorescence branched, with numerous spikes in 5-10(-14) ovoid, contiguous or overlapping clusters (or rarely the lowest slightly separate); spikes male above and female below; lowest bract setaceous to leaf-like. Female glumes shorter than utricles. Utricles plano-convex, distinctly veined, patent, gradually narrowed into a scabrid, almost winged, 2-fid beak. Stigmas 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. vulpina} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 973 (1753) ({\i C. compacta} Lam.). Stems 30-100 cm, narrowly winged, with concave faces; basal sheaths dark brown, becoming blackish-fibrous. Leaves (2-)4-8(-10) mm wide, dark green; ligule broadly triangular, wider than long, overlapping edges of leaf. Spikes ovoid, in an irregular inflorescence 3-7(-10) cm; lowest bract setaceous, usually shorter than the spike, with conspicuous, reddish-brown auricles. Female glumes ovate, acuminate or aristate, dark reddish-brown. Utricles (3·5-)4-5 mm, ovate-elliptical, dark brown, dull and papillose, with isodiametric, thick-walled epidermal cells; beak with an asymmetrical slit down the back. 2n = 68.{\i  Wet or shady places. Europe northwards to} 61°{\i  N. in N.W. Russia, but absent from much of the west and south.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co ?Cr Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    The distribution is very uncertain because of confusion with {\b 7}, which has in general a more western and southern range and is probably the commoner species over most of Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. otrubae} Podp., {\i Publ. Fac. Sci. Univ. Masaryk}{\b  12}: 15 (1922) ({\i C. vulpina} auct., non L.,{\i  C. compacta} sensu V. Krecz., non Lam.). Like {\b 6} but stems not or scarcely winged, with plane faces; basal sheaths pale brown; leaves bright green, becoming orange-tinged when dead; ligule ovate-lanceolate, acute, longer than wide, not overlapping edges of leaf; lowest bract often leaf-like and as long as the inflorescence, without auricles; female glumes scarcely aristate, pale orange-brown; utricles 5-6 mm, ovate and less narrowed at base, greenish- or orange-brown to dark grey, shining and smooth, with oblong, thin-walled epidermal cells; beak not slit down the back. 2n = 58, 60.{\i  Ditches and other damp places. Europe northwards to} 63°{\i  N. in Norway.} All except Al ?Co Fa Is Sb ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b C}. × {\b pseudaxillaris} K. Richter ({\b 7} × {\b 25}; {\i C}. × {\i axillaris} auct., non Good.) is a frequent hybrid in some parts of Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. PHLEOIDEAE (Meinsh.) Egorova. Like Sect. {\i Vulpinae} but inflorescence with lower branches usually slightly remote; utricles veinless or with very faint veins, abruptly contracted into an unwinged beak.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. vulpinoidea} Michx, {\i Fl. Bor. Amer.}{\b  2}: 169 (1803). Stems 30-100 cm; basal sheaths dark brown. Leaves 2-4 mm wide. Spikes ovoid-oblong, clustered on numerous branches, crowded into an elongate, lobed inflorescence 5-10 cm, the lower clustered on short branches; bracts filiform or leaf-like, the lower exceeding the spikes. Female glumes ovate-oblong, aristate, pale reddish-brown. Utricles 2-2·5 mm, ovate-orbicular, pale greenish-brown, abruptly contracted into beak.{\i  Frequent as a casual in N.W. & C. Europe and locally naturalized.} [Br Cz Ga He Ho Po.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. PHAESTOGLOCHIN Dumort. (Sect.{\i  Muehlenbergianae }(L. H. Bailey) Kuk.). Like Sect. {\i Vulpinae} but stems with more or less obtuse angles; inflorescence usually simple, with 3-10 spikes; utricles veinless or with faint veins at base, sometimes erect, sometimes abruptly contracted into the always unwinged beak.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 9-11}). {\b C. muricata} group. Stems 20-100 cm; basal sheaths becoming fibrous. Leaves 2-4(-5) mm wide, flat, usually shorter
\par

\par
297}
\par