{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 249 Beak of utricle smooth, or weakly scabrid with ascending
\par
    teeth or cilia less than 0·1 mm ..................................... ({\b 96-102}). {\b flava }group
\par
247 Female spikes ± distant, usually with exserted peduncles
\par
250 Sheath of lowest bract loose, ± inflated .............................. {\b 79. brevicollis}
\par
250 Sheath of lowest bract tight, not inflated
\par
251 Utricles patent or deflexed
\par
252 Beak of utricles strongly aculeolate with patent 
\par
    pricklets at least some of which are 0·1 mm ................................. {\b 93. mairii}
\par
252 Beak of utricles smooth, or weakly scabrid with 
\par
    ascending teeth or cilia less than 0·1 mm
\par
253 Female glumes reddish-brown, with wide, silvery, 
\par
    scarious margin .......................................................................... {\b 94. hostiana}
\par
253 Female glumes pale or reddish-brown, without or with 
\par
    a narrow, inconspicuous margin, or glumes entirely 
\par
    scarious except for green midrib
\par
254 Utricles shining; spikes oblong to cylindrical ......................... {\b 90. punctata}
\par
254 Utricles not shining; spikes ovoid ............................ ({\b 96-102}). {\b flava} group
\par
251 Utricles ascending or erect
\par
255 Upper bracts shorter than spikes; lower bracts usually shorter
\par
than spikes; apex of leaf-sheath of cauline leaves truncate or
\par
concave opposite the ligule (mountains of C. & S. Europe)
\par
256 Basal sheaths with lamina
\par
257 Leaves 0·5-1 mm wide, with inrolled margins ................ {\b 133. kitaibeliana}
\par
257 Leaves 1-4 mm wide, flat
\par
258 Leaves less than ½ as long as stems,tapered from base .......... {\b 132. firma}
\par
258 Leaves at least ½ as long as stems,linear
\par
259 Sheath of lowest bract 10-30 mm ................................. {\b 131. sempervirens}
\par
259 Sheath of lowest bract 3-7 mm ......................................... {\b 134. macrolepis}
\par
256 Basal sheaths without lamina
\par
260 Female spikes 6-8(-10) mm wide ............................................ {\b 141. frigida}
\par
260 Female spikes 2·5-4·5 mm wide
\par
261 Stems sharply trigonous, usually scabrid above .................. {\b 139. fimbriata}
\par
261 Stems obtusely trigonous, smooth
\par
262 Leaves 1-3 mm wide, flat; utricles with a scabrid beak .... {\b 137. ferruginea}
\par
262 Leaves 0·5-1 mm wide, the margins inrolled when dry;
\par
    utricles with a smooth beak ............................................ {\b 138. brachystachys}
\par
255 All bracts exceeding spikes, or rarely the uppermost
\par
    equalling or slightly shorter (usually lowlands, or 
\par
    in mountains of N. & W. Europe)
\par
263 Apex of leaf-sheath of cauline leaves truncate or 
\par
    concave opposite the ligule; female spikes very lax ................. {\b 64. sylvatica}
\par
263 Apex of leaf-sheath of cauline leaves usually convex or with
\par
an ovate projection opposite the ligule; female spikes dense
\par
264 At least some leaves on plant usually more than 6 mm
\par
    wide; ligule usually more than 5 mm
\par
265 Female glumes greenish- or reddish-brown; utricles 
\par
    pale greenish-brown, gradually narrowed into beak ................. {\b 84. laevigata}
\par
265 Female glumes dark purplish-brown; utricles usually 
\par
    dark brown, abruptly contracted into beak ............................... {\b 85. camposii}
\par
264 Leaves not more than 6 mm wide; ligule less than 5 mm
\par
266 Utricles 2·5-3 mm, veinless ....................................................... {\b 89. cretica} 
\par
266 Utricles 3-5 mm, with prominent veins
\par
267 Female glumes with prominent silvery, scarious margin ....... {\b 94. hostiana}
\par
267 Female glumes without or with narrow, inconspicuous
\par
    scarious margin
\par
268 Basal sheaths orange-brown; female glumes dark reddish-
\par
    or purplish-brown ....................................................................... {\b 87. binervis}
\par
268 Basal sheaths pale to dark brown; female glumes pale
\par
    brown to pale reddish-brown
\par
269 Beak of utricle 0·75-1 mm, usually scabrid .............................. {\b 88. distans}
\par
269 Beak of utricle c. 0·5 mm, usually smooth ................................ {\b 91. diluta}
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Indocarex} Baillon. Monoecious. Spikes male above and female below, solitary or 2 or more, all similar in appearance, in a simple or paniculately branched inflorescence. Lateral spikes arising from a fertile utricle or a utriculiform scale open at one side. Stigmas 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. phyllostachys} C. A. Meyer, {\i Verz. Pfl. Cauc.} 30 (1831). Caespitose. Stems 15-45 cm, sharply trigonous, scabrid above; basal sheaths reddish- or blackish-brown, entire. Leaves 1·5-3 mm wide, equalling or exceeding the stems, flat, green or greyish-green. Inflorescence 2-5 cm, of 1- 2 approximate, lax spikes, each with 2-5 female flowers, the lower, if present, shortly pedunculate and arising from a usually fertile utricle. Lower female glumes 5-20 cm, leaf-like. Utricles 5-6 mm, ovoid,. greyish-green, prominently veined, abruptly contracted into a short, smooth beak.{\i  Woods. S. Jugoslavia }({\i W. Makedonija}). Ju. ({\i Caucasian region.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. distachya} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  2}: 336 (1799) ({\i C. linkii} Schkur,{\i  C. longiseta} Brot.). Densely caespitose. Stems (10-)15-45 cm, obtusely trigonous, smooth or scabrid at apex; basal sheaths blackish-brown, entire. Leaves 0·5-1(-2) mm wide, equalling the stems, flat, green or greyish-green. Inflorescence usually occupying at least half the stem. Spikes 2-4, very lax, with 2-5 female flowers, the upper sessile, the lower very remote, shortly pedunculate and arising from a utriculiform scale; lower bracts leaf-like, greatly exceeding inflorescence. Female glumes slightly exceeding utricles, or the lower leaf-like and up to as long as spike. Utricles 4-6 mm, ellipsoid, pale greenish-brown, with one prominent vein . each face, abruptly contracted into a short, smooth beak. 2n = 74.{\i  Dry places. S. Europe.} ?Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Vignea} (Beauv. ex Lestib.) Kük. Monoecious, with 2 or more spikes all similar in appearance, hermaphrodite or unisexual, in a simple or paniculately branched inflorescence, or with a solitary spike with male flowers at base; or dioecious,with a solitary spike. Lateral spikes without a scale between the bract and the lowest glume. Stigmas usually 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. HELEOGLOCHIN Dumort. (Sect.{\i  Paniculatae} (J. Carey) Christ). Caespitose. Stems trigonous, scabrid above. Inflorescence usually branched; spikes numerous, male above and female below (or the lower entirely female); lowest bract shorter than branch, usually setaceous or glumaceous. Female glumes
\par

\par
296}
\par