{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 162 Basal sheaths pale brown, entire; lowest bract with 
\par
    a sheath 20-100 mm .................................................................. {\b 64. sylvatica}
\par
162 Basal sheaths dark brown, fibrous; lowest bract with
\par
    a sheath 10-15 mm ....................................................................... {\b 65. arnellii} 
\par
151 Male spike solitary
\par
163 Utricles without or with a truncate or obliquely truncate beak
\par
164 Not or laxly caespitose, with distinct creeping rhizomes
\par
165 Utricles ± veinless ....................................................................... {\b 72. flacca}
\par
165 Utricles ± veined
\par
166 Lowest bract with a sheath 10-20 mm ......................................... {\b 145. laxa}
\par
166 Lowest bract not sheathing or with a sheath not more than 5 mm
\par
167 Female spikes 3-4 mm wide, with 5-8 flowers ...................... {\b 143. rariflora}
\par
167 Female spikes 5-7 mm wide, with 7-20 flowers
\par
168 Leaves 1-1·5(-2) mm wide; female glumes less than 
\par
    1½ times as long as and at least as wide as utricles;  
\par
    lateral spikes entirely female ...................................................... {\b 142. limosa}
\par
168 Leaves 2-4 mm wide; female glumes more than 1½ 
\par
    times as long as and only c. 2/3 as wide as utricles;
\par
    lateral spikes male at base .................................................. {\b 144. magellanica}
\par
164 Densely caespitose, without creeping rhizomes
\par
169 Utricles 5-7 mm ......................................................................... {\b 66. debilis}
\par
169 Utricles less than 5 mm
\par
170 Female spikes 50-160 mm ....................................................... {\b 62. pendula}
\par
170 Female spikes less than 30 mm
\par
171 Terminal spike with female flowers at apex; leaves 
\par
    about equalling stems .................................................................. {\b 68. krausei}
\par
171 Terminal spike entirely male; leaves not more than 
\par
    ½ as long as stems
\par
172 Terminal spike overtopping the lateral spikes .................. {\b 69. ledebourana}
\par
172 Terminal spike overtopped by at least one of the 
\par
    lateral spikes .............................................................................. {\b 67. capillaris}
\par
163 Utricles with a distinct, 2-fid or prominently emarginate beak
\par
173 Female spikes 5-12 mm wide
\par
174 Utricles patent; lowest bract greatly exceeding inflo-
\par
    rescence ............................................................................ {\b 54. pseudocyperus}
\par
174 Utricles erect; lowest bract not exceeding inflorescence
\par
175 Lowest bract shorter than spike; female spikes ovoid,
\par
    usually all overlapping ............................................................ {\b 140. atrofusca}
\par
175 Lowest bract usually exceeding spike; female spikes
\par
    cylindrical to oblong-ovoid, at least the lower distant
\par
176 Utricles veinless ....................................................................... {\b 141. frigida}
\par
176 Utricles prominently veined
\par
177 Leaves 6-12 mm wide; ligule 7-15 mm ................................. {\b 84. laevigata}
\par
177 Leaves 3-6 mm wide; ligule 1-2 mm ....................................... {\b 87. binervis}
\par
173 Female spikes 2·5-5 mm wide
\par
178 Utricles with smooth beak
\par
179 Leaves 0·5-1 mm wide ................................................. {\b 138. brachystachys}
\par
179 Leaves 2-15 mm wide
\par
180 Female glumes acuminate ...................................................... {\b 64. sylvatica}
\par
180 Female glumes obtuse ............................................................... {\b 66. debilis}
\par
178 Utricles with scabrid or serrulate beak
\par
181 Female spikes 30-60 mm, usually with male flowers at  
\par
    apex .................................................................................. {\b 86. hochstetterana}
\par
181 Female spikes 5-30 mm, without male flowers
\par
182 Leaves 0·5-1 mm wide, with inrolled margins ................ {\b 133. kitaibeliana}
\par
182 Leaves 1-3(-4) mm wide, flat
\par
183 Female spikes 5-10 mm, ovoid; lowest bract with a 
\par
    sheath 3-5(-10) mm ...................................................................... {\b 132. firma}
\par
183 Female spikes 10-30 mm, cylindrical to oblong-ovoid;
\par
    lowest bract with a sheath 10-50 mm
\par
184 Densely caespitose, without creeping rhizomes; basal
\par
    sheaths with lamina .......................................................... {\b 131. sempervirens} 
\par
184 Laxly caespitose, with creeping rhizomes; basal
\par
    sheaths without lamina .......................................................... {\b 137. ferruginea}
\par
150 Spikes not pendent
\par
185 Leaf-sheaths or leaves or stems hairy
\par
186 Utricles 6-9 mm ..................................................................... {\b 49. atherodes}
\par
186 Utricles 2·5-5 mm
\par
187 Female spikes lax, distant ........................................................... {\b 81. pilosa}
\par
187 Female spikes dense, crowded (or sometimes the 
\par
    lowest distant) ....................................................................... {\b 103. pallescens}
\par
185 Leaf-sheaths, leaves and stems glabrous
\par
188 Lowest bract not sheathing
\par
189 Persistent unbranched part of style protruding from apex 
\par
    of utricle ..................................................................................... {\b 152. stylosa}
\par
189 Style not persistent and protruding
\par
190 Male spike overtopped by the female; utricles scarcely
\par
    beaked ................................................................................... {\b 151. holostoma}
\par
190 Male spike overtopping the female; utricles distinctly beaked
\par
191 Utricles papillose
\par
192 Utricles 4-5 mm, plano-convex, hispid-denticulate on
\par
    margin with teeth c. 0·1 mm ........................................................ {\b 73. hispida}
\par
192 Utricles 1·5-4 mm, biconvex or subterete, without 
\par
    teeth on margin or with teeth less than 0·1 mm ............................. {\b 72. flacca}
\par
191 Utricles smooth
\par
193 Plant ± densely caespitose, without or with very
\par
    short creeping rhizomes
\par
194 Stems scabrid above ............................................................... {\b 122. fritschii}
\par
194 Stems smooth
\par
195 Female spikes 2-3 mm wide, lax ........................................... {\b 110. glacialis}
\par
195 Female spikes 3-12 mm wide, dense
\par
196 Lowest bract glumaceous or setaceous; utricles winged ........... {\b 95. durieui}
\par
196 Lowest bract leaf-like; utricles not winged .............. ({\b 96-102}). {\b flava} group
\par
193 Plant not or only laxly caespitose, with long,
\par
    creeping rhizomes
\par
197 Female spikes with not more than 15 flowers
\par
198 Female spikes sessile; utricles 2·5-3 mm ................................. {\b 129. supina}
\par
198 Female spikes pedunculate; utricles 3-4 mm .................. {\b 130. liparocarpos}
\par
197 Female spikes with more than 15 flowers
\par
199 Lowest bract shorter than inflorescence, patent or
\par
    deflexed; leaves 1-2 mm wide .................................................. {\b 59. rotundata}
\par
199 Lowest bract equalling or exceeding inflorescence,
\par
    erect; leaves 2-15 mm wide
\par
200 Utricles with an emarginate beak c. 0·5 mm ...................... {\b 51. acutiformis}
\par
200 Utricles with a 2-fid beak at least 0·75 mm 
\par
201 Female glumes exceeding utricles ............................................. {\b 53. riparia} 
\par
201 Female glumes shorter than utricles
\par
202 Utricles patent, ± abruptly contracted into beak 
\par
203 Male spike solitary ............................................................. {\b 61. mollissima} 
\par
203 Male spikes 2-7 
\par
204 Stems obtusely trigonous; leaves 2-4(-7) mm wide,
\par
    glaucous; female spikes 6-10 mm wide ...................................... {\b 55. rostrata}
\par
204 Stems sharply trigonous; leaves (6-) 8-15 mm wide,
\par
    bright green; female spikes 10-13 mm wide .................... {\b 56. rhynchophysa}
\par
202 Utricles erect or erecto-patent, gradually narrowed
\par
    into beak 
\par
205 Utricles (6-)7-8 mm ................................................................ {\b 57. vesicaria} 
\par
205 Utricles 3·5-5·5 mm 
\par
206 Leaves usually shorter than stems, with inrolled margins; 
\par
    utricles greenish-brown, with conspicuous, sunken veins {\b 52. melanostachya}
\par

\par
294}
\par