{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min23}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min24}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1126}{\nofchars6423}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 2 Tunic sparsely lined inside with straight hairs, or subglabrous
\par 3 Perianth-segments obtuse to shortly acuminate, variously
\par   coloured; leaf-margins flat .......................................................... }{\b\fs28 8. gesnerana}{\fs28 
\par 3 Perianth-segments long-acuminate, scarlet; leaf-margins
\par   undulate ......................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 9. boeotica}{\fs28 
\par 2 Tunic lined inside with long, undulate hairs, forming a felt
\par 4 Leaves less than 1 cm wide; perianth-segments white,
\par   tinged with red on the outside; tunic with a tuft of
\par   woolly hairs protruding from the neck .......................................... }{\b\fs28 7. clusiana}{\fs28 
\par 4 At least the basal leaves more than 1\'b75 cm wide;
\par   perianth-segments red or orange, tinged with green or 
\par   grey on the outside; tunic without a tuft of woolly 
\par   hairs protruding from the neck
\par 5 Perianth-segments c. 3 times as long as wide, elliptical
\par   to elliptic-oblong, acuminate; leaves green ............................... }{\b\fs28 11. agenensis}{\fs28 
\par 5 Perianth-segments about twice as long as wide, ovate to
\par   obovate, subobtuse to shortly apiculate; leaves glaucous ............ }{\b\fs28 10. praecox}{\fs28 
\par 1 Filaments with a hairy boss near the base; perianth 
\par   abruptly narrowed near the base    (Sect.}{\i\fs28  Eriostemones}{\fs28 )
\par 6 Tunic densely felted inside with undulate hairs
\par 7 Leaves 5-7; perianth-segments more than 40 mm, dark 
\par   reddish or ange or orange-brown .................................................. }{\b\fs28 3. goulimyi}{\fs28 
\par 7 Leaves 2-3; perianth-segments less than 25 mm, white,
\par   with a yellow basal blotch ................................................................ }{\b\fs28 6. biflora}{\fs28 
\par 6 Tunic glabrous or sparsely lined inside with straight 
\par   hairs, particularly towards the top
\par 8 Perianth-segments yellow or cream, without a basal
\par   blotch inside ................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 1. sylvestris}{\fs28 
\par 8 Perianth-segments white, pink, purple or orange-brown,
\par   usually with a basal blotch or zone inside
\par 9 Anthers not more than 3 mm; perianth-segments not more
\par   than 30 mm ....................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 5. cretica}{\fs28 
\par 9 Anthers at least 5 mm; perianth-segments more than 35 mm
\par 10 Leaves bright, shining green above, \'b1 flat, the lowest
\par    one usually more than 2\'b75 cm wide; perianth-segments 
\par    lilac-pink or purple, with a yellow basal blotch inside ................. }{\b\fs28 4. saxatilis}{\fs28 
\par 10 Leaves deep, dull green above, canaliculate, the lowest one less 
\par    than 2 cm wide; perianth-segments orange-brown or orange-
\par    yellow, sometimes with a darker basal blotch or zone ............ }{\b\fs28 2. orphanidea}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28   Sect. ERIOSTEMONES Boiss. Filaments with a hairy boss near the base. Perianth-segments usually ciliate at the base. Perianth abruptly narrowed near the base, especially in bud.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. T. sylvestris}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  305 (1753). Bulb 18-45 \'d7 8-22 mm, often stoloniferous; tunic tough, with a few straight hairs inside towards the apex, occasionally glabrous. Stem (5-)8-45 cm. Leaves 2-3(-4), up to 30 \'d7 18 cm, linear-lanceolate to linear, canaliculate. Flowers 1(-2), nodding in bud; perianth yellow, rarely cream, the outer segments 20-63 \'d7 4\'b75-27 mm, narrowly elliptical, acute, sometimes tinged outside with green, pink or crimson; inner segments 21-70 \'d7 6-26 mm, elliptic-oblanceolate, shortly acuminate. Filaments 5-14 mm; anthers 2\'b75-9 mm. Capsule 17-30 \'d7 14-16 mm, globose to oblong-ellipsoid.}{\i\fs28  Meadows, grassy and rocky places, occasionally in open woodland. S. & S.E. Europe, extending northwards to N.W. France and to}{\fs28  c. 55\'b0}{\i\fs28  N. in E.C. Russia; widely naturalized in N. & C. Europe.}{\fs28  Al Bu Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si [Au Be Br Cz Da Ge Ho No Po Su].
\par 
\par   (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 sylvestris}{\fs28  (subsp.}{\i\fs28  grandiflora}{\fs28  (Hy) Hayek, subsp. }{\i\fs28 balcanica}{\fs28  (Velen.) Hayek): Stem at least 2\'b75 mm in diameter (above the uppermost leaf). Lowest leaf at least 1\'b72 cm wide. Outer perianth-segments (35-)36-63 \'d7 8-18 mm, sometimes tinged with green outside on the back, the inner (35-)37-70 \'d7 16-26 mm. Filaments 9-14 mm; anthers 4-9 mm. 2n = 36.}{\i\fs28  Italy, Sicilia, Sardegna; naturalized in N. & C. Europe}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par   (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 australis}{\fs28  (Link) Pamp.,}{\i\fs28  Bull. Soc. Bot. Ital.}{\b\fs28  1914}{\fs28 : 114 (1914) (}{\i\fs28 T. australis}{\fs28  Link, }{\i\fs28 T. australis}{\fs28  subsp. }{\i\fs28 celsiana}{\fs28  (DC.) Hayek; incl. }{\i\fs28 T. biebersteiniana}{\fs28  Schultes fil.): Stem not more than 2 mm in diameter. Lowest leaf less than 1\'b72 cm wide. Outer perianth segments 20-35(-37) \'d7 4\'b75-9 mm, tinged with pink or crimson outside, the inner 21-36(-38) \'d7 6-16 mm. Filaments 5-8 mm; anthers 2\'b75-4 mm. 2n = 24.}{\i\fs28  Mountain meadows and stony places. Throughout the native range of the species except for parts of C. Mediterranean region}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28 T. patens}{\fs28  Agardh ex Schultes fil. in Roemer & Schultes,}{\i\fs28  Syst. Veg.}{\b\fs28  7}{\fs28 : 384 (1829), from S.E. Russia, with white perianth-segments tinged with yellow inside at the base, the outer tinged with violet outside, and}{\b\fs28  T. grisebachiana}{\fs28  Pant., }{\i\fs28 \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  23}{\fs28 : 265 (1873) (}{\i\fs28 T. australis}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  grisebachiana}{\fs28  (Pant.) Hayek), described from S. Jugoslavia, a slender plant with erect leaves and plain yellow flowers, are probably best regarded as variants of}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. T. orphanidea}{\fs28  Boiss. ex Heldr.,}{\i\fs28  Gartenfl.}{\b\fs28  11}{\fs28 : 309 (1862) (}{\i\fs28 T. hageri}{\fs28  Heldr., }{\i\fs28 T. thracica}{\fs28  Davidov,}{\i\fs28  T. hellespontica}{\fs28  Degen). Bulb 20-47 \'d7 8-22 mm; tunic leathery, lined with a few straight hairs inside towards the apex. Stem 8-27 cm, glabrous or finely pubescent above the uppermost leaf. Leaves (2-)3-7, up to 32 \'d7 1\'b76 cm, linear-lanceolate to linear, canaliculate, glabrous. Flowers 1(-3); perianth bright orange or orange-red, the segments with a darker, oblong basal blotch inside, the outer 30-49 \'d7 8-16 mm, elliptical, subacute, usually tinged with green outside, the inner 30-47 \'d7 10-19 mm, elliptical-oblanceolate, obtuse or shortly apiculate. Filaments 9-12 mm; anthers 5-10 mm. Ovary glabrous or rarely pubescent. 2n = 24, 36, 48.}{\i\fs28  Stony ground and cultivated fields. Aegean region and E. part of Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28  Bu Cr Gr Tu. 
\par 
\par Variable; a number of taxa have been recognized horticulturally, but it is not possible to maintain these here. 
\par 
\par Plants occur in Greece with stems up to 43 cm and it is likely that these are hybrids between }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) and }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 . Their flowers are very variable in colour, from yellowish-orange to orange-red or brownish-red; the outer perianth-segments are 45-65 \'d7 10-16 mm, narrowly elliptical, acute to acuminate, and the inner 45-62 \'d7 12-20 mm, broadly elliptic-oblong, acuminate to apiculate.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. T. goulimyi}{\fs28  Sealy & Turrill, }{\i\fs28 Kew Bull.}{\b\fs28  10}{\fs28 : 59 (1955). Like }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28  but bulb-tunics densely woolly inside with long undulate hairs; leaves 5-7, up to 20 \'d7 2 cm, the margin somewhat undulate; perianth bright orange to brownish-red, the outer segments 42-50 \'d7 12-14 mm, elliptic-oblanceolate, subobtuse, the inner 45-52 \'d7 18-22 mm, elliptic-oblanceolate, obtuse; filaments 10-12 mm; anthers 7\'b75-9 mm. }{\i\fs28 Sandy fields and stony ground. \bullet  S. Greece.}{\fs28  Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. T. saxatilis}{\fs28  Sieber ex Sprengel,}{\i\fs28  Syst. Veg.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 63 (1825). Bulb  20-35 \'d7 15-30 mm, markedly stoloniferous; tunics coriaceous, with a few straight hairs inside towards the apex. Leaves 2-3(-4), up to 38 \'d7 4\'b75 cm, oblong-lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, flattish, glabrous, shiny green above. Flowers 1-2(-4); perianth pink to lilac-purple, the segments with a distinct, white-edged, yellow basal blotch inside; outer segments 38-53 \'d7 9-18 mm, elliptical to elliptic-oblong, acute to subacute, the inner 38-55 \'d7 16-30 mm, oblong-elliptical to oblong-obovate, subacute to obtuse, often shortly apiculate. Filaments 8-17 mm; anthers 4\'b75-7 mm. Capsule rarely formed. 2n = 24, 36.}{\i\fs28  Field-margins, hillsides and rocky places. \bullet  S. Aegean region.}{\fs28  Cr ?Gr [It].
\par 
\par  Normally triploid; diploid plants, which appear to have rather smaller, deeper coloured flowers, are sometimes treated as 
\par 
\par 29}
\par }