{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. C. ligerica} Gay,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat}. ser. 2,{\b 10}: 360 (1838) (incl.{\i  C. colchica} Gay). Like {\b 12} but smaller and more slender in all its parts; stems up to 30(-50) cm, with usually pale brown basal sheaths; leaves 1-2 mm wide, usually shorter than stems; spikes 4-7(-10), all female above and male below (the lowest rarely entirely female), in a usually more compact inflorescence 2-3(-4) cm: female glumes darker brown; utricles 3·5-5 mm, with a narrower scarious wing. 2n = 58.{\i  Dry, sandy places. From Latvia and Denmark southwards to W. France, Turkey-in-Europe and W. Kazakhstan, but absent from most of C. Europe.} Bu Da Ga Ge Ho Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. C. reichenbachii} Bonnet,{\i  Petite Fl. Paris.} 420 (1883). Stems 30-50(-90) cm; basal sheaths pale brown. Leaves 2-3 mm wide, exceeding stems. Spikes 5-12, all with female flowers above and male below, or the upper entirely male or male above, ovoid, crowded into an irregular oblong, lobed inflorescence 3-5 cm, the lower spikes often somewhat remote. Female glumes pale yellowish-brown. Utricles c. 5 mm, pale greenish, conspicuously veined, with a wide, denticulate, scarious wing in the upper 2/3, gradually narrowed into a long beak.{\i  Dry, sandy places. • From N. France to N.E. Germany and Czechoslovakia.} Be Cz Ga Ge Ho Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A little-understood plant, perhaps of hybrid origin from {\b 18} and some other species. {\b C. pseudobrizoides} Clavaud,{\i  Bull. Trav. Soc. Pharm. Bordeaux}{\b  13}: 156 (1873), described from S.W. France, is possibly conspecific with {\b 14}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. C. disticha} Hudson,{\i  Fl. Angl.} 347 (1762) ({\i C. intermedia }Good., non Retz.). Stems (15-)30-100(-120) cm; basal sheaths dark brown. Leaves 2-4(-6) mm wide, shorter than or almost equalling stems. Spikes 15-30, the lower and upper usually female, oblong-ovoid, the middle usually male, crowded into an irregularly lobed, long inflorescence 3-7(-10) × 1-2 cm, often conspicuously contracted in the middle, the lowest spikes sometimes slightly remote. Female glumes reddish-brown. Utricles 4-5 mm, brown or reddish-brown, conspicuously veined, with a narrow, scarious, scabrid wing in the upper ¾, gradually narrowed into beak. 2n = 62.{\i  Damp meadows. Much of Europe, but absent from the extreme north and most of the Mediterranean region. }Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge ?Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, ?K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. C. repens} Bellardi, {\i App. Fl. Pedem.} 42 (1792). Like {\b 15} but spikes 8-12, the upper male, the middle male above and female below, the lower female, linear-oblong, all crowded into an oblong, lobed inflorescence 3-5 cm or the lowest slightly remote; utricles pale greenish, obscurely veined, with a wider scarious, scabrid wing extending to the base. 2n = 70.{\i  Coniferous woods and scrub. • C. Europe and N. Italy; very local.} Au ?Ga Ge Hu It Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Many populations of this species do not produce viable seed and it is possibly of hybrid origin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. C. praecox} Schreber,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Lips.} 63 (1771) ({\i C. schreberi} Schrank; incl. {\i C. praecox} subsp.{\i  intermedia} (Celak.) Schultze-Motel). Stems (5-)10-30(-45) cm; basal sheaths pale brown. Leaves 1-2 mm wide, not more than ½ as long as stems. Spikes 3-7, female above, male at base, oblong, straight or rarely slightly curved, more or less crowded in an oblong-ovoid, lobed inflorescence 1·5-2·5(-3) cm. Female glumes reddish-brown. Utricles 2-4 mm, reddish-brown, obscurely veined, with a narrow, scarious, scabrid wing in the upper ½-¾, more or less abruptly contracted into a short beak. 2n = 58.{\i  Dry, sandy or grassy places. Most of Europe, except Fennoscandia and the islands, but local in the west.} Al Au Be Bu ?Co Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) ?Sa ?Tu [Fe].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. C. brizoides} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl.}{\b  1}: 31 (1755). Stems 25-50(-100) cm; basal sheaths pale, sometimes slightly reddish-brown. Leaves 1·5-3 mm wide, exceeding stems. Spikes (3-)5-8(-15), female above, male below, oblong-clavate and slightly curved outwards, contiguous, or the lowest separated from the others, in a lobed inflorescence 1·5-3 cm. Female glumes pale brown or greenish. Utricles 3-4(-4·5) mm, greyish-green, obscurely veined, with a narrow, scarious, scabrid wing throughout, gradually narrowed into a long beak. 2n = 58.{\i  Damp, shady places. • From Latvia and N. France southwards to the Pyrenees, C. Jugoslavia and C. Ukraine.} Al Au Be Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. DIVISAE Christ ex Kük. Rhizomes long. Stems trigonous or subterete. Inflorescence simple, ovoid to oblong; spikes 2-12, ovoid, crowded, male above, female below, the upper sometimes entirely male, the lower sometimes entirely female; lowest bract glumaceous to leaf-like. Female glumes slightly shorter to slightly longer than utricles, ovate to ovate-oblong, acute or aristate, usually with a narrow scarious margin. Utricles ovate, plano- or concavo-convex, with a 2-fid beak. Stigmas 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. C. chordorrhiza} L. fil.,{\i  Suppl.} 414 (1781). Rhizomes very long, sympodially branched, with long, ascending branches. Stems (5-)15-30 cm, ascending, subterete, smooth; basal sheaths greyish-brown. Leaves 1-2(-2·5) mm wide. Spikes 2-5, the lower sometimes entirely female, in a dense, ovoid inflorescence 0·7-1·5 × 0·5-1 cm; lowest bract glumaceous. Female glumes slightly shorter than utricles, acute, pale to dark reddish-brown. Utricles 3-4·5(-5) mm, yellowish- to dark reddish-brown, with faint veins, abruptly contracted into a short, smooth beak. 2n = 60, c. 66.{\i  Very wet bogs, usually amongst} Sphagnum.{\i  N. & C. Europe, extending south-westwards to the Pyrenees and south-eastwards to C. Ukraine.} Au Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Is No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. C. divisa} Hudson, {\i Fl. Angl.} 348 (1762) (incl. {\i C. chaetophylla} Steudel,{\i  C. rivalis} sensu Willk., non Good.,{\i  C. setifolia} Godron, non G. Kunze). Rhizomes stout, far-creeping. Stems (5-)10-50(-80) cm, erect, trigonous, more or less scabrid at least at apex; basal sheaths dark brown. Leaves 1- to 3(-5) mm wide. Spikes 3-8(-12), the upper often entirely male, in a dense ovoid to more or less lax, lobed, oblong inflorescence (0·7-)1·5-2·5(-4) × 0·5-1·2 cm; lowest bract glumaceous to leaf-like and greatly exceeding the inflorescence. Female glumes equalling or slightly exceeding utricles, acute and cuspidate or aristate, dark, sometimes slightly reddish-brown, usually with a narrow scarious margin. Utricles 2·5-4 mm, yellowish- to dark reddish-brown, with prominent, slender veins, more or less gradually narrowed into a short, more or less scabrid beak. 2n = 60, 62.{\i  Sandy or damp, grassy places. S., S.C. & W. Europe, northwards to C. England and the Netherlands; mainly coastal in the northern part of the range}. Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Gr †Hb Ho Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. PHYSODEAE Christ ex Kük. Rhizomes long, slender, creeping. Stems obtusely trigonous. Inflorescence oblong or oblong-ovoid, usually dense; spikes 3-10, male above, female below; lowest bract glumaceous or setiform. Female glumes ovate to oblong-lanceolate, acute, with a wide scarious margin. Utricles ovate and plano-convex or strongly inflated, abruptly contracted into a short beak. Stigmas 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. C. stenophylla} Wahlenb., {\i Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} nov. ser., {\b 24}: 142 (1803) (incl.{\i  C. uralensis} C. B. Clarke).
\par

\par
299}
\par