{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. wahlenbergii} (Holmberg) Juz. in Komarov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  1}: 283 (1933) ({\i A. gramineum} subsp. {\i wahlenbergii} Holmberg). Leaves usually submerged, 0·1-0·3 cm wide, narrowly linear, or sometimes with a narrowly elliptic-oblong blade gradually attenuated at the base into the petiole. Inflorescence not overtopping the leaves. Petals 1·5-3 mm, slightly longer than the sepals, white. Anthers suborbicular. Styles shorter than the ovaries, recurved. Fruitlets 2-2·5 mm; lateral pericarp thin, translucent. 2n = 14. •{\i  Baltic region, southwards to Latvia, and extending eastwards to} c. 33° {\i E. in W.C. Russia.} Fe Rs (B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b  5.         Caldesia}       Parl.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves all basal, floating or aerial, ovate to elliptical, cordate or subcordate. Flowers hermaphrodite, in racemes or panicles. Stamens 6(-11). Carpels few or numerous in a single whorl, free, each with 1 ovule; styles subventral. Fruitlets drupaceous, with woody endocarp and spongy exocarp, swollen, with a short subventral beak, smooth or with tubercles or spines.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. parnassifolia} (L.) Parl., {\i Fl. Ital.}{\b  3}: 599 (1860) ({\i Alisma parnassifolium} L.). Leaves up to 6 × 4 cm, obtuse. Petals 5-7 mm, white. Stamens 6. Carpels 5-10. Fruitlets 3-4 mm, obliquely obovoid, smooth, with 3-5 longitudinal ribs on the dorsal side. {\i From N.C. France to N.E. Ukraine, northwards to Lithuania and southwards to C. Italy}. †Au †Bu Ga Ge †He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 6.              Damasonium}                Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aquatic perennial herbs. Leaves all basal, floating, or aerial in subterrestrial plants. Flowers hermaphrodite, in 1-many whorls, in umbels, racemes or panicles. Stamens 6. Carpels 6-9, in 1 whorl, connate at the base, each with 2-many ventral ovules; styles terminal: Fruit a whorl of follicles; follicles laterally compressed, stellately radiating, with a more or less elongated apical beak.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. alisma} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 1 (1768) ({\i D. stellatum} Thuill.; incl. {\i D. polyspermum} Cosson, {\i D. constrictum} Juz.). Floating leaves up to 8 × 3 cm, oblong or ovate-oblong, subcordate or truncate at the base, obtuse or rounded at the apex; aerial leaves in subterrestrial plants often lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, cuneate at the base. Petals c. 3 mm, white, with a yellow spot at the base. Carpels usually 6. Follicles 5-12 mm, gradually or more or less abruptly contracted into the beak. 2n = 28.{\i  W., S. & S.E. Europe, northwards to S. England.} Bl Br Ga Gr Hs It Lu Rs (W, E)Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable in size and robustness according to the depth of the water; dwarf plants with aerial leaves occur growing subterrestrially on mud. The number of ovules is unstable: usually there are 2 in each carpel, but carpels with 4-many ovules occur here and there over the range of the species, especially in small plants. Multiovulate plants from S.W. Europe and Sicilia have been described as {\b D. polyspermum} Cosson,{\i  Not. Pl. Crit. }47 (1849), but are not worth taxonomic recognition. The shape of the follicles depends on the number of seeds: the beak (empty upper part) of the carpel is elongated in 2-seeded plants, whereas in many-seeded plants the seeds occupy more of the follicle and the beak is relatively shorter and less well defined.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 171.                 BUTOMACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. E.V. Heywood. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial aquatic herbs, with creeping rhizome. Leaves basal, alternate, linear, sheathing at the base. Flowers hermaphrodite, in long-pedunculate umbels subtended by an involucre of bracts. Sepals 3, petaloid. Petals 3, slightly larger than the sepals. Stamens 9, with elongated filaments; anthers opening by longitudinal slits. Carpels 6, connate at the base, each with numerous parietal ovules. Fruit a whorl of follicles; seeds without endosperm; embryo straight.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.              Butomus}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome thick. Leaves usually emersed, triquetrous below. Umbels many-flowered; bracts free, acuminate. Flowers long-pedicellate. Styles short.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. umbellatus} L., Sp. Pl. 372 (1753). Leaves up to 150 cm × 10 mm, twisted. Peduncles usually overtopping the leaves. Sepals and petals 1-1·5 cm, pinkish-white, with darker pink veins, the sepals greenish outside along the midrib. 2n = 26, 39. Still or slowly-moving water. Most of Europe except for some of the islands. All except Az Bl Co Cr Fa Is Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 172.           HYDROCHARITACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. S.M. Walters. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Submerged or floating aquatic herbs, sometimes marine. Leaves alternate, opposite or verticillate, sheathing at the base or with nodal scales. Flowers hermaphrodite or unisexual, 1 or more together in spathes composed of 1 or 2 free or connate bracts. Sepals 3. Petals 3 or 0. Stamens 2-15, free or connate at the base, occasionally some staminodal; filaments elongated or absent; anthers 2-thecous, opening by longitudinal slits. Ovary syncarpous, inferior, often attenuated into a filiform beak. ovules on parietal, sometimes intruded placentas; styles 3-15 Fruit dehiscing irregularly or splitting stellately into valves; seeds without endosperm; embryo straight.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant marine, submerged .......................................................... {\b 10. Halophila} 
\par
1 Plant of fresh water, submerged or floating
\par
2 Stems short, with or without stolons; leaves all basal;
\par
  spathes (at least the male ones) pedunculate
\par

\par
3}
\par