{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. C. disperma} Dewey,{\i  Amer. Jour. Sci. Arts}{\b  8}: 266 (1824) ({\i C. tenella} Schkuhr, non Thuill.). Very laxly caespitose and with slender, creeping rhizomes. Stems 20-50 cm, filiform, weak and often decumbent, trigonous, scabrid above; basal sheaths brown. Leaves 1-1·5 mm wide, bright green. Inflorescence 2-4 cm, very lax; spikes 2-6, globose, each with 1-2 male flowers above and 2-3 female below (or the terminal entirely male), the lower separated from each other by 1-2 cm; lowest bract setiform. Female glumes c. 2/3 as long as utricles, whitish-brown. Utricles 2·5-3 mm, broadly ellipsoid, subinflated, patent, yellowish-green to dark brown, shining, weakly veined, abruptly contracted into a very short, cylindrical, smooth beak.{\i  Damp woods and heaths. N.E. Europe, extending to S.E. Norway and N.E. Poland}. Fe No Po Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. BALDENSES Kük. Densely caespitose. Stems obtusely trigonous, smooth. Inflorescence capitate to irregularly oblong; spikes several, oblong-ovoid, male above and female below. Utricles trigonous in section, with or without a beak. Stigmas 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The two species put together here for convenience differ from all the others in Subgen. {\i Vignea} in having 3 stigmas; their affinities are uncertain and they do not seem to be closely related to each other.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. C. baldensis} L., {\i Cent. Pl.}{\b  2}: 32 (1756). Stems 10-30(-40) cm, smooth; basal sheaths reddish- or orange-brown. Leaves 2-4 mm wide. Inflorescence c. 1·5 × 2·5 cm, capitate; spikes 3-9; bracts 2-5, (1-)2-5(-10) cm, patent, leaf-like. Female glumes whitish or pale yellowish. Utricles 4-5 mm, oblong-ellipsoid, very obtusely trigonous, whitish becoming dark brown, faintly veined, not beaked. 2n = 88, 90.{\i  Dry, rocky places; calcicole. • Alps from} 9° 15' {\i E. to} 11° 30' {\i E., mainly in the south}. Au Ge He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. C. curvula} All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem.}{\b  2}: 264 (1785). Stems 3-30(-40) cm, smooth; basal sheaths pale brown, persistent and conspicuous. Leaves 1-2·5 mm wide. Inflorescence 1-2(-3) cm, ovoid to irregularly oblong, more or less dense; spikes (2-)4-6; lowest bract glumaceous, with a setaceous apex, rarely leaf-like. Utricles 5-8 mm, lanceolate, trigonous with 2 angles almost winged, yellowish- or greenish-brown at base, dark brown above, almost veinless, gradually narrowed into a long, smooth, 2-fid beak. 2n = c. 86. {\i Grassy and rocky places. • Mountains of S. & S.C. Europe.} Au Bu Ga He Hs It Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b curvula}: Roots pale brown. Stems and leaves curved. Leaves canaliculate, in transverse section 7-12 times as wide as thick. Female glumes reddish-brown, with wide scarious margin. {\i Calcifuge. Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b rosae} Gilomen, {\i Mitt. Naturf. Ges. Bern}{\b  1937}: xxvii (1937): Roots dark or blackish-brown. Stems straight; leaves weakly curved. Leaves plano-convex in transverse section and 3-5 times as wide as thick. Female glumes pale, often yellowish-brown, with wide scarious margin.{\i  Calcicole. Alps, Pyrenees}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The distribution of the two subspecies is uncertain, but subsp. ({\b a}) is much the more widespread.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen.{\b  Carex.} Monoecious. Spikes 2 or more, dissimilar in appearance and usually unisexual, at least the terminal one male and the basal one female, in a usually simple inflorescence usually with 3 stigmas, or spikes similar in appearance and at least the terminal one with both male and female flowers, with 2 stigmas; rarely spike solitary, with both male and female flowers, with 2 stigmas. Lateral spikes usually with a scale between the bract and the lowest glume.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CAREX. Laxly caespitose, with long rhizomes. Stems obtusely trigonous; basal sheaths without lamina. Male spikes usually several, linear-lanceolate, shortly pedunculate. Female spikes oblong-clavate to cylindrical, erect; lowest bract sheathing. Female glumes slightly shorter to slightly longer than utricles. Utricles ovoid-ellipsoid, subcoriaceous, prominently veined, usually hairy, gradually narrowed into a 2-fid beak. Stigmas 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. C. hirta} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 975 (1753). Stems (10-)15-50(-100) cm, 3-5 mm wide at base, smooth; basal sheaths brown or reddish-brown, usually entire. Leaves 2-5 mm wide, flat, usually hairy at least on sheaths, green. Male spikes 2-3(-4); glumes usually hairy. Female spikes 2-3, 10-45 × 7-10 mm, dense above, lax below, distant from the male but sometimes overlapping each other, the lowest with peduncles up to 2(-10) cm; lowest bract exceeding spike but usually shorter than inflorescence, with a sheath 3-40 mm. Female glumes acuminate-aristate, pale greenish-brown. Utricles 5-7 mm, green or brownish-green, pubescent all over, with a scabrid beak 1·5-2 mm. 2n = 112.{\i  In a wide variety of habitats, usually on damp sands or in grassy places. Europe, except the extreme north and south.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Sa Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. C. atherodes} Sprengel, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  3}: 828 (1826) ({\i C. aristata} R. Br., non Honckeny,{\i  C. siegertiana} Uechtr.; incl.{\i  C. orthostachys} C.A. Meyer). Like {\b 48} but stems 30-100(-150) cm, 7-10 mm wide at base, sometimes scabrid at apex; basal sheaths fibrous; leaves up to 7 mm wide, sometimes with revolute margins, sparsely hairy beneath and on sheaths; male spikes 2-5, the glumes glabrous; female spikes (2-)3-4(-5), 25-80 mm; lowest bract usually exceeding inflorescence; utricles 6-9 mm, glabrous or sparsely hairy near apex, with a smooth beak 2-3·5 mm. {\i Wet places. E. Europe, southwards to} 48° {\i N. in Ukraine, and extending westwards to N.E. Germany.} Fe Ge Po Rs (N, B, C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. C. lasiocarpa} Ehrh., {\i Hannover. Mag.}{\b  9}: 132 (1784). Stems (30-)45-120 cm, smooth or slightly scabrid above; basal sheaths yellowish- to reddish-brown. Leaves 1-2 mm wide, with inrolled margins, greyish-green. Male spikes 1-3. Female spikes 1-3, 10-35 × 5-8 mm, dense, distant and usually not overlapping, the lowest subsessile or with peduncles up to 2 cm; lowest bract equalling or exceeding inflorescence, with a sheath up to 5(-10) mm. Female glumes acute, brown or reddish-brown. Utricles 3·5-5 mm, greyish-green, densely tomentose, with a ciliate-scabrid beak c. 1 mm. 2n = c. 56.{\i  Fens, wet bogs and lake margins. Europe, southwards to the Pyrenees, C. Italy, S. Jugoslavia and S. Ukraine}. Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. PALUDOSAE (Fries) Christ. Rhizomes long, stout. Stems sharply trigonous; basal sheaths without lamina. Male spikes usually several, linear-ellipsoid, subsessile or shortly pedunculate. Female spikes oblong to cylindrical, dense, distant or the upper overlapping, erect or pendent. Female glumes oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, purplish-brown. Utricles ovate-elliptical and plano-convex or ovoid and inflated, glabrous, erecto-patent or erect, more or less beaked. Stigmas usually 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. C. acutiformis} Ehrh.,{\i  Beitr. Naturk.}{\b  4}: 43 (1789) ({\i C. paludosa} Good.). Stems (30-)50-150 cm, scabrid above; basal sheaths reddish- to greyish-brown, entire. Leaves equalling or exceeding stems, (4-)7-10 mm wide, flat or plicate, glaucous-green. Male spikes 2-3(-4), with subobtuse glumes. Female spikes (1-)3-4,20-50(-70) × 6-8 mm, erect, the lowest sessile or with a peduncle up to 1(-4) cm; lowest bract exceeding inflorescence. Female glumes 2/3-1 1/4 times as long as utricles. Utricles 3·5-5 mm, ovate-elliptical, plano-convex, ascending, greyish-green, finely papillose, prominently veined, more or less abruptly contracted into a usually smooth, emarginate beak
\par

\par
303}
\par