{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 2-4. Female glumes pale brownish-scarious. Beak of utricle scabrid. 2n = 54.{\i  Stony or grassy places; usually calcicole. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b fuscidula} (V. Krecz. ex Egorova) Á. & D. Löve, {\i Bot. Not. }{\b 128}: 504 (1976) ({\i C. fuscidula} V. Krecz ex Egorova): Male spike at least partly enclosed in sheath of bract. Female spikes 2(-3). Female glumes reddish-brown. Beak of utricle usually smooth.{\i  Tundra. Arctic Russia and N. Ural.} ({\i Siberia, North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 68. C. krausei} Boeckeler, {\i Bot. Jahrb. }{\b 7}: 279 (1886). Like {\b 67} ({\b a}) but stems not more than 16 cm; terminal spike with female flowers at apex; lateral spikes up to 6, more distant, the lower often branched; utricles 1·5-2 mm, very shortly beaked. 2n = 36.{\i  Grassy places. Iceland.} Is [Rs (N)]. ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The plants from Iceland belong to subsp.{\b  porsildiana} (Polunin) Á. & D. Löve,{\i  Acta Horti Gotob.}{\b  20}: 175 (1956) ({\i C. capillaris} subsp.{\i  porsildiana }(Polunin) Böcher); subsp.{\b  krausei}, known only from Alaska, differs chiefly in its larger utricles 2·5-3 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 69. C. ledebourana} C. A. Meyer ex Trev.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  36} ({\b 1}): 540 (1863). Like {\b 67} ({\b a}) but male spike 8-15 × 3-5 mm, exceeding female spikes; female spikes (1-)2(-3), distant; female glumes reddish-brown; utricles c. 3 mm.{\i  Damp places. N.E. Russia}. Rs (N). ({\i Siberia, Mongolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 70. C. strigosa} Hudson,{\i  Fl. Angl.} ed. 2, 411 (1778). Laxly caespitose, with short rhizomes. Stems (20-)30-100 cm; basal sheaths pale brown, without lamina. Leaves 1/2-2/3 as long as stems, 5-12 mm wide. Male spike solitary, 30-40(-80) × 1-2 mm. Female spikes 2-5(-7), (25-)40-80 × 2-3 mm, cylindrical, the upper overlapping, the lower distant and suberect or arcuate, with slender peduncles 3-7 cm; lowest bract longer than spike but shorter than inflorescence, leaf-like, with a sheath 30-50 mm. Female glumes acute, greenish-brown, with narrow scarious margin. Utricles 3-4 mm, ellipsoid-trigonous, green, glabrous, gradually narrowed into a short, conical, truncate beak less than 0·5 mm. 2n = 66.{\i  Woods and other damp, shady places. S., C. & W. Europe, northwards to Denmark and eastwards to Bulgaria.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. GRACILES Kük. Like Sect.{\i  Strigosae} but utricles ovate, plano-convex, with a long, slender, 2-fid beak.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 71. C. vulcani} Hochst. in Seub.,{\i  Fl. Azor.} 22 (1844). Caespitose, with short, stout rhizomes. Stems (30-)40-100 cm; basal sheaths brownish. Leaves equalling or shorter than stems, 2-4·5 mm wide. Male spike solitary, 20-60 × 1-3 mm, rarely female at apex or base. Female spikes 3-5, 20-50 × (3-)4-6 mm, fairly dense, the upper crowded and overlapping the male, sometimes male at apex, the lower distant, erect or pendent, with peduncles 4-12 cm, sometimes branched; lowest bract equalling or exceeding inflorescence, with a sheath 30-50 mm. Female glumes acuminate, scarious. Utricles (4-)4·5-5 5 mm, pale greenish, veinless, abruptly contracted into a scabrid beak. {\i Scrub in small volcanic craters. • Açores.} Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. GLAUCAE (Ascherson) Christ. Not or laxly caespitose, with long creeping rhizomes. Stems obtusely trigonous, usually smooth. Male spikes usually several, cylindrical, more or less pedunculate. Female spikes cylindrical, dense or lax, erect or pendent; lowest bract leaf-like, usually at least as long as inflorescence, often sheathing. Female glumes oblong-ovate to elliptic-lanceolate. Utricles oblong-ovoid to obovoid, or ovate to obovate and plano-convex, membranous, more or less veinless, papillose to hispid-scabridulous, abruptly contracted into a short beak. Stigmas 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 72. C. flacca} Schreber,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Lips., App.} 178 (1771). Stems (10-)20-50(-90) cm; basal sheaths brown, often purplish-tinged, entire. Leaves (1·5-)3-6 mm wide, shorter than stems, glaucous beneath, dark green above, gradually acute at apex. Male spikes (1-)2-3(-4), 15-40 × 2-3 mm. Female spikes 1-5, 12-30(-60) × 3-7 mm, usually overlapping; lowest bract exceeding spike and usually inflorescence, not sheathing or with a sheath up to 3(-10) mm. Female glumes acute or acuminate, sometimes aristate, purplish-black to pale reddish-brown, 1-veined. Utricles 2-4 mm, broadly ellipsoid to obovoid, greenish-brown to purplish-black, papillose or hispidulous, with hairs less than 0·1 mm, rounded at apex and with a minute beak not more than 0·2 mm. {\i In a wide variety of habitats; usually calcicole. Most of Europe, but absent from much of the northeast.} All except Az Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Extremely variable, especially in the mountains of C. & S. Europe, but only two subspecies can be at present usefully recognized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b flacca} ({\i C. glauca }Scop.{\i  C. diversicolor} Crantz pro parte; incl. {\i C. claviformis} Hoppe, {\i C. glauca} subsp.{\i  claviformis} (Hoppe) Schinz & R. Keller): Female spikes usually dense, usually distinctly pedunculate and often pendent. Female glumes acute or sometimes aristate, entire, not or usually only slightly exceeding utricles, 1-veined. Utricles 2-3 mm, obovoid, rounded above, patent or erecto-patent. 2n = 76, 90. {\i Throughout the range of the species but absent from much of the Mediterranean region.} 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b serrulata} (Biv.) W. Greuter, {\i Boissiera }{\b 13}: 167 (1967) ({\i C. serrulata} Biv., {\i C. cuspidata} Host, {\i C. glauca} subsp.{\i  cuspidata }(Host) Suess.): Female spikes lax, sessile or subsessile, erect. Female glumes with a denticulate arista, equalling or exceeding the utricles, 3-veined. Utricles 3-4 mm, broadly ellipsoid, rather narrowed above, erecto-patent or erect. 2n = 76, 90.{\i  S. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 73. C. hispida} Willd. in Schkuhr, {\i Beschr. Abbild. Riedgr.} 63 (1801). Stems 45-100 cm; basal sheaths blackish-brown, prominently fibrous. Leaves 4-8 mm wide, shorter than stems, glaucous. Male spikes (2-)3-5, 30-100 × 2·5-7 mm. Female spikes 2-5(-7), 40-120 × 7-12 mm, overlapping, dense, the upper often male above, subsessile or the lower shortly pedunculate, erect; lowest bract usually equalling or exceeding inflorescence, without or with a sheath up to 40 mm. Female glumes exceeding utricles, with a scabrid arista (rarely shorter than utricles and muticous), brown or reddish-brown, 3-veined. Utricles 4-5 mm, ovate or obovate, plano-convex, pale yellowish- or greenish-brown, often purple-spotted above, hispid-denticulate on margin with teeth c. 0·1 mm, often hispid-scabridulous on surface, with a parallel-sided beak 0·3-0·5 mm. 2n = 38, 42. {\i Ditches, marshes and shallow water. Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. PANICEAE (O. F. Lang) Christ. Rhizomes short, slender, creeping. Stems obscurely trigonous, usually smooth. Male spike solitary, cylindrical-subclavate, long-pedunculate. Female spikes cylindrical, lax, erect; lowest bract leaf-like, sheathing. Female glumes shorter than utricles, ovate, acute, with scarious margin. Utricles oblong- to obovoid-ellipsoid, membranous, glabrous, obscurely veined, usually with a short, entire to emarginate beak. Stigmas 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 74. C. panicea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 977 (1753). Stems (5-)10-50(-90) cm, smooth; basal sheaths very pale brown, usually with lamina. Leaves shorter than stems, (1-)2-4(-6) mm wide, flat, glaucous.
\par

\par
306}
\par