{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i most of its range.} Au Bu ?Co Cz Ga Ge Hs Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 83. C. secalina} Willd. ex Wahlenb.,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} nov. ser.,{\b  24}: 151 (1803). Like {\b 82} but stems slender; leaves 2-3(-4) mm wide, female spikes 2-5, 10-30 × 5-8 mm, all more or less distant, with peduncles up to 5 cm; lowest bract with a sheath up to 40 mm; utricles 5-7 mm, not in distinct rows, smooth except for margins and beak, glabrous.{\i  Damp, usually saline places. C. & E. Europe, from C. Germany to S.E. Russia.} Au Cz Ge Hu Po Rm Rs (W, F.).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ELATAE Kük. Caespitose, with short creeping rhizomes. Stems trigonous, smooth or slightly scabrid. Male spikes 1-several, cylindrical. Female spikes oblong to cylindrical, more or less dense; lowest bract leaf-like, sheathing. Female glumes ovate-lanceolate, acuminate or aristate. Utricles obovoid-ellipsoid, membranous, glabrous, prominently veined, suberect to erecto-patent, with a 2-fid beak. Stigmas 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 84. C. laevigata} Sm.,{\i  Trans. Linn. Soc. London}{\b  5}: 272 (1800) ({\i C. helodes} auct., non Link). Stems (30-)50-120 cm, erect, stout, sharply trigonous, usually slightly scabrid above; basal sheaths pale brown, entire, without lamina. Leaves c. ½ as long as stems, (4-)6-12 mm wide, keeled, pale green; apex of inner side of sheath with a rounded projection; ligule 7-15 mm. Male spike 1(-3), 20-60 × 2-3 mm. Female spikes (2-)3-4, 20-60 × 6-8 mm, distant, the lower suberect or pendent, with peduncles 3-15 cm; lowest bract exceeding spike but shorter than inflorescence, with a sheath 20-120 mm. Female glumes slightly shorter than utricles, acuminate, greenish- or reddish-brown. Utricles 4-5·5 mm, pale greenish-brown, gradually narrowed into a scabrid beak 1-1·5 mm. 2n = 72.{\i  Damp, usually shady places. W. Europe, northwards to Scotland; S. Bulgaria.} Be Br Bu Co Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from S. Spain with leaves not more than 4 mm wide resemble {\b 88} in general appearance, but can be distinguished chiefly by the long ligule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 85. C. camposii} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 117 (1852). Like {\b 84} but more densely caespitose; stems smooth; apex of inner side of leaf-sheath usually truncate, the ligule sometimes shorter; female spikes 5-7 mm wide, erect, their peduncles not or scarcely exceeding the bract-sheath; female glumes dark purplish-brown; utricles 3-3·5 mm, usually dark brown, abruptly contracted into a usually scabrid beak c. 1 mm. 2n = 68 .{\i  Flushes and streamsides. Mountains of S.E. Portugal and S. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 86. C. hochstetterana} Gay ex Seub.,{\i  Fl. Azor.} 22 (1844). Stems 50-100 cm, erect, slender, obtusely trigonous, smooth; basal sheaths blackish-brown, entire, without lamina. Leaves shorter than stems, 2-4 mm wide, flat, pale green; ligule less than 1 mm. Male spikes 1-4, 20-50 × 2-4 mm, contiguous. Female spikes 3-5, (15-)30-60 × 4-5 mm, usually male at apex, at least the lower distant, usually pendent, with filiform peduncles 1-3(-6) cm; lowest bract usually shorter than to exceeding inflorescence, with a sheath 15-30 mm. Female glumes equalling utricles, aristate, greenish- or pale reddish-brown. Utricles 4-5 mm, pale brown, gradually narrowed into a scabrid beak c. 1 mm.{\i  Grassy places. • Açores.} Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. SPIROSTACHYAE (Drejer) L. H. Bailey. Caespitose, sometimes with short creeping rhizomes. Stems obtusely trigonous. Male spike usually solitary, subcylindrical, sessile or pedunculate. Female spikes cylindrical to ovoid, dense, erect to pendent; lowest bract leaf-like. Female glumes shorter than utricles, usually obtuse and mucronate. Utricles ovoid-ellipsoid, usually prominently veined and speckled with brown or reddish-brown, with an emarginate to 2-fid beak. Stigmas 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 87. C. binervis} Sm.,{\i  Trans. Linn. Soc. London}{\b  5}: 268 (1800). Caespitose, with short creeping rhizomes. Stems (15-)30-150(-200) cm, smooth or scabrid above; basal sheaths orange-brown, entire. Leaves c. ½ as long as stems, 3-6 mm wide, keeled, dark green; ligule 1-2 mm. Male spike solitary, 20-55 × 3-4 mm. Female spikes 2-4(-6), 15-45 × 5-8 mm, distant, the lower usually pendent, with filiform peduncles 1-15 cm; lowest bract exceeding spike but shorter than inflorescence, with a sheath 10-70 mm. Female glumes dark reddish- or purplish-brown. Utricles 3·5-5 mm, blackish- or purplish-brown, or green, prominently veined, more or less abruptly contracted into a scabrid, 2-fid beak 1-1·5 mm. 2n = 74.{\i  Grassland, moorland and rocky places; calcifuge. W. Europe, northwards to} c. 64°{\i  N. in Norway, but absent from E. France and the W. part of the; Mediterranean region.} Be Br Fa Ga Ge Hb Hs Lu No. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 88. C. distans} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1263 (1759). Densely caespitose. Stems (10-)25-60(-100) cm, smooth; basal sheaths pale to dark brown, entire. Leaves c. ½ as long as stems, 2-6 mm wide, flat, dull or greyish-green; ligule 2-3 mm. Male spike 1(-2), 15-40 × 2-4 mm. Female spikes 2-3(-4), 10-30 × 5-8 mm, distant, erect, the lower with peduncles 1-4 cm; lowest bract exceeding spike but shorter than inflorescence, erect, with a sheath 10-35 mm. Female glumes pale brown or pale reddish-brown. Utricles (3-)4-5 mm, ascending, pale greenish-brown, not shining, prominently veined, abruptly contracted into a usually scabrid, 2-fid beak 0·75-1 mm. 2n = 72, 74.{\i  Damp places. Most of Europe except the north-east and extreme north}. All except ?Az Fa Is Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Extremely variable, especially in S. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 89. C. cretica} Gradstein & Kern,{\i  Acta Bot. Neerl.}{\b  17}: 242 (1968). Like {\b 88} but less densely caespitose; stems 15-30 cm; leaves 1·5-2·5 mm wide, pale green; male spike 10-15 × 2-3 mm; female spikes 7-15 × 3-4 mm, the lower with peduncles 0·5-1(-3) cm; lowest bract sometimes equalling or exceeding inflorescence; female glumes mostly scarious; utricles 2·5-3 mm, veinless, with a beak 0·5-0·75 mm.{\i  Damp places. • W. Kriti. }Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 90. C. punctata} Gaudin,{\i  Agrost. Helv.}{\b  2}: 152 (1811). Like {\b 88} but less densely caespitose, with short rhizomes; leaves 4-8 mm wide, bright green; male spike 10-30 × 2-3 mm; female spikes 7-25 × 5-7 mm, cylindrical or oblong; lowest bract almost as long as or exceeding inflorescence; female glumes sometimes mostly scarious except for green midrib; utricles 3-4 mm, slightly inflated, more or less patent, shining, with slender veins, with a usually smooth beak. 2n = 68.{\i  Damp, grassy or rocky places, usually near the sea. W. & S. Europe, extending locally north-eastwards to S.W. Sweden, N. Poland and S.E. Austria.} Au Az Br Bu Co Cr Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu No Po Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 91. C. diluta} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 388 (1808) (incl. {\i C. aspratilis} V. Krecz.,{\i  C. karelinii} Meinsh.). Like {\b 88} but stems 5-50 cm; leaves sometimes green or yellowish-green; male spike 10-25(-30) mm; female spikes 8-20(-30) mm, the upper 2-3 usually approximate; lowest bract usually equalling or exceeding inflorescence; utricles 3-4·5 mm, with a usually smooth, emarginate or weakly 2-fid, sometimes wide beak c. 0·5 mm.{\i  Saline meadows and streamsides. C. & S. parts of U.S.S.R}. Rs (C, W, ?K, E).
\par

\par
308}
\par