{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i maritime rocks. Coats of N. Europe, southwards to} 58°{\i  N}. Fe Is No Rs (N, B, C) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. C. ursina} Dewey,{\i  Amer. Jour. Sci. Arts}{\b  27}: 240 (1835) Caespitose and with short rhizomes. Stems 2-5 cm, obscurely trigonous, smooth, curved, usually concealed by the very narrow, canaliculate, more or less smooth leaves. Spikes 4-6 mm, solitary or very rarely 2 close together, ovoid or, subglobose, female above and male below. Female glumes c. 2/3 as long as utricles, ovate, obtuse, reddish-brown. Utricles c. 2 mm, ovate, plano-convex, suberect, pale greyish-green, sometimes brown at apex, with faint veins and an obscure beak with a slit down the back. 2n = 64.{\i  Maritime sands. Spitsbergen; Arctic Russia} ({\i Vajgac}). Rs (N) Sb. ({\i Arctic Asia, arctic and subarctic North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. C. mackenziei} V. Krecz. in Komarov,{\i  Fl. URSS }{\b 3}: 183 (1935). Laxly to densely caespitose, with ascending and often long rhizomes. Stems 10-40 cm, obtusely trigonous, smooth or slightly scabrid at apex; basal sheaths pale brown, persistent and conspicuous. Leaves 2-3 mm wide, flat, greyish- or yellowish-green. Inflorescence 2-5 cm, lax; spikes 3-6, the terminal 12-20 mm, clavate, female only in the upper 1/3, male below, the lateral 8-15 mm, oblong, entirely female, usually all overlapping or lowest slightly remote. Female glumes equalling (or slightly exceeding) and concealing utricles, yellowish- or pale reddish-brown, with narrow scarious margin. Utricles 2·75-3·5 mm, broadly ovate-elliptical, plano-convex, erect, greyish-green, prominently veined, gradually narrowed into an indistinct, conical, sparsely scabrid beak. 2n = 64.{\i  Coastal and estuarine marshes. Coasts of N. Europe, southwards to} 56° {\i N. in S. Sweden.} Fe Is No Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The hybrid {\b 37} × {\b 40} ({\i C}. × {\i pseudohelvola }Kihlman) is common in marshes in Fennoscandia, especially by the Gulf of Bothnia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. C. heleonastes} L. fil.,{\i  Suppl.} 414 (1781). Caespitose. Stems 15-40 cm, sharply trigonous, scabrid above; basal sheaths pale brown. Leaves 1-2 mm wide, bluish-green. Inflorescence 1-2 cm, ovoid-oblong, dense; spikes 3-4(-6), 5-10 mm, ovoid-globose to ovoid, each with 6-10 flowers, male below, female above, all overlapping. Female glumes slightly shorter than utricles, pale to reddish-brown, with wide scarious margin. Utricles 2·75-3·5 mm, ovate-elliptical, plano-convex, pale brown, becoming dark brown at apex, erecto-patent, with slender veins, gradually narrowed into a short concave-sided, conical, usually slightly scabrid beak c. 0·5 mm. 2n = c. 64. {\i Damp places. N. Europe, westwards to S.W. Norway and N.W. Germany; Iceland; Alps; isolated stations in the E. Carpathians and W. Bulgaria.} Au Bu Fe Ga Ge He Is It No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. C. marina} Dewey, {\i Amer. Jour. Sci. Arts }{\b 29}: 247 (1836) ({\i C. amblyrhyncha} V. Krecz.). Like {\b 38} but 10-15(-30) cm; inflorescence not more than 1·5 cm, narrower; spikes 2(-3), 3-5 mm, oblong-clavate; utricles 2·5-3 mm, elliptical, the apex conical with weakly convex, usually smooth margins. {\i Boggy tundra and gravelly shores. Arctic Europe} ({\i Spitsbergen; Vajgac}). Rs (N) Sb. ({\i Circumpolar-arctic.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The plant from Europe (and Greenland) has been called subsp.{\b  pseudolagopina} (Sørensen) Böcher,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  80}: 106 (1969); subsp.{\b  marina}, from Siberia and North America, differs in having usually (2-)3(-4) spikes usually equal in size (not the terminal larger than the others), narrower leaves and a more distinct beak.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. C. curta} Good.,{\i  Trans. Linn. Soc. London}{\b  2}: 145 (1794) ({\i C. canescens} auct., non L.; incl. {\i C. hylaea} V. Krecz.). Caespitose, usually with ascending rhizomes. Stems (10-)20-50(-70) cm, sharply trigonous, scabrid above; basal sheaths pale greyish- or pinkish-brown, persistent. Leaves (1·5)2-3(-4) mm wide, flat, pale or greyish-green. Inflorescence (2-)3-5 cm, lax; spikes (3-)4-7(-12), 5-8(-10) mm, ovoid-oblong, all female above and male below, the upper overlapping, the lower often separated from each other by a gap of about their own length. Female glumes slightly shorter than utricles, whitish or pale yellowish-brown and mostly scarious. Utricles 2-2·5(-3) mm, ovate to ovate-elliptical, plano-convex, erect, pale green to pale greyish-yellow, prominently veined, gradually narrowed into an obscure, conical, straight-sided, scabrid beak, without a slit down the back. 2n = 54, 56. {\i Wet, usually base-poor habitats. Europe, southwards to the Pyrenees, Macedonia and C. Ukraine.} Au ?Az Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. C. lapponica} 0. F. Lang, {\i Linnaea}{\b  24}: 539 (1851). Like {\b 40} but stems 15-40 cm; leaves 1-1·5 mm wide; inflorescence 1·5-4 cm; spikes 3-6, 3-5 mm, ovoid-globose; utricles 1·5-2 mm, more abruptly contracted into a concave-sided, smooth beak. Sphagnum-{\i bogs and other wet places. N. Fennoscandia and N. Russia, southwards to} c. 64° {\i N}. Fe No Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C. bonanzensis} Britton,{\i  Bull. New York Bot. Gard.}{\b  2}: 160 (1901), a closely related plant with dark brown female glumes 1/2-2/3 as long as the utricles, occurs in Siberia and North America and has been erroneously reported from arctic Russia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. C. brunnescens} (Pers.) Poiret in Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot., Suppl.}{\b  3}: 286 (1813) (incl. subsp.{\i  vitilis} (Fries) Kalela,{\i  C. vitilis} Fries). Like {\b 40} but stems more slender, with basal sheaths darker brown; leaves 1·5-2 mm wide, often brighter green; inflorescence 1·5-3(-5) cm; spikes 3-5 mm, usually ovoid-globose; female glumes often darker brown; utricles 2-3(-3·5) mm, brown, sometimes veined only below, abruptly contracted into a prominent, concave-sided beak with an asymmetrical slit down the back. 2n = 56.{\i  Mainly in damp and shady places. N. & C. Europe, extending to the Maritime Alps and S.C. Russia.} Au Cz Fe Ga Ge He Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. C. loliacea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 974 (1753). Caespitose and with slender, creeping rhizomes. Stems 20-40 cm, slender but more or less rigid, erect or ascending, trigonous, scabrid at apex; basal sheaths brown. Leaves 1-2 mm wide, bright green. Inflorescence 1-3 cm, lax; spikes (2-)3-5(-7), subglobose, each with 1-6 female flowers above and 1-4 male flowers below, the lower separated from each other by 1-1·5 cm; lowest bract glumaceous or setiform. Female glumes c. ½ as long as utricles, whitish-brown. Utricles 2-3(-3·5) mm, broadly ellipsoid, patent, greenish or brownish, prominently veined, not beaked. 2n = 54. Sphagnum-{\i bogs, heaths and damp woods. Fennoscandia and N. half of U.S.S.R., extending to N.E. Poland and N.E. Romania.} Fe No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, ?W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. C. tenuiflora} Wahlenb.,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} nov. ser.,{\b  24}: 147 (1803). Like {\b 43} but leaves greyish-green; inflorescence 0·5-1 cm, dense; spikes 2-4, with 4-10 female flowers, contiguous or separated by not more than 0·5 cm; utricles usually ascending, with slender, inconspicuous veins, slightly more narrowed at apex but not beaked. Sphagnum{\i  bogs and damp woods. N.E. Europe, extending westwards to} 10° 45' {\i E. in Norway}. Fe No Rs (N, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. DISPERMAE Ohwi. Like Sect. {\i Canescentes} but spikes male above and female below, or the terminal entirely male.
\par

\par
302}
\par