{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Male spike 10-20 × 3-4 mm. Female spikes 1-3, 10-30 × 5-6 mm, erect, the upper subsessile, the lower with peduncles 1-2 cm, usually not overlapping; lowest bract usually exceeding spike but shorter than inflorescence, with a narrow sheath (0·5-)10-15 mm. Female glumes purplish- or blackish-brown. Utricles 3-4·5 mm obovoid-ellipsoid, slightly asymmetrical, pale greenish-brown, tinged with purplish-brown, abruptly contracted into a short, cylindrical, entire or weakly emarginate beak c. 0·5 mm. 2n = 32.{\i  Marshes, heaths and damp grassland. Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region and much of the U.S.S.R.} All except Bl Cr Rs (K) Sa Sb Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 75. C. vaginata} Tausch,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 4}: 557 (1821) ({\i C. sparsiflora} (Wahlenb.) Steudel). Like {\b 74} but leaves 3-5 mm wide, yellowish- to dark green; male spike 7-15 mm; female spikes 5-25 mm, the lower with peduncles 1-5 cm; lowest bract often shorter than spike, with an inflated sheath 5-30 mm; utricles up to 5 mm, less asymmetrical, gradually narrowed into a more or less emarginate beak 0·5-1 mm. 2n = 32.{\i  Damp places in woods and on mountains. N. Europe; locally in the mountains of C. & S.W. Europe from the W. Carpathians and Sudeten Mts. to the E. Pyrenees.} Au Br Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs Is No Po Rs (N, B, C, ?W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Dwarf plants from arctic Russia and other parts of N. Europe have been called subsp.{\b  quasivaginata} (C. B. Clarke) Malyschev,{\i  Vysok. Fl. Vost. Sajana} 90 (1965) ({\i C. algida }Turcz. ex V. Krecz.), but do not seem of sufficient significance to merit such recognition.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 76. C. livida} (Wahlenb.) Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  4}: 285 (1805). Like {\b 74} but stems 15-30(-50) cm, often scabrid above; leaves usually equalling or exceeding the stems, canaliculate, whitish-glaucous; female spikes usually overlapping; lowest bract with a sheath 5-10(-20) mm; utricles oblong-ellipsoid, symmetrical, glaucous to yellowish-green, more or less beakless. 2n = 32.{\i  Peat-bogs and other very wet places. Fennoscandia and adjacent parts of N.W. Russia; N. Iceland.} Fe Is No Rs (N, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 77. C. asturica} Boiss. in Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Pugillus} 117 (1852). Like {\b 74} but basal sheaths dark purplish-brown, without lamina; leaves sometimes green; female spikes 5-20 mm; lowest bract with a more or less inflated sheath 5-20 mm; utricles 4-5 mm, less asymmetrical, purplish- or blackish-brown, shining, abruptly contracted into a very short, entire beak less than 0·5 mm. 2n = 46.{\i  Subalpine pastures. • Mountains of N.W. Spain and N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. RHOMBOIDALES Kük. Caespitose or not. Stems trigonous, smooth or scabrid. Male spike solitary, cylindrical to oblong-clavate, pedunculate. Female spikes oblong to cylindrical, lax or dense, erect, distant; lowest bract leaf-like, sheathing. Female glumes ovate, acute or acuminate to mucronate, usually with a scarious margin. Utricles obovoid or obovoid-ellipsoid, membranous or subcoriaceous, glabrous or pubescent, abruptly contracted into beak. Stigmas 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 78. C. depauperata} Curtis ex With.,{\i  Arr. Brit. Pl.} ed. 2,{\b  2}: 1049 (1787). Laxly caespitose, with short rhizomes. Stems 30-100 cm, obtusely trigonous, smooth; basal sheaths reddish- or purplish-brown, entire, without lamina. Leaves shorter than stems, 2-4 mm wide. Male spike 20-35 × 2-3 mm, cylindrical. Female spikes 2-4, 10-20 × 5-7 mm, lax, with 2-6(-10) flowers, with peduncles 1·5-8 cm; lowest bract usually equalling or exceeding inflorescence, with a sheath 10-50 mm. Female glumes c. 2/3 as long as utricles, brown, with wide scarious margin. Utricles 7-9 mm, obovoid-ellipsoid, greyish- or greenish-brown, prominently veined, glabrous, with a long, scabrid, obliquely truncate beak 2·5-3·5 mm. 2n = 44.{\i  Dry woods and scrub. W. & S. Europe, northwards to S. Ireland; local.} Al Be Br Bu Co Ga Ge Gr Hb He Hs It Ju Rm Rs (K) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 79. C. brevicollis} DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 5}: 295 (1815). Densely caespitose and with stout rhizomes. Stems 20-60 cm, compressed-trigonous, scabrid above; basal sheaths brown, becoming fibrous. Leaves equalling or slightly shorter than stems, 3-5(-7) mm wide. Male spike 15-25 × 5-10 mm, oblong-obovoid, pedunculate. Female spikes 1-3, 15-25 × 7-10 mm, oblong to obovoid, dense, with 6-15 flowers, usually not overlapping male spike; peduncles 1·5-3(-5) cm; lowest bract about equalling spike, with a sheath 15-30 mm. Female glumes about equalling utricles, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, orange-brown, without a scarious margin. Utricles 5-7 mm, obovoid, pale brownish-green, sparsely puberulent, often glabrescent, weakly veined, with a short, scabrid, 2-fid beak 1-1·5 mm.{\i  Open woods, mountain grassland and dry, stony slopes. S. France, N. Spain; S.E. & E.C. Europe, southwards to C. Bulgaria}. Bu Cz Ga Hs Hu Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 80. C. michelii} Host, {\i Syn. Pl. Austr. }507 (1797). Like {\b 79} but not caespitose, with long, slender rhizomes; stems obtusely trigonous, sometimes smooth; leaves shorter than stems, 2-3 mm wide; male spike 10-20 × 5-7 mm, oblong-clavate; female spikes 1-2, 10-20 mm; female glumes pale brown; utricles often glabrous, with a beak 2-3 mm. 2n = 62, c. 70.{\i  Dry grassland and scrub. From S.W. Poland and S.C. Russia southwards to C. Italy and N. Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W
\par
  K, E) [?Ga]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 81. C. pilosa} Scop., {\i Fl. Carn.} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 226 (1772). Rhizomes long, slender. Stems 20-50 cm, erect, slender, compressed trigonous, smooth; basal sheaths purplish- or reddish-brown, entire, without lamina. Leaves equalling or exceeding stems, 5-10 mm wide, ciliate and sparsely hairy beneath. Male spike 15-30 × 3-5 mm, oblong-clavate. Female spikes 2-3(-5), 20-40 × 4-5 mm, lax, with 7-20 flowers; peduncles 1-5 cm; lowest bract shorter than spike, with sheath 15-35 mm. Female glumes slightly shorter than utricles, pale or reddish-brown. Utricles 3·5-5 mm, obovoid, green or pale brown, with slender veins, glabrous, with a short, smooth, 2-fid beak 1-1·5 mm. 2n = 44. {\i Woods, usually deciduous. • From C. France and the Leningrad region southwards to C. Italy and Turkey-in-Europe.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. SECALINAE (O. F. Lang) Kük. Densely caespitose, without creeping rhizomes. Stems obtusely trigonous, smooth. Male spikes usually several, cylindrical-subclavate. Female spikes oblong, dense; lowest bract leaf-like, exceeding inflorescence. Female glumes shorter than utricles, ovate, acute, with wide scarious margin. Utricles lanceolate, plano-convex, coriaceous, with a narrow, serrulate wing, with slender veins, glabrous or puberulent, gradually narrowed into a long, scabrid, 2-fid beak.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 82. C. hordeistichos} Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph. }{\b 2}: 221 (1787). Stems (5-)10-30(-50) cm; basal sheaths reddish-brown, sometimes becoming fibrous. Leaves exceeding stems, 3-5 mm wide, flat, glaucous-green. Male spikes (1-)2-3, crowded, the terminal 10-20 × 2-4 mm. Female spikes 2-4, 20-40 × 8-10 mm, the upper subsessile and crowded but remote from the male, the lowest often distant and with a peduncle 1-3 cm; lowest bract with a sheath 10-25 mm. Female glumes pale greenish-brown. Utricles 8-12 mm, in distinct vertical rows, pale yellowish- or orange-brown, sparsely scabrid-puberulent on surface.{\i  Damp places. S.E. & E.C. Europe, northwards to C. Czechoslovakia; W. & W.C. Europe, from C. Germany to S. Spain; very local over}
\par

\par
307}
\par