{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Stems (3-)10-40 cm, usually scabrid above; basal sheaths pale to blackish-brown. Leaves 0·5-1(-2·5) mm wide, canaliculate or involute, usually shorter than stems. Spikes (3-)5-10, in a dense inflorescence 0·8-1·5(-3) × 0·5-1 cm. Female glumes equalling or exceeding (rarely slightly shorter than) utricles, reddish-brown. Utricles 3-4·5 mm, ovate, strongly convex abaxially, yellowish- to dark reddish-brown, with prominent veins, with usually slightly scabrid beak. 2n = 60.{\i  Dry places. C. Europe, from N. Italy to Czechoslovakia and extending to E. Romania; S. & E. Ukraine and S. Russia}. Au Cz ?Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. C. physodes} Beib.,{\i  Mém. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  2}: 104 (1809). Stems 15-40 cm, smooth; basal sheaths pale reddish-brown, prominent and persistent. Leaves c. 0·5 mm wide, plicate, shorter than stems. Spikes 3-7, in a sometimes slightly interrupted inflorescence 1-3 × 2-4 cm. Female glumes much shorter than utricles, reddish-brown. Utricles 10-20 mm, oblong to ellipsoid, strongly inflated and bladder-like, reddish-brown, with distinct but slender veins and smooth beak.{\i  Sandy deserts. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. FOETIDAE (L.H. Bailey) Kük. Not or laxly caespitose, with creeping rhizomes. Stems trigonous. Inflorescence dense, ovoid or pyramidal; spikes numerous, on 3-15 very short branches, the terminal or upper entirely male and the remainder male above and female below, or all male above and female below, or the lower entirely female; lowest bract glumaceous or setiform. Female glumes c. 2/3 as long as utricles. Utricles ovate to ovate-lanceolate, plano-convex, with faint veins, gradually narrowed into a 2-fid beak. Stigmas 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. C. foetida} All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem.}{\b  2}: 265 (1785). Laxly caespitose and with creeping rhizomes. Stems 5-30 cm, erect or ascending and slightly curved, sharply trigonous, scabrid above; basal sheaths blackish- or orange-brown, often fibrous. Leaves 1·5-3 mm wide, flat. Inflorescence 1-1·8 × 0·8-1·5 cm (rarely elongate), with 8-15 branches, dark brown. Female glumes ovate-lanceolate, acuminate or acute, blackish-brown, without or with a very narrow scarious margin. Utricles 3-4 mm, erect or erecto-patent, yellowish-brown at base, blackish-brown above, with a long, scabrid beak. 2n = 58.{\i  Damp, grassy or stony places,} 1700-3050{\i  m. C. & E. Pyrenees, Alps and mountains of Jugoslavia}. Au Ga He Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. C. maritima} Gunnerus,{\i  Fl. Norv.}{\b  2}: 131 (1772) ({\i C. incurva} Lightf.). Rhizome long, slender, creeping. Stems 2-18 cm, ascending, often strongly curved, obtusely trigonous, smooth; basal sheaths pale brown. Leaves up to 1(-2) mm wide, plicate or with involute margins. Inflorescence (0·5-)1-1·8 × (0·5-)0·7-1·3 cm, with 3-8(-10) branches, usually pale reddish-brown. Female glumes ovate-orbicular, obtuse or acute, but usually mucronulate, usually dark brown, with scarious margin. Utricles 3-5 mm, patent, yellowish-brown but blackish at least at apex, with a short, usually sparsely scabrid beak. 2n = 60. {\i Sandy, gravelly or rocky places. Coasts of arctic and N.W. Europe, extending to S.W. Sweden; inland on mountains in Norway and Iceland; also in the Alps.} Au Br Da Fa Ga He ?Hs Is It No Rs (B) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp.{\b  setina} (Christ) Egorova,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 1965}: 73 (1965) ({\i C. setina }(Christ) V. Krecz.), from the coasts of arctic Europe, differs in being smaller in all its parts, with very narrow leaves, the inflorescence not more than 1 cm and the utricles not more than 4 mm; similar plants can, however, be found elsewhere throughout the range of the species and they do not seem worth taxonomic recognition.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. REMOTAE (Ascherson) C.B. Clarke. Densely caespitose, usually forming tussocks. Stems sharply trigonous, scabrid at apex. Inflorescence very lax; spikes 5-10, oblong-ovoid, male below and female above, or the lower entirely female; lowest bract leaf-like, exceeding inflorescence. Female glumes slightly shorter than utricles. Utricles ovate-lanceolate, plano-convex, membranous, suberect, gradually narrowed into a short, wide, scabrid, 2-fid beak. stigmas 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. C. remota} L.,{\i  Fl. Angl.} 24 (1754). Stems 30-60(-100) cm; basal sheaths brownish. Leaves 1·5-2 mm wide. Inflorescence 8-20 cm; spikes 4-10 mm, the lower separated from each other by 5-7 cm. Female glumes ovate, acute, whitish or pale brownish. Utricles 2·5-3·5 mm, pale yellowish-green, distinctly veined. 2n = 62.{\i  Damp, shady places. Most of Europe, northwards to} c. 63°{\i  N. in Norway.} All except Az Bl Fa Is Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CYPEROIDEAE Koch. Caespitose, short-lived perennials. Stems rather flaccid, trigonous, smooth. Inflorescence capitate, rarely oblong; spikes many, very crowded and indistinct, female above and male below; lowest bract leaf-like. Female glumes c. ½ as long as utricles, linear-lanceolate, acute. Utricles linear-lanceolate, plano-convex, membranous, gradually narrowed into a very long, denticulate, 2-fid beak occupying most of their length. Stigmas 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. C. bohemica} Schreber,{\i  Beschr. Gräser}{\b  2}: 52 (1772) ({\i C. cyperoides} Murray). Stems 5-30(-60) cm; basal sheaths few, pale brown. Leaves 1·5-2·5 mm wide. Inflorescence 1·5-2·5 cm in diameter; bracts 2-5, the lowest 3-15 cm, erect, the others also leaf-like but patent. Female glumes whitish-scarious. Utricles 7-10 mm, pale green to pale yellow, obscurely veined, with a narrow, scarious, denticulate margin. 2n = 80.{\i  Damp, sandy or muddy places. C. Europe and U.S.S.R.; a few isolated stations elsewhere; everywhere inconstant and very local and perhaps only casual in some localities.} Au Az Be Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (N, C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. OVALES (Kunth) Christ. Caespitose and with short rhizomes. Stems obtusely trigonous below, sharply so and scabrid above. Inflorescence simple, pyramidal to irregularly cylindrical, brown; spikes 2-10, ovoid, female above and male below; lowest bract glumaceous, or setaceous and equalling spike. Utricles ovate-elliptical, plano-convex, suberect, membranous, with a narrow denticulate wing in at least the upper half, gradually narrowed into a distinct, winged, denticulate, 2-fid beak. Stigmas 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. C. ovalis} Good., {\i Trans. Linn. Soc. London}{\b  2}: 148 (1794) ({\i C. leporina} auct., non L.; incl.{\i  C. argyroglochin} Hornem.). Stems (5-)10-60(-90) cm, often curved; basal sheaths brown becoming fibrous. Leaves 1·5-3(-4) mm wide. Inflorescence (1·5-)2-4 cm; spikes (2-)3-7(-10), 5-15 mm, almost always all overlapping. Female glumes equalling utricles, ovate, acuminate, pale or reddish-brown, with narrow but prominent scarious margin. Utricles 3·5-5 mm, pale brown, prominently veined. 2n = 64, 66, 68.{\i  Usually in damp, base-poor habitats. Throughout Europe, but rare in the extreme north and only on mountains in the south.} All except ?Az Bl Cr Is Rs (K) Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. C. macloviana} D'Urv.,{\i  Mém. Soc. Linn. Paris }{\b 4}: 599 (1826). Like {\b 27} but usually not more than 40 cm; inflorescence 1-2 cm, ovoid to pyramidal; spikes 4-6, crowded; female glumes slightly shorter than utricles, acute or subacute, dark brown, with usually inconspicuous scarious margin; utricles 3-4·5 mm, often dark brown. 2n = 86. {\i Meadows, pastures and grassy paths. N. Sweden and adjacent parts of Norway and Finland; Iceland.} Fe Is No Su. ({\i North America, Greenland, Kamchatka}.)
\par

\par
300}
\par