{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. C. stenolepis} Less.,{\i  Reise Norweg. Loffod. }301 (1831). Like {\b 58} but stems 20-50 cm; leaves usually exceeding stems, 3-4·5 mm wide, flat or plicate; female spikes 15-30(-35) × 7-10 mm, oblong-ovoid to cylindrical, with peduncles up to 1·5 cm; lowest bract exceeding inflorescence; utricles 4-5 mm, ovoid-ellipsoid, ascending, gradually narrowed into a 2-fid beak c. 1 mm; stigmas 3.{\i  Bogs. Arctic Russia and N. Fennoscandia, southwards to} c. 63° {\i N. in Sweden.} Fe No Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Intermediate morphologically between {\b 57} and {\b 58} and perhaps of hybrid origin. {\b C}. × {\b grahamii} Boott, {\i Trans. Linn. Soc. London}{\b  19}: 215 (1844), is the name given to largely sterile plants, believed to be transient hybrids between these two species; they differ from {\b 60} chiefly in their paler utricles, more abruptly contracted into a longer beak, and occur in the same area as{\b  60} and in Scotland.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. C. mollissima} Christ, {\i Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl}. nov. ser., {\b 22} ({\b 10}): 181 (1888). Stems 25-40 cm, erect, slender, compressed-trigonous, scabrid above; basal sheaths brown, without lamina, becoming slightly fibrous. Leaves exceeding stems, 3-7 mm wide, flat, green. Male spikes solitary. Female spikes 2-4, 15-30 × 7-8 mm, cylindrical, overlapping, erect, subsessile or with peduncles up to 3(-4) cm; lowest bract exceeding inflorescence. Female glumes reddish-brown. Utricles 4-5·5 mm, ovoid, more or less patent, greenish-yellow, shining, with slender veins, more or less abruptly contracted into a 2-fid or emarginate beak 1-1·5 mm.{\i  Marshes and shallow water. N. & C. Ural.} Rs (N, C). ({\i N. & E. Siberia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. RHYNCHOCYSTIS Dumort. (Sect.{\i  Maximae} (Ascherson) Kük.). Densely caespitose. Stems sharply trigonous. Male spike cylindrical. Female spikes cylindrical, dense; lowest bract about equalling inflorescence, sheathing. Female glumes ovate to lanceolate, acute or acuminate. Utricles ovoid to ellipsoid, membranous, glabrous, gradually or abruptly narrowed into a short, weakly emarginate beak. Stigmas 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. C. pendula} Hudson, {\i Fl. Angl.} 352 (1762) ({\i C. maxima }Scop.). Stems 50-180(-240) cm, smooth; basal sheaths reddish- or purplish-brown. Leaves (8-)10-20 mm wide, dark or yellowish-green above, somewhat glaucous beneath. Male spikes 1(-2), 55-160 mm. Female spikes (3-)4-5(-7), 50-260 × 5-7 mm, sometimes male at apex, the lower with peduncles at least half as long as spike, pendent; lowest bract with a sheath (30-)50-100 mm. Female glumes shorter than or exceeding utricles, reddish-brown. Utricles 3-3·5 mm, pale to brownish-green, faintly veined. 2n = 58, 60, 62.{\i  Woods and other damp, shady places. W., C. & S. Europe, northwards to} c. 58°{\i  N. in Scotland.} Al Au Az Be Br Bu Co Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Su Tu. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 63. C. microcarpa} Bertol. ex Moris,{\i  Stirp. Sard.}{\b  1}: 48 (1827). Like {\b 62} but stems not more than 100 cm, slightly scabrid above; leaves not more than 13 mm wide, glaucous; female spikes 40-100(-120) × 3-6 mm, erect; female glumes equalling or slightly exceeding utricles; utricles 2·5-3·3 mm, more or less veinless, purplish-brown-puncticulate. 2n = 60. {\i Damp places. • Corse, Sardegna, C. Italy}. Co It Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. STRIGOSAE (Fries) Christ. Caespitose, without or with short creeping rhizomes. Stems trigonous, smooth. Male spikes cylindrical to subclavate, more or less pedunculate. Female spikes oblong to cylindrical, lax, usually pendent; lowest bract sheathing. Female glumes shorter than utricles, ovate to ovate-lanceolate. Utricles obovoid- to ellipsoid-trigonous, membranous, usually veinless, glabrous, with a more or less distinct, 2-fid to truncate beak. Stigmas 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: Á. Löve, D. Löve & M. Raymond,{\i  Canad. Jour. Bot. }{\b 35}: 715-761 (1957) (spp.{\b  67-69}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. C. sylvatica} Hudson, {\i Fl. Angl.} 353 (1762). Caespitose, with very short rhizomes. Stems 10-70(-200) cm; basal sheaths pale brown, not fibrous. Leaves shorter than stems, 3-15 mm wide. Male spikes 1(-7), 10-45 × 2-3 mm. Female spikes (2-)3-5(-6), 20-70 × 3-5 mm, the upper overlapping the male spike, the lower distant, pendent, with filiform peduncles 5-25 cm, rarely branched; lowest bract usually exceeding spike but shorter than inflorescence, with a sheath 20-100 mm. Female glumes acuminate, greenish, with wide scarious margin. Utricles 4-5·5 mm, obovoid- to ellipsoid-trigonous, pale greenish, more or less veinless, more or less abruptly contracted into a long, slender, smooth, 2-fid beak.{\i  Woods and other shady places. Most of Europe northwards to }c. 65°{\i  N. in Norway}. All except Az Bl Cr Fa Fe Is Lu Rs (N) Sa Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sylvatica}: Stems usually not more than 100 cm. Leaves less than 10 mm wide. Male spike 1(-2), 10-40 mm. Female spikes 20-60 mm, with long-exserted peduncles, rarely branched. 2n = 58.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except for parts of N.E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b paui} [Sennen] A. & O. Bolós in A. Bolós, {\i Veg. Com. Barcelon.} 246 (1950): Stems 75-200 cm. Leaves at least 10 mm wide. Male spikes 2-7, 40-45 mm. Female spikes 50-70 mm, with peduncles not or scarcely exserted from the bract-sheath, often branched.{\i  N.E. Spain.} ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. C. arnellii} Christ,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} nov. ser., {\b 22} ({\b 10}): 177 (1888). Like {\b 64}({\b a}) but basal sheaths dark brown, strongly fibrous and persistent; male spikes 2-3; female spikes 2-3, not more than 40 mm; lowest bract with sheath 10-15 mm.{\i  Woods and scrub. C. & E. Russia, from} c. 54°{\b  to} c. 57°{\b  N.} Rs (C, E). ({\b Temperate Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 66. C. debilis} Michx,{\i  Fl. Bor.-Amer.}{\b  2}: 172 (1803). Densely caespitose, without creeping rhizomes. Stems 30-60 cm; basal sheaths reddish-brown. Leaves equalling or shorter than stems, 2-7 mm wide. Male spike solitary, 20-35 × 1-2 mm. Female spikes 2-4, 20-60 × c. 3 mm, lax, the lower pendent, with filiform peduncles 0·5-1 cm and sometimes branched, lowest bract exceeding spike but shorter than inflorescence, with a sheath 30-70 mm. Female glumes obtuse, scarious. Utricles 5-7 mm, ellipsoid, pale greenish-brown, scarcely veined, gradually narrowed into a long, smooth beak very oblique and white-scarious at apex.{\i  Woods and damp places. Açores} ({\i Faial}). Az. ({\i W. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 67. C. capillaris} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 917 (1753). Caespitose, without creeping rhizomes. Stems 2-40(-60) cm; basal sheaths pale or reddish-brown, becoming fibrous. Leaves not more than half as long as stems, 0·5-2·5 mm wide. Male spike solitary, 5-10 × c. 1 mm, overtopped by the female. Female spikes 2-4, 5-15(-25) × 2-4 mm, 5- to 8(-12)-flowered, lax, all, except sometimes the lowest, digitately clustered, pendent, with filiform peduncles 1-4 cm; lowest bract equalling inflorescence, with a sheath 5-20 mm usually enclosing all the peduncles. Female glumes acute or obtuse, caducous. Utricles 2-4 mm, ellipsoid-ovoid, greyish-brown, shiny, veinless, gradually narrowed into a short, truncate beak scarious at the apex.{\i  Stony or grassy places; usually calcicole. N. Europe; mountains of C. & S. Europe southwards to Sierra Nevada and Crna Gora}. Au Br Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b capillaris} (incl. {\i C. chlorostachys} Steven): Male spike completely exserted from sheath of bract. Female spikes
\par

\par
305}
\par