{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 92. C. extensa} Good.,{\i  Trans. Linn. Soc. London }{\b 2}: 175 (1794). Densely caespitose. Stems 3-75 cm, rigid, smooth; basal sheaths blackish-brown, becoming slightly fibrous. Leaves about as long as stems, 1-3 mm wide, canaliculate or the margins inrolled, glaucous or greyish-green. Male spike 1(-3), 5-25 × 2-3 mm. Female spikes 2-4, 5-15(-20) × 4-6 mm, erect, overlapping or the lowest remote, with peduncles 0·3-1 cm; lowest bract greatly exceeding inflorescence, patent, with a sheath 3-10 mm. Female glumes reddish-brown. Utricles 2·5-4 mm, ascending, greyish- or greenish-brown, often reddish-spotted, not shining, prominently veined, gradually narrowed into a smooth, emarginate beak 0·5-0·75 mm. 2n = 60. {\i Salt-marshes and maritime rocks. Coasts of Europe northwards to} c. 61° N.{\i  in Sweden.} All except Au Cz Fa He Hu Is Rs (N, C, E) Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 93. C. mairii} Cosson & Germ.,{\i  Obs. Pl. Crit.} 18 (1840) (incl. {\i C. loscosii} Lange,{\i  C. winkleri} Lange). Densely caespitose. Stems 20-80 cm, scabrid at apex; basal sheaths brown, becoming slightly fibrous. Leaves c. ½ as long as stems, 2·5-5(-7) mm wide, flat, pale green. Male spike solitary, 10-30 × 2-4 mm. Female spikes 2-3(-5), 7-10(-15) × 5-7 mm, erect, all more or less approximate to the male or the lowest separated from the rest by not more than 1(-2) times its own length, with peduncles 0·5-1 cm; lowest bract exceeding spike and often inflorescence, patent, with a sheath 3-10 mm. Female glumes pale reddish-brown. Utricles 3-4 mm, patent, pale greenish-brown, shining, with slender veins, abruptly contracted into a 2-fid beak 0·5-1 mm which is strongly aculeolate with patent pricklets. 2n = 68, 70.{\i  Damp meadows and streamsides. Spain and France, just extending to N.W. Italy}. Ga Hs It. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. CERATOCYSTIS Dumort. (Sect.{\i  Flavae} (O. F. Lang) Christ). Like Sect. {\i Spirostachyae} but female spikes ovoid to oblong, erect; lowest bracts sometimes glumaceous; female glumes ovate, acute to subobtuse, not mucronate; utricles not speckled, sometimes ovate and plano-convex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 94. C. hostiana} DC.,{\i  Cat. Pl. Horti Monsp.} 88 (1813) ({\i C. hornschuchiana} Hoppe). Very laxly caespitose, with short rhizomes. Stems 15-50(-80) cm, smooth or slightly scabrid at apex; basal sheaths pale brown, fibrous. Leaves c. ½ as long as stems, 2-5 mm wide, pale green, flat. Male spike 1(-2), 10-30 × 2-3 mm, pedunculate. Female spikes 1-3(-5), 7-20 × 5-8 mm, obovoid to oblong, distant and not overlapping, with peduncles 0·7-5 cm; lowest bract exceeding spike but shorter than inflorescence, with a sheath 7-40 mm. Female glumes reddish-brown, with prominent scarious margin. Utricles 3-4(-5) mm, obovoid, ascending or almost patent, green, prominently veined, not shining, abruptly contracted into a scabrid, 2-fid beak 0·75-1·5 mm. 2n = 56.{\i  Damp grassland and wet heaths. Much of Europe, but absent from most of the east and rare in the Mediterranean region.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sterile hybrids are frequent between {\b 94} and other members of the section, especially with{\b  98} ({\i C}. × {\i fulva} Good.) and with {\b 101}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 95. C. durieui} Steudel,{\i  Nomencl. Bot.} ed. 2,{\b  1}: 289 (1840). Caespitose, with very short rhizomes. Stems 20-70 cm, smooth; basal sheaths brown. Leaves shorter than stems, 0·5-1 mm wide, canaliculate, greyish-green. Male spike solitary, 15-20 × 2-3 mm, shortly pedunculate. Female spikes 1(-2), 7-10 × 5-8 mm, ovoid-globose, overlapping the male, subsessile; lowest bract glumaceous, or setaceous and about equalling spike. Female glumes reddish-brown, with narrow scarious margin. Utricles 6-7 mm, ovate, plano-convex, patent or ascending, yellowish-green, scarcely shining, obscurely veined, narrowly winged, gradually or abruptly narrowed into a scabrid, 2-fid beak c. 2 mm. 2n = 52.{\i  Damp grassland. • N.W. Spain, N.W. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 96-102}). {\b C. flava} group. More or less caespitose, with short rhizomes. Stems smooth; basal sheaths pale greyish- or yellowish-brown. Male spike solitary, 5-20 × 1-3 mm. Female spikes 2-4(-5), ovoid, the lower shortly pedunculate; lowest bract leaf-like, with a sheath 1-25 mm. Female glumes yellowish- to reddish-brown, often with a narrow scarious margin. Utricles with a smooth or slightly scabrid, 2-fid or emarginate beak.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  An extremely critical group, in need of experimental study throughout its range. Only the more distinctive of the many described taxa are recognized here, and all show a great deal of variation; at least partially fertile hybrids occur between most of the species, but it is not known how much of the variation is attributable to this. Although the group has been studied in some detail in Fennoscandia and the British Isles, it remains difficult to name satisfactorily many plants from both areas and little is known about the variation in the mountains of C. & S. Europe. (See especially E. W. Davies,{\i  Watsonia }{\b 3}: 66-84 (1953); 129-137 (1955); A. Palmgren, {\i Fl. Fenn.}{\b  2}: 1-165 (1959); E. Patzke & D. Podlech,{\i  Decheniana}{\b  113}: 265-273 (1960); L. Fagerström, {\i Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  79} ({\b 3}): 1-14 (1967).)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Beak of utricle deflexed or curved, usually at least
\par
  ½ as long as the usually ± curved body
\par
2 Utricles 5-7 mm; male spike usually subsessile; leaves 
\par
  up to 7 mm wide ................................................................................ {\b 96. flava}
\par
2 Utricles 1·5-5 mm; male spike usually pedunculate; 
\par
  leaves not more than 4 mm wide
\par
3 Leaves from 2/3 as long as to equalling stems; utricles
\par
  gradually narrowed into beak ................................................. {\b 97. jemtlandica}
\par
3 Leaves c. ½ as long as stems; utricles abruptly 
\par
  contracted into beak
\par
4 Stems usually more than 15 cm; utricles (3-)3·5-5 mm,
\par
  with beak 1·5-2 mm ................................................................ {\b 98. lepidocarpa}
\par
4 Stems not more than 15 cm; utricles 1·5-3(-3·5) mm, 
\par
  with beak 0·5-1·5 mm .............................................................. {\b 99. nevadensis} 
\par
1 Beak of utricle neither deflexed nor curved, usually 
\par
  less than ½ as long as the ± straight body
\par
5 Male spike usually sessile; utricles abruptly contracted
\par
  into beak ..................................................................................... {\b 102. serotina}
\par
5 Male spike usually pedunculate; utricles gradually 
\par
  narrowed into beak
\par
6 Utricles 1·75-2 mm .................................................................... {\b 102. serotina}
\par
6 Utricles 3-4 mm
\par
7 Stems erect; leaves 1-3·5 mm wide; utricles usually not
\par
  more than 3·5 mm .................................................................... {\b 100. bergrothii}
\par
7 Stems ascending; some leaves usually more than (3-)3·5
\par
  mm wide; utricles usually more than 3·5 mm ............................ {\b 101. demissa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 96. C. flava} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 975 (1753) (incl.{\i  C. flavella} V. Krecz.). Stems (10-)20-50(-90) cm, erect. Leaves about equalling or slightly shorter than stems, 3-7 mm wide, yellowish-green, flat. Male spikes usually subsessile, sometimes with a peduncle up to 20 mm. Female spikes 10-15 × 10-12 mm, crowded, the lowest usually somewhat remote; lowest bract greatly exceeding inflorescence, patent or deflexed. Utricles 5-7 mm, broadly ellipsoid, yellowish-green to yellow, prominently veined, the central ones patent, the lower deflexed, all curved and gradually narrowed into a curved beak 1·5-2·5 mm usually comprising at least 1/3 of the length of the utricle. 2n = 30, 33, 60, 64.{\i  Wet woods fens and marshes; usually calcicole. Most of Europe, but absent from much of the Mediterranean region.} All except Az Bl Cr Gr ?Hb Sa Si Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 97. C. jemtlandica} (Palmgren) Palmgren, {\i Mem. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  13}: 126 (1938). Stems (15-)20-50 cm, erect. Leaves
\par

\par
309}
\par