{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 c. 0·5 mm. Stigmas sometimes 2. 2n =c. 38, 78.{\i  Wet meadows, marshes and ditches. Most of Europe, northwards to} 62° 30'{\i  N. in Sweden, and southwards to C. Spain, Sicilia and S. Bulgaria.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge ?Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. C. melanostachya} Bieb. ex Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  4}: 299 (1805) ({\i C. nutans} Host, non J. F. Gmelin). Like {\b 51} but stems (15-)30-50(-100) cm, slender, scarcely scabrid above; basal sheaths more or less fibrous; leaves usually shorter than stems, 2-4(-5) mm wide, greyish-green, with inrolled margins; male spikes 1-2(-3), with acute glumes; female spikes (1-)2-3(-4), 10-35 × 5-10 mm; lowest bract equalling or slightly exceeding inflorescence; female glumes c. 2/3 as long as utricles; utricles 3·5-5·5 mm, biconvex, greenish-brown, not papillose, with sunken veins, gradually narrowed into a smooth, 2-fid beak c. 0·75 mm.{\i  Wet grassland. C. & S.E. Europe, extending westwards to W.C. France and north-eastwards to} c. 54° 30' {\i E. in E.C. Russia. }Au Bu Cz Ga Ge ?Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. C. riparia} Curtis, {\i Fl. Lond.}{\b  2 }({\b 4}): t. 60 (1783). Like {\b 51} but leaves up to 15 mm wide; male spikes (2-)3-6, with acuminate glumes; female spikes (1-)2-5, 30-100 × 8-12 mm, the lowest often pendent, with peduncles up to 5(-10) cm; female glumes exceeding utricles; utricles 5-6·5 mm, ovoid, inflated, greenish-brown, not papillose, with slender veins, gradually narrowed into a smooth, 2-fid beak c. 1 mm. 2n = 72. {\i Wet meadows, marshes and ditches. Europe, northwards to} c. 62°{\i  N. in Finland.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. PSEUDOCYPEREAE (L.H. Bailey) Kük. Laxly caespitose, with short rhizomes. Stems sharply trigonous, scabrid. Male spike solitary, linear, shortly pedunculate. Female spikes oblong to cylindrical, dense, all at the same level and equalling or exceeding the male, pendent, with long, filiform peduncles. Female glumes ovate, long-aristate. Utricles ovoid-ellipsoid, patent, prominently veined, glabrous, gradually narrowed into a smooth, 2-fid beak. Stigmas 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. C. pseudocyperus} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }978 (1753). Stems 30-100 cm; basal sheaths pale brown, entire. Leaves exceeding stems, 5-10(-15) mm wide, yellowish-green. Female spikes 3-5, 20-60(-100) × 8-12 mm; lowest bract greatly exceeding inflorescence, with sheath 2-12 mm. Female glumes equalling or exceeding utricles, pale greenish-brown, with scarious margin. Utricles 4-5·5 mm, green or pale brownish-green. 2n = 66.{\i  Lake-margins, ditches and wet fens. Most of Europe, from S.C. Finland southwards to C. Spain, Sicilia and Macedonia.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. VESICARIAE (O. F. Lang) Christ. Rhizomes creeping. Stems trigonous. Male spikes linear, subsessile or shortly pedunculate. Female spikes subglobose to cylindrical, dense, erect or pendent; lowest bract not sheathing. Female glumes shorter than utricles, ovate-lanceolate, more or less acute. Utricles membranous, inflated, glabrous, patent to erecto-patent, with a smooth, 2-fid or emarginate beak. Stigmas 2 or 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. C. rostrata} Stokes in With.,{\i  Arr. Brit. Pl.} ed. 2,{\b  2}: 1059 (1787) ({\i C. ampullacea} Good.,{\i  C. inflata} sensu V. Krecz., non Hudson). Stems 20-100 cm, erect, stout, obtusely trigonous, smooth or scabrid above; basal sheaths reddish-brown, without lamina, entire. Leaves exceeding stems, 2-4(-7) mm wide, flat or often canaliculate or with inrolled margins, glaucous. Male spikes 2-4. Female spikes 2-3(-5), 30-70(-100) × 6-10 mm, cylindrical, overlapping or remote, erect, subsessile or with peduncles up to 1(-4) cm; lowest bract equalling or exceeding inflorescence. Female glumes reddish-brown. Utricles 4-6 mm, ovoid, more or less patent, pale yellowish-green, not or scarcely shining, with slender veins, abruptly contracted into a 2-fid beak 1-1·5 mm. Stigmas 3. 2n = 60, 72-74, 76, 82.{\i  Shallow water, bogs and marshes; somewhat calcifuge. Most of Europe, but rare in the south-west and south-east}. Al Au Be Br Bu ?Co Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Forming hybrids with most of the other species in the section.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. C. rhynchophysa} Fischer, C. A. Meyer & Avé-Lall.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Hort. Petrop.}{\b  9}, {\i Suppl}.: 9 (1844) ({\i C. laevirostris} (Blytt ex Fries) Fries). Like {\b 55} but stems 50-120 cm, sharply trigonous, scabrid above; leaves often not exceeding stems, (6-)8-15 mm wide, bright green; male spikes 3-7; female spikes 50-80 × 10-13 mm, the lower sometimes slightly pendent; utricles 5-7 mm, ovoid-globose, very inflated, shining.{\i  Ditches, lake-margins and wet woods, often in water. N.E. Europe, extending southwards to} 52° 30'{\i  N. in S. Ural and westwards to S.E. Norway and N.E. Poland.} Fe No Po ?Rm Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. C. vesicaria} L., Sp. Pl. 979 (1753). Like {\b 55} but stems up to 120 cm, sharply trigonous, scabrid above; basal sheaths purplish-brown; leaves (3-)4-8 mm wide, green or yellowish-green; female spikes (1-)2-3, 20-40(-70) × 10-15 mm, the lowest with peduncle up to 4 cm and sometimes pendent; utricles (6-)7-8 mm, ovoid-ellipsoid, inflated, erecto-patent, more or less shiny, brownish-yellow, gradually narrowed into a beak 1·5-2 mm. 2n = 70, 74, 82, 86, 88.{\i  Marshes and shallow water. Most of Europe, southwards to N.E. Spain, S. Italy and S. Bulgaria.} Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. C. saxatilis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 976 (1753). Stems 10-30(-60) cm, erect or ascending, slender, trigonous, usually scabrid above; basal sheaths purplish-brown, without lamina, entire. Leaves equalling or slightly shorter than stems, 2-4 mm wide, plicate or canaliculate,green. Male spikes 1(-2). Female spikes 1-2(-4), 7-20 × 5-7 mm, subglobose to oblong, usually overlapping, erect and subsessile or (var. {\i laxa} (Trautv.) Ohwi) the lowest with a peduncle up to 1(-5) cm and pendent; lowest bract exceeding spike but shorter than inflorescence, suberect. Female glumes dark purplish-brown, with narrow scarious margin near apex. Utricles 3-4(-4·5) mm, ovoid-biconvex, erecto-patent to patent, yellowish-brown below, blackish-purple above, slightly shining, scarcely veined, abruptly contracted into an emarginate beak c. 0·5 mm. Stigmas 2. 2n = 80.{\i  Tundra, flushes and wet, peaty ground; somewhat calcicole. N. Europe, southwards to} 56°{\i  N. in Scotland.} Br Fa Fe Is No Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable. Hybrids with {\b 55}, {\b 57}, {\b 59} and {\b 60} are frequent, and are often partly fertile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. C. rotundata} Wahlenb., {\i Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} nov. ser., {\b 24}: 153 (1803). Like {\b 58} but stems always erect, stouter and more rigid; basal sheaths often pale brown; leaves usually shorter than stems, 1-2 mm wide, greyish-green, more rigid, canaliculate with inrolled margins; female spikes subsessile; lowest bract usually patent or deflexed; utricles 2·5-4 mm, strongly inflated and patent; stigmas 3. {\i Tundra, flushes and wet peaty ground; somewhat calcifuge. N. & W. Fennoscandia, arctic and subarctic Russia.} Fe No Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Partly fertile hybrids with {\b 55} and{\b  58} occur frequently and are often confused with both these species.
\par

\par
304}
\par