{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. STELLULATAE (Kunth) Christ. Densely or laxly caespitose. Stems obtusely trigonous. Inflorescence simple, lax; spikes (2-)3-5(-7), subglobose, the terminal female above and male below, the others entirely female; lowest bract usually glumaceous. Female glumes c. 2/3 as long as utricles, ovate, acute. Utricles ovate, plano-convex, strongly patent, subcoriaceous, abruptly contracted into a scabrid, deeply 2-fid beak. stigmas 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. C. echinata} Murray,{\i  Prodr. Stirp. Gotting.} 76 (1770) ({\i C. stellulata} Good., {\i C. muricata} auct., non L.). Stems 5-40(-90) cm, smooth, or scabrid at apex; basal sheaths pale greyish-brown. Leaves 1-2·5 mm wide. Inflorescence 1-2·5(-3) cm; spikes separated by not more than 0·7 cm. Female glumes pale, often reddish-brown, with wide scarious margin. Utricles 3-4 mm, greenish-brown to dark brown, with slender veins. 2n = 56, 58.{\i  Marshes and bogs; calcifuge. Europe, except for parts of the north-east, south-east and of the Mediterranean region; only on mountains in the south.} All except Bl Cr Rs (K) Sa Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. PHYSOGLOCHIN Dumort. (Sect.{\i  Dioicae} (Tuckerman) Pax). Usually dioecious, with solitary spike. Caespitose or not. Stems subterete, smooth or scabrid above. Male spike rarely with female flowers at base; glumes lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, acute or subacute. Female spike oblong-ovoid to cylindrical; glumes ovate, subobtuse to acute, with scarious margin. Utricles ovate to linear-lanceolate, plano-convex, subcoriaceous, appressed to patent or recurved, with a distinct beak. Stigmas 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. C. dioica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 972 (1753). Rhizomes slender, creeping. Stems (3-)5-40 cm, usually smooth; basal sheaths pale brown. Leaves shorter than stems, setaceous. Male spike 7-20 × c. 2 mm; glumes reddish-brown. Female spike 7-13 × 5-7 mm, oblong-ovoid, dense throughout; glumes 2·5-4 mm, almost as long as utricles, more or less reddish-brown. Utricles 2·5-3·5 mm, ovate, dark or reddish-brown, with prominent veins, patent but not recurved at maturity, more or less abruptly contracted into a short, scabrid beak. 2n = 52, 60.{\i  Damp places. N. Europe, southwards to the Pyrenees, C. Romania and S.E. Russia.} Au Br Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Hybrids are frequently formed with species of Sect.{\i  Canescentes} and with {\b 24}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. C. parallela} (Laest.) Sommerf., {\i Suppl. Fl. Lapp.} 39 (1826). Like {\b 30} but laxly caespitose or with creeping rhizomes; female spike 8-18 × 4-7 mm; cylindrical to oblong-ovoid, usually lax at least below; glumes sometimes shorter than utricles; utricles 3-4·5 mm, ovate-lanceolate to oblong-ovate, gradually narrowed into a more or less smooth beak, patent to appressed at maturity.{\i  Damp places. Arctic Europe, extending southwards to} c. 62°{\i  N. in Norway}. Fe No Rs (N, C) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b parallela}: Not caespitose, with creeping rhizomes. Female glumes about as long as utricles. Utricles 3-3·5(-4) mm, ovate to oblong-ovate, erecto-patent to appressed at maturity. 2n = 44.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b redowskiana} (C.A. Meyer) Egorova,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 10}: 104 (1973) ({\i C. redowskiana} C. A. Meyer): Laxly caespitose and with very short rhizomes. Female glumes c. ½ as long as utricles. Utricles 3·5-4·5 mm, ovate-lanceolate, patent at maturity.{\i  Arctic Russia and N. Ural}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. C. davalliana} Sm., {\i Trans. Linn. Soc. London}{\b  5}: 266 (1800). Densely caespitose, without creeping rhizomes. Stems (1-)10-40(-50) cm, usually scabrid above; basal sheaths dark brown. Leaves setaceous-canaliculate, shorter than stems. Male spike 15-20 × c. 2 mm, oblong; glumes 2·5-3 mm, dark, often reddish-brown. Utricles 3·5-4·5 mm, linear-lanceolate, dark reddish- or blackish-brown, with weak veins, patent or recurved when ripe, gradually narrowed into a long, more or less smooth beak. 2n = 46. {\i Damp, usually base-rich habitats. From N. France and Estonia southwards to E.C. Spain, C. Italy and Macedonia}. Au †Br Co Cz †Da Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ELONGATAE (Kunth) Kük. Densely caespitose. Stems sharply trigonous, scabrid. Inflorescence simple, lax; spikes (5-)8-12(-18), oblong to oblong-ovoid, usually all overlapping, all female above and male below or the lower entirely female; lowest bract usually setaceous and shorter than spike. Female glumes 1/2-2/3 as long as utricles, ovate, subacute, with wide scarious margin. Utricles oblong-lanceolate, often recurved, plano-convex, membranous, more or less patent, gradually narrowed into a scabrid or smooth, entire beak. Stigmas 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. C. elongata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 974 (1753). Stems (15-)30-70(-100) cm; basal sheaths pale brown. Leaves 2-6 mm wide, yellowish-green. Inflorescence 3-10 cm; spikes 5-15 mm. Female glumes reddish-brown. Utricles 3-4 mm, yellowish- to reddish-brown, prominently veined. 2n = 56. {\i Damp woods and marshy places. From arctic Norway southwards to C. France, the S. Carpathians and S.E. Russia.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge ?Gr Hb He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CANESCENTES (Fries) Christ. More or less caespitose. Stems sharply or obtusely trigonous, scabrid or smooth. Inflorescence simple; spikes 1-7(-12), globose to oblong, female above and male below, or the lateral spikes entirely female; lowest bract glumaceous or setaceous. Female glumes ovate, usually obtuse. Utricles ovate and plano-convex to ellipsoid and subinflated, membranous or coriaceous, suberect to patent, usually with a short, conical or obscure beak. Stigmas 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: T. W. Böcher, {\i Acta Arct.}{\b  5}: 1-31 (1952). G. Halliday & A.O. Chater, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  80}: 77-106 (1969). H. Toivonen,{\i  Ann. Bot. Fenn. }{\b 11}: 225-230 (1974).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. C. lachenalii} Schkuhr,{\i  Beschr. Abbild. Riedgr. }51 (1801) ({\i C. lagopina }Wahlenb., {\i C. tripartita} auct., non All.). Laxly or densely caespitose, with short, creeping rhizomes. Stems (3-)10-20(-50) cm, obtusely trigonous, smooth or scabrid only at apex; basal sheaths brown. Leaves 1-2 mm wide, flat, clear green, with stomata only on abaxial surface. Inflorescence (0·5-)1-2 cm, ovoid to oblong, dense; spikes (2-)3-4(-5), 7-10 mm, ellipsoid (rarely ovoid), all male below and female above, overlapping. Female glumes slightly shorter than utricles, dark reddish-brown, usually with a narrow scarious margin. Utricles (1·5-)2·5-3 mm, ovate or obovate, plano-convex, erect, yellowish-brown below, dark brown towards apex, with slender veins, gradually narrowed into a distinct, parallel-sided, smooth beak 0·75-1 mm, with a slit down the back. 2n = 58, 62, 74.{\i  Marshes, damp grassland and heaths. N. Europe, southwards to C. Scotland; mountains of C. & S. W. Europe.} Au Br Cz Fe Ga He Hs Is It ?Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, ?C, W) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. C. glareosa} Wahlenb.,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl}. nov. ser., {\b 24}: 146 (1803) (incl.{\i  C. marina} auct., non Dewey). Like {\b 34} but densely caespitose; leaves 0·5(-2) mm wide, often canaliculate, grey-green or glaucous, with stomata on both surfaces; spikes 2-3(-4), the terminal oblong-clavate, female above, male below, the others oblong, female; utricles 2-3·5 (-4) mm, broadly ovate to fusiform, concolorous, pale greenish to reddish-brown, conical but scarcely beaked at apex, with straight or scarcely concave sides. 2n = 66. {\i Salt-marshes and}
\par

\par
301}
\par