{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. GYNOBASIDAE  Trabut. Caespitose, and with creeping rhizomes. Stems trigonous, scabrid above. Spikes with male flowers in a linear cluster at apex and laxly arranged female flowers on a more or less zigzag axis below; at least the lowest spike long-pedunculate and arising from base of stem; lowest bract leaf-like, exceeding inflorescence. Female glumes ovate, usually aristate. Utricles ellipsoid to obovoid-ellipsoid, subcoriaceous, glabrous, gradually narrowed at apex into an obscure, conical, entire beak. Stigmas 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 114. C. oedipostyla} Duval-Jouve,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b 17}: lxx (1870) ({\i C. ambigua} Link, non Moench). Caespitose, with very short creeping rhizomes. Stems 5-25 cm; basal sheaths brown. Leaves exceeding stems, 1·5-2 mm wide, pale green. Spikes 2-3, 7-15 mm, each with 3-5 male and 2-4 remote female flowers, the lateral spike or spikes arising from base of stem. Female glumes exceeding utricles, long-aristate, green, with wide scarious margin. Utricles 3-4·5 mm, obovoid-ellipsoid, pale green, prominently veined.{\i  Dry places. S.W. Europe}. Bl Ga Hs Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 115. C. illegitima} Cesati in Friedrichsthal, {\i Reise} 271 (1838). Caespitose and with long, stout, creeping rhizomes. Stems 15-40 cm; basal sheaths blackish-brown, prominent and persistent. Leaves 1-3 mm wide, exceeding stems, glaucous-green. Spikes 2-5, 15-30 mm, each with 5-15 male and 1-6 overlapping female flowers, the upper spikes overlapping, subsessile, the lower arising from base of stem. Female glumes shorter than utricles, ovate, often shortly aristate, obtuse to acute, blackish-brown, without or with a very narrow scarious margin. Utricles 6-7 mm, ellipsoid, substipitate at base, pale green, obscurely veined.{\i  Dry rocky places and scrub. W. coasts of Greece and Jugoslavia; Pantelleria.} Gr Ju Si. ({\i Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. ACROCYSTIS Dumort. (Sect.{\i  Montanae} (Fries) Christ). Caespitose or not. Stems trigonous. Male spike usually solitary, cylindrical to subclavate, usually sessile or subsessile. Female spikes globose to oblong, dense; lowest bract glumaceous to leaf-like, sometimes sheathing. Female glumes usually shorter than utricles, usually ovate to obovate. Utricles ovoid to subglobose, membranous, usually puberulent, sometimes beakless. Stigmas (2-)3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 116. C. globularis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 975 (1753). Laxly caespitose and with long, slender rhizomes. Stems 20-50 cm, scabrid above; basal sheaths reddish or purplish. Leaves 1-2 mm, equalling or exceeding stems, greyish-green. Male spike solitary, 5-15(-20) × 1·5-2 mm. Female spikes 2-3, 3-5(-7) × 3-5 mm, globose to ovoid-oblong, sessile or shortly pedunculate, not overlapping; lowest bract leaf-like, exceeding spike and up to as long as inflorescence, without or with a sheath up to 2 mm. Female glumes obtuse, usually dark brown, with scarious margin. Utricles 3-3·4 mm, ovoid-trigonous, pale brownish-green, distinctly veined, densely brownish-puberulent, abruptly contracted into a short, conical beak.{\i  Damp woods and peaty ground; somewhat calcifuge. N.E. Europe, extending westwards to S. Norway and S.E. Russia.} Fe No Po Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 117. C. tomentosa} L.,{\i  Mantissa} 123 (1767) ({\i C. filiformis} auct., non L.). Rhizomes slender, creeping. Stems (10-)20-50 cm, scabrid above; basal sheaths reddish-brown or purple, becoming fibrous. Leaves 1·5-2(-2·5) mm wide, shorter than stems, glaucous-green. Male spike 1(-2), 10-30 × c. 2 mm. Female spikes 1-2, 5-15(-20) × 4-5 mm, oblong to subglobose, dense, erect, sessile or shortly pedunculate, usually overlapping; lowest bract longer than spike but shorter than inflorescence, more or less patent, not or shortly sheathing. Female glumes acute or apiculate, reddish- or purplish-brown. Utricles 2-3 mm, obovoid or subglobose, pale green, veinless, densely white-puberulent, almost beakless or with an emarginate beak less than 0·2 mm. 2n = 48.{\i  Meadows and woods; usually calcicole. From C. England and Estonia southwards to E. Spain, C. Italy and C. Greece.} ?Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from C. Italy with glaucous leaves, female spikes up to 40 mm and long-acuminate or aristate female glumes have been called {\i C. tomentosa} var. {\i lucana} N. Terracc. and may merit subspecific status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 118. C. grioletii} Roemer in Schkuhr, {\i Beschr. Abbild. Riedgr.}{\b  2}: 76 (1806). Like {\b 117} but somewhat caespitose; stems 30-75 (-100) cm, scabrid more or less throughout; leaves 2-5·5 mm wide, usually equalling stems; inflorescence 10-25(-40) cm; male spike 15-60 mm; female spikes (3-)4-5(-6), 5-15 × 4-5 mm, ovoid, not overlapping, the lower long-pedunculate; lowest bract usually exceeding inflorescence, erect, with a sheath 5-35(-100) mm; female glumes whitish or pale greenish-brown; utricles 1·5-2·5 mm, obovoid, prominently veined, usually glabrous below, with a sometimes 2-fid beak up to 0·4 mm. 2n = 48.{\i  Usually in damp, shady places. Mediterranean region from E. Spain to Crna Gora; very local}. *Ga Hs It Ju Si. ({\i Caucasian region}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 119. C. ericetorum} Pollich, {\i Hist. Pl. Palat.}{\b  2}: 580 (1777) (incl. {\i C. approximata} All.). More or less caespitose, with short creeping rhizomes. Stems 5-30(-45) cm, weakly scabrid at apex; basal sheaths dark, often purplish-brown, becoming fibrous. Leaves 2-4 mm wide, shorter or longer than stems rigid, usually greyish-green. Male spike solitary, 10-15(-20) × 1·5-3 mm, subclavate, subsessile. Female spikes 1-3, 6-15 × c. 5 mm, ovoid to oblong, erect, subsessile, overlapping; lowest bract 2-3 mm, glumaceous, scarcely sheathing. Female glumes obtuse to acute, dark reddish- or purplish-brown (rarely pale brown), with wide scarious, often fimbriate margin, glabrous. Utricles 2-2·5(-3) mm, obovoid or obovoid-ellipsoid, brownish-green, veinless, densely puberulent, gradually narrowed into a short, conical beak, not scarious at apex. 2n = 30.{\i  Dry, grassy and sandy places; usually calcicole. Most of Europe, but absent from the extreme west, the Mediterranean region and parts of the south-east.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 120. C. melanocarpa} Cham. ex Trautv. in Middendorff,{\i  Reise Nord. Öst. Sibir.} {\b 1} ({\b 2}), {\b 1}: 21 (1856). Like {\b 119} but stems not more than 15 cm, smooth; leaves 1·5-2·5 mm wide, shorter than stems; male spike 6-13 mm, linear, pedunculate; female spikes 3-7 × c. 3 mm; female glumes purplish-brown, sparsely puberulent; utricles 1·5-2 mm, dark reddish-brown, sparsely puberulent, rather abruptly contracted into beak, with scarious apex.{\i  Stony slopes and woods. On the borders of Europe at }c. 66° 30' {\i N. in N. Ural}. Rs (N). ({\i N. Siberia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 121. C. montana} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 975 (1753). Densely caespitose with short, ascending or long, creeping rhizomes. Stems (5-)10-40 cm, scabrid above; basal sheaths reddish or purplish becoming fibrous. Leaves 1·5-2 mm wide, shorter or longer than stems, pale green, persistent, sparsely hairy above but glabrescent. Male spike solitary, 10-20 × c. 2 mm, linear-ellipsoid. Female spikes 1-3(-4), 5-8 × 4-6 mm, ovoid, sessile, usually overlapping; lowest bract up to as long as spike (rarely longer), glumaceous or setaceous, scarcely sheathing. Female glumes ovate or obovate, obtuse, often mucronate, blackish- or dark purplish-brown, often with narrow scarious margin. Utricles 3-4·5 mm, obovoid, substipitate, greenish-brown, often
\par

\par
313}
\par