{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 overlapping, female; lowest bract leaf-like, usually equalling or exceeding the inflorescence, more or less erect. Female glumes shorter than to exceeding utricles, usually asymmetrical, dark reddish-brown. Utricles 2-4·5 mm, pale green, with a minute, emarginate beak.{\i  Fens and wet meadows. Mainly in C. & E. Europe and Fennoscandia, but extending locally westwards to Iceland, Scotland and N.W. France, and southwards to C. Italy.} Au Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge †Hb He Ho Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A detailed account of the variation of this and {\b 149} can be found in A. J. Cajander,{\i  Ann. Bot. Soc. Zool.-Bot. Fenn. Vanamo}{\b  5}({\b 5}) (1935)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b buxbaumii} ({\i C. polygama} Schkuhr, non J.F. Gmelin): Female glumes acuminate or aristate, equalling or exceeding utricles. Utricles 3-4·5 mm, ellipsoid, gradually narrowed into a very short beak. 2n = c. 74, c. 100. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species, but less widespread in N. Europe than subsp.} ({\b b}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b alpina} (Hartman) Liro, {\i Ann. Acad. Sci. Fenn.} (Ser. A) {\b 42}: 523 (1938) ({\i C. adelostoma} V. Krecz.): Female glumes acute to acuminate, shorter than or rarely equalling utricles. Utricles 2-3 mm, obovoid, rounded at apex and abruptly contracted into an indistinct beak. 2n = 106.{\i  N. Europe, southwards to S. Norway}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 149. C. hartmanii} Cajander, {\i Ann. Bot. Soc. Zool.-Bot. Fenn. Vanamo}{\b  5} ({\b 5}): 23 (1935) ({\i C. emasculata }V. Krecz.). Like {\b 148} ({\b b}) but stems less rigid and inflorescence usually nodding; leaves dark green; all spikes 15-35 × 4-7 mm, cylindrical (or sometimes the upper lateral ones ovoid), usually overlapping; lowest bract usually slightly shorter than or equalling the inflorescence; female glumes equalling or slightly exceeding utricles, acuminate or slightly aristate, symmetrical.{\i  Wet meadows. C. Europe, extending northwards to} 61°{\i  N. in Fennoscandia, eastwards to S. Ural and southwards to S. Jugoslavia.} Au Cz Da Fe ?Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rs (B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The distribution, especially in the southern part of the range, is uncertain because of former confusion with {\b 148}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 150. C. norvegica} Retz.,{\i  Fl. Scand. Prodr.} 179 (1779). Caespitose, with short rhizomes. Stems 5-60 cm, smooth or slightly scabrid above; basal sheath purplish- or blackish-brown, not or scarcely fibrous. Leaves 1·5-5 mm wide. Inflorescence a dense cluster of 2-4(-5) ovate to oblong, erect, sessile or subsessile spikes 5-12 mm, the terminal female above and male below, the rest female; lowest bract leaf-like, equalling or slightly exceeding inflorescence. Female glumes acute or obtuse, purplish- or brownish-black, sometimes with a narrow scarious margin. Utricles 1·8-3·5 mm, greenish to greyish-brown, blackish at apex, with a short, flat, emarginate beak. 2n = 56.{\i  N. Europe southwards to }57°{\i  N. in Scotland; E. & E.C. Alps.} Au Br Fe ?Ga He Is It No Rs (N, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A detailed account of the variation in this species can be found in A. Kalela, {\i Ann. Bot. Soc. Zool.-Bot. Fenn. Vanamo }{\b 19} ({\b 3}) (1944).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Utricles 1·8-2·5 mm, abruptly contracted into beak;
\par
  female glumes c. ¾ as long as utricles ............................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b norvegica} 
\par
1 Utricles 2·5-3·5 mm, gradually narrowed into beak;
\par
  female glumes c. ½ as long as utricles
\par
2 Leaves soft; lowest bract erect; utricles up to 3·5 mm . ({\b b}) subsp. {\b inferalpina} 
\par
2 Leaves rigid; lowest bract patent or deflexed; utricles
\par
  not more than 3 mm ......................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b pusterana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b norvegica} ({\i C. alpina} Liljeblad, non Schrank, {\i C. halleri} auct., ?an Gunnerus): Usually densely caespitose. Stems 5-40 cm. Leaves c. ½ as long as stems, 1·5-3 mm wide, rigid, dark green. Terminal spike of inflorescence larger than the rest; lowest bract erect. Female glumes c. ¾ as long as utricles. Utricles 1·8-2·5 mm, broadly ovoid or obovoid, suberect, abruptly contracted into a scabrid beak c. 0·25 mm. {\i Damp places. Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b inferalpina} (Wahlenb.) Hultén,{\i  Lunds Univ. Årsskr.} nov. ser., {\b 38} ({\b 1}): 348 (1942) (incl. {\i C. angarae} Steudel): Laxly caespitose. Stems 20-60 cm. Leaves usually almost as long as stems, 2·5-5 mm wide, soft, dark green. Terminal spike of inflorescence larger than the rest; lowest bract erect. Female glumes c. ½ as long as utricles. Utricles 2·5-3·5 mm, ellipsoid, more or less patent, gradually narrowed into a usually smooth beak c. 0·75 mm.{\i  Damp woods and marshy meadows. Fennoscandia and N. Russia, usually at lower altitudes than subsp.} ({\b a}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b pusterana} (Kalela) Chater, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 365 (1978) ({\i C. angarae} subsp. {\i pusterana} Kalela, {\i C. media} subsp.{\i  pusterana} (Kalela) Schultze-Motel): Usually densely caespitose. Stems 10-40 cm. Leaves c. ½ as long as stems, rigid, pale green. Terminal spike of inflorescence about the same size as the rest; lowest bract patent or deflexed. Female glumes c. ½ as long as utricles. Utricles 2·5-3 mm, ellipsoid, more or less patent, gradually narrowed into a usually scabrid beak c. 0·75 mm.{\i  Damp, stony places; calcifuge. •  E. Alps.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 151. C. holostoma} Drejer, {\i Revis. Crit. Caric. Bor.} 29 (1841). Not or only laxly caespitose, with long rhizomes. Stems 10-20(-35) cm, scabrid above; basal sheaths purplish-brown, entire, without lamina. Leaves 1·5-2(-3) mm wide, equalling or shorter than stems, yellowish- or greyish-green. Inflorescence very compact; terminal spike 3-5 mm, entirely male, overtopped and concealed by the (2-)3(-4) sessile, approximate, oblong female spikes 5-10 × 2-3 mm (rarely the lowest spike somewhat distant); lowest bract setaceous, usually shorter than spike. Female glumes ½-¾ as long as utricles, acute, blackish. Utricles 1·8-2·5 mm, obovoid, green, usually becoming brownish-black at least above, rounded at apex and scarcely beaked.{\i  Streamsides, mainly in the mountains, and wet tundra. Arctic Fennoscandia.} Fe ?Is No Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 152. C. stylosa} C. A. Meyer,{\i  Mém. Sav. Étr. Pétersb.}{\b  1}: 222 (1831). Caespitose, with short creeping rhizomes. Stems (10-)20-45 cm, scabrid above; basal sheaths dark or reddish-brown, leafless, becoming fibrous. Leaves shorter than stems, 2-3 mm wide, green or greyish-green, flat. Terminal spike 8-15 × c. 2 mm, entirely male, shortly pedunculate. Lateral spikes 2-3, 8-15 × 4-5 mm, entirely female, oblong, usually overlapping each other and often overlapping base of male spike, erect, with peduncles 0·5-3 cm; lowest bract usually about equalling spike, leaf-like. Female glumes c. 2/3 as long as utricles, subobtuse, blackish- or dark reddish-brown, with narrow scarious margin. Utricles 2·5-3·5 mm, ellipsoid-ovoid, greenish- to brownish-yellow, often dark brown towards apex, papillose, gradually narrowed into a soft, conical, usually smooth, truncate beak, with persistent unbranched part of style protruding for c. 1 mm.{\i  Sandy or boggy places. Arctic Norway. }No. ({\i N. Siberia, North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 153. C. bicolor} All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem.}{\b  2}: 267 (1785). Laxly caespitose and with short rhizomes. Stems 5-20(-25) cm, procumbent to erect and usually nodding, slightly scabrid at apex; basal sheaths pale yellowish- or whitish-brown. Leaves shorter than stems, 1-2(-3) mm wide, flat, greyish- or yellowish-green. Spikes
\par

\par
318}
\par