{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 142. C. limosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 977 (1753). Rhizomes far-creeping. Stems 10-40(-60) cm, sharply trigonous, smooth or scabrid above; basal sheaths reddish- to yellowish-brown, without lamina, persistent. Leaves 1-1·5(-2) mm wide, shorter than stems, glaucous or greyish-green. Terminal spike male, 10-25 × 1-2 mm; lateral spikes 1-2(-3), (5-)10-20 × 5-7 mm, ovoid to oblong, dense, approximate, pendent, with peduncles 1-4 cm, female, with 9-20 flowers; lowest bract leaf-like, usually shorter than the inflorescence, not sheathing or with a sheath less than 5 mm. Female glumes slightly exceeding in length and at least as wide as utricles, acute or mucronate, reddish- or purplish-brown. Utricles 3·5-4·5 mm, greyish- or bluish-green, prominently veined, abruptly contracted into beak. 2n = 56, 62, 64. {\i Wet bogs and peaty lake-margins. N., N.W. & C. Europe, extending locally southwards to the Pyrenees, S. Bulgaria and S.E. Russia.} Au Be  Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs †Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 143. C. rariflora} (Wahlenb.) Sm. in Sowerby, {\i Engl. Bot.}{\b  35}: t. 2516 (1813). Like {\b 142} but rhizomes short, ascending; stems 10-20(-40) cm, obtusely trigonous, smooth; basal sheaths often becoming fibrous; leaves 1-3 mm wide, pale green; male spike 5-10 mm; lateral spikes 5-12 × 3-4 mm, narrowly oblong, lax, on peduncles 0·5-1 cm, with 5-8 flowers; female glumes blackish- or dark purplish-brown; utricles obscurely beaked. 2n = c. 52, 54.{\i  Peat-bogs and wet tundra. N. & W. Fennoscandia and N. Russia, Iceland, Scotland.} Br Fe Is No Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Hybrids are frequently formed with {\b 144}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 144. C. magellanica} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  3}: 385 (1789). Like {\b 142} but rhizomes short, ascending; leaves 2-4 mm wide, often equalling the stems, pale green; terminal spike often female at apex; lateral spikes lax, with 7-13 female flowers and 1-3 male flowers at the base; lowest bract usually exceeding the inflorescence; female glumes almost twice as long as and c. 2/3 as wide as utricles, acuminate or aristate; utricles weakly veined. 2n = 58.{\i  Bogs and other wet places. N. & C. Europe; an outlying station in S.E. France} ({\i Mont Cenis}). Au Br Cz Fe Ga Ge Hb He Is It No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, ?W) Su. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The European plant is subsp.{\b  irrigua} (Wahlenb.) Hiitonen,{\i  Suomen Kasvio} 161 (1933) ({\i C. irrigua} (Wahlenb.) Sm. ex Hoppe; incl.{\i  C. magellanica} subsp.{\i  planitiei} (Ascherson & Graebner) Schultze-Motel); subsp.{\b  magellanica} occurs in South America southwards from 40° S., and differs chiefly in having the terminal spike almost always female at the apex, more male flowers in the lateral spikes and longer and wider female glumes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 145. C. laxa} Wahlenb.,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} nov. ser., {\b 24}: 156 (1803). Like {\b 142} but stems 20-40 cm, rather flaccid, obtusely trigonous, smooth; basal sheaths dull, pale brown; leaves flat; lateral spikes usually 2, rather lax, distant; lower bract shorter than the inflorescence, with a sheath 10-20 mm; female glumes obtuse and mucronate to subacute, reddish-brown; utricles more gradually narrowed into beak.{\i  Wet peat-bogs. Fennoscandia, southwards to} 62°{\i  N. }Fe No Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ATRATAE Christ. Caespitose and with creeping rhizomes. Stems sharply trigonous. Terminal spikes female above and male below, or male above and female below, or entirely male; lateral spikes female, cylindrical to ovoid-globose; lowest bract usually leaf-like, not or very shortly sheathing. Female glumes ovate to ovate-lanceolate, usually blackish. Utricles ellipsoid to broadly obovoid, subterete or biconvex, membranous, glabrous, veinless or obscurely veined at base, with a short, entire or emarginate beak, or beakless. Stigmas 3, rarely 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 146. C. atrata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 976 (1753). Caespitose, with short rhizomes. Stems (10-)20-60 cm; basal sheaths dark purplish- or blackish-brown, usually entire. Leaves shorter than, or equalling stems, flat or the margins rolled outwards, pale green or glaucous. Inflorescence nodding, a lax cluster of 2-7 oblong or oblong-ellipsoid spikes 10-35 mm, the terminal female above and male below, the rest female; lowest spike with a peduncle at least half as long as itself, usually pendent; lowest bract leaf-like, usually exceeding inflorescence, erect or erecto-patent. Female glumes acute, purplish-black, often with a pale margin. Utricles 3-5 mm, broadly ovoid to obovoid, abruptly contracted into a short, emarginate beak.{\i  Grassy or rocky places. N. Europe southwards to Wales and S. Norway; S. Ural; mountains of C. & S. Europe.} Au Br Bu Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Utricles shining, yellow or pale orange .......................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b caucasica}
\par
1 Utricles dull, yellowish to black
\par
2 Stems usually more than 30 cm, scabrid; 
\par
  utricles 4-5 mm .................................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b aterrima}
\par
2 Stems usually less than 30 cm, smooth; 
\par
  utricles 3-4 mm ...................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b atrata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b atrata}: Stems (10-)20-30(-50) cm, slender, rigid, smooth. Leaves 3-5(-10) mm wide. Spikes 10-20 mm. Female glumes exceeding utricles. Utricles 3-4 mm, dull greenish- or brownish-yellow, often with purplish spots or blackish-purple above, veinless. 2n = 52, 54.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species except S. Ural.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b aterrima} (Hoppe) Celak.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Bohm.} 67 (1867) ({\i C. aterrima }Hoppe; incl.{\i  C. perfusca} V. Krecz.): Stems 30-60 cm, stout, rather flaccid, scabrid above. Leaves 5-10 mm wide. Spikes 15-35 mm. Female glumes equalling or slightly exceeding utricles. Utricles 4-5 mm, dull black or purplish-black, with greenish base, veinless.{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe; S. Ural.}  
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b caucasica} (Steven) Kük. in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  38} ({\b IV. 20}) (Cyper.-Caric.): 400 (1909) ({\i C. caucasica} Steven): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but sometimes with supplementary spikes at base of lateral spikes; female glumes shorter than utricles; utricles 3-4 mm, shining, yellow or pale orange, obscurely veined at base.{\i  Ural.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Hybrids between subsp. ({\b a}) and {\b 150} ({\b a}) ({\i C}. × {\i candriana} Kneucker), are common in N. Fennoscandia.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 147. C. parviflora} Host,{\i  Gram. Austr.}{\b  1}: 64 (1801) ({\i C. nigra} All., non (L.) Reichard, {\i C. atrata} subsp. {\i nigra} (Gaudin) Hartman). Like {\b 146}({\b a}) but stems 10-20 cm, sometimes slightly scabrid; basal sheaths sometimes yellowish-brown and becoming fibrous; leaves (1-)2-4 mm wide, sometimes exceeding the stems, inflorescence usually erect; spikes not more than 4, 5-8 mm, oblong- to globose-ovoid, erect, sessile or subsessile, approximate; terminal spike sometimes male at apex or throughout; lowest bract usually patent or deflexed; female glumes slightly shorter than the utricles; utricles 2·5-4 mm, black, or blackish-purple, usually greenish at base and paler at the margin. 2n = 54.{\i  Rocks, screes and alpine grassland. Mountains of C. & S. Europe, from the Carpathians to N. Spain, C. Italy and S.W. Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 148. C. buxbaumii} Wahlenb.,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl}. nov ser., {\b 24}: 163 (1803). Laxly caespitose and with long rhizomes. Stem 15-80 cm, scabrid above; basal sheaths dark brownish- or blackish-red, becoming somewhat fibrous. Leaves shorter than stems, 2-4 mm wide, glaucous or greyish-green, the margins usually inrolled. Inflorescence lax, sometimes nodding, of 3-4(-6) spikes; terminal spike 10-25 × 5-10 mm, clavate, female above, male below; lateral spikes 10-25 × 5-10 mm, ovoid or obovoid, sessile or subsessile, distant and usually not 
\par

\par
317}
\par