{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 shorter than utricles, acute or acuminate. Utricles obovoid-trigonous, sparsely puberulent at least above, prominently veined, with an emarginate beak. Stigmas 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 104. C. hallerana} Asso,{\i  Syn. Stirp. Arag.} 133 (1779) ({\i C. alpestris} All.). Densely caespitose. Stems (5-)10-40 cm, slender, scabrid above; basal sheaths brown, fibrous. Leaves shorter or longer than stems, 1-2·5 mm wide. Male spike 10-20 × c. 3 mm. Female spikes 1-3(-6), 8-10(-15) × c. 5 mm, the upper 1-3 sessile or shortly pedunculate. Female glumes brown or reddish-brown, with scarious margin. Utricles (3-)4-5 mm, greenish-brown, abruptly contracted into a very short beak. 2n = 50, 52, 54. {\i Dry places. S. & S.C. Europe. }Al Au Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 105. C. rorulenta} Porta, {\i Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.}{\b  19}: 321 (1887). Like {\b 104} but not caespitose, with long, slender rhizomes; stems 3-10(-15) cm, filiform, smooth; leaves 0·5-1 mm wide; male spike 5-6 × 1-2 mm; female spikes 1-3, 4-6 mm; utricles 3-3·5 mm, more gradually narrowed at apex into a longer beak. 2n = 48-50. {\i Dry, stony places. • Islas Baleares.} Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. DIGITATAE (Fries) Christ. Caespitose, sometimes with short creeping rhizomes. Stems obtusely trigonous. Male spike solitary, linear. Female spikes linear to oblong or fusiform, lax; lowest bract up to about as long as spike, glumaceous to leaf-like, sheathing. Female glumes obovate to lanceolate, with scarious margin. Utricles obovoid to subglobose, membranous, usually more or less stipitate, puberulent or glabrous, usually veinless, with a very small or obscure beak. Stigmas 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 106. C. digitata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 975 (1753) ({\i C. ornithopoda} auct. balcan. pro parte, non Willd.). Caespitose, with short, ascending rhizomes. Stems 10-30(-40) cm, conspicuously lateral and leafless, decumbent to erect, smooth or weakly scabrid above; basal sheaths reddish-purple, conspicuous, becoming fibrous. Leaves shorter or longer than stems, (0·5-)2-5(-6) mm wide, flat, green or dark green. Male spike 8-15 × 1-1·5 mm, subsessile. Female spikes 2-3(-4), 10-25 × 2-3 mm, linear, very lax, the upper subsessile and exceeding the male spike, the lower with peduncles 1-2(-4) cm and overlapping the upper or distant; lowest bract glumaceous, with a sheath 3-8 mm. Female glumes about equalling utricles, obovate, obtuse or emarginate, sometimes apiculate, reddish-brown. Utricles 3-4(-4·5) mm, yellowish-brown, puberulent, veinless, abruptly contracted into an obscure, conical, subentire beak. 2n = 48, 50, 52, 54, {\i Woods and dry, rocky or grassy places. Most of Europe, but rare in the extreme west and most of the Mediterranean region.} Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from Finland, known as var. {\i pallens} Fristedt, showing some of the characters of {\b 108} ({\b b}) are probably of hybrid origin. The hybrid between {\b 106} and {\b 107} is frequent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 107. C. ornithopoda} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  4}: 255 (1805). Like {\b 106} but stems 5-15(-25) cm; basal sheaths yellowish- to dark reddish-brown, becoming fibrous; leaves shorter than the stems, 1-3 mm wide, pale green; male spike 4-8 × 1-1·5 mm, sessile; female spikes 3-10(-15) × 2-3 mm, lax, the lower sessile or with peduncles up to 0·5 cm and at almost the same level as the upper; female glumes 1/2-2/3 as long as utricles, yellowish- to reddish- or blackish-brown; utricles 2-3 mm, yellowish to dark reddish-brown, sometimes glabrous.{\i  Dry grassland and scrub; calcicole. • Much of Europe, but absent from the south-east and much of the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Br Co Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ornithopoda} ({\i C. pedata} auct., ?an L.): Stems up to 15(-25) cm, erect or decumbent, straight or weakly curved, smooth or scabrid above. Male spike up to 8 mm. Female spikes 2-3(-4), 5-10(-15) mm, the lower on peduncles up to 0·5 cm. Female glumes yellowish- to reddish-brown. Utricles 2·5-3 mm, puberulent. 2n = c. 46, 52, 54.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ornithopodioides} (Hausm.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 772 (1882) ({\i C. ornithopodioides} Hausm.): Stems 5-10 cm, strongly curved and decumbent, smooth. Male spike not more than 6 mm. Female spikes usually 2, 3-5 mm, sessile or subsessile. Female glumes reddish-brown to blackish. Utricles 2-2·5 mm, glabrous. 2n = 54, 56.{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe}.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 108. C. pediformis} C. A. Meyer, {\i Mém. Sav. Étr. Pétersb. }{\b 1}: 219 (1831). Caespitose, sometimes forming tussocks, usually with stout rhizomes. Stems (10-)20-50(-60) cm, terminal, erect or ascending, scabrid at least above; basal sheaths reddish- or purplish-brown, fibrous. Leaves 1·5-3 mm wide, shorter or longer than stems, flat or with revolute margins, green. Male spike 5-25 × 1-4 mm, sessile or shortly pedunculate. Female spikes 2-3(-4), 15-30 × 2-4 mm, oblong-linear, lax, the upper usually exceeding the male spike, shortly pedunculate, the lower distant, with peduncles 20-50 mm; lowest bract setaceous or leaf-like, with a sheath 10-20 mm. Female glumes equalling utricles, ovate to lanceolate, acute, often mucronate, reddish-brown. Utricles 3-4 mm, obovoid-trigonous, yellowish- or brownish-green, puberulent, gradually narrowed into an obscure, conical, entire beak.{\i  E. & E.C. Europe, southwards to S.C. Russia and Czechoslovakia and extending westwards to S.E. Norway}. ?Au Cz Fe †It No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Densely caespitose, without creeping rhizomes ........... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b pediformis} 
\par
1 Laxly caespitose, with short, creeping rhizomes
\par
2 Male spike not reaching beyond the uppermost female 
\par
  spike .................................................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b rhizodes}
\par
2 Male spike reaching beyond the uppermost female spike
\par
  .......................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b macroura}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pediformis}: Densely caespitose, forming tussocks, without creeping rhizomes. Leaves shorter than stems. Male spike 5-10 × 3-4 mm, shorter than or equalling uppermost female spike. Utricles 3-3·5 mm, with prominent veins at least at base. {\i Steppes and dry, stony slopes. C. & E. Russia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b rhizodes} (Blytt) H. Lindb. fil., {\i Sched. Pl. Finl. Exsicc.}{\b  1-8}: 44 (1907) ({\i C. rhizina }Blytt ex Lindblom): Laxly caespitose, with creeping rhizomes. Leaves equalling or exceeding stems. Male spike 5-12 × 1-2(-3) mm, shorter than or equalling uppermost female spike. Utricles 3·5-4 mm, obscurely veined. {\i Dry woods and scrub. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b macroura} (Meinsh.) Podp.,{\i  Publ. Fac. Sci. Univ. Masaryk}{\b  101}: 21 (1928) ({\i C. macroura} Meinsh.): Laxly caespitose, with short, creeping rhizomes. Leaves usually about equalling stems. Male spike 10-25 × 1-3 mm, exceeding uppermost female spike. Utricles 3-3·5 mm, obscurely veined.{\i  Dry woods. C. & S. Ural}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    A record of subsp. ({\b c}) from W. Czechoslovakia requires confirmation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 109. C. humilis} Leysser, {\i Fl. Halens.} 175 (1761). Caespitose, forming tussocks. Stems 2-10(-15) cm, ascending or erect, smooth; basal sheaths reddish- or purplish-brown, fibrous, persistent. Leaves greatly exceeding stems, 1-1·5(-2) mm wide, flat or canaliculate, greyish-green. Male spike 10-15(-20) × 2-4 mm, long-pedunculate. Female spikes 2-4, 5-10 × 1-2 mm,
\par

\par
311}
\par