{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. T. agenensis} DC. in Redouté, {\i Liliacees }{\b 1}: 60 (1804) ({\i T. oculus-solis} St-Amans, {\i T. lortetii} Jordan). Like {\b 10} but leaves green; perianth-segments redder and narrower, more than 3 times as long as wide, the outer 57-85 × 13-30 mm, elliptical to oblong-elliptical, acuminate, the inner 48-75 × 14-23 mm, elliptical to elliptic-ovate, acute. 2n = 24, 36.{\i  In and around cultivated land. Naturalized in S. France and Italy}. [Ga It.] (?{\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Records from elsewhere in S. Europe refer to casual occurrences in which the plant does not persist for long.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 23.     Fritillaria}           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By E.M. Rix. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, bulbous perennials. Bulb usually globose, with few, tightly-packed scales and thin, translucent tunic which disappears with increased bulb-size. Leaves verticillate, opposite or alternate. Flowers solitary, rarely in few-flowered racemes, nodding. Perianth campanulate, or conical-campanulate, the segments often marked with alternating squares of dark and light colour ({\i tessellations}), and often with a longitudinal stripe of clear green down the middle ({\i fascia}). Nectaries conspicuous, at the base or at the point of inflection of the perianth-segments. Filaments inserted slightly above base of anther. Style entire or 3-fid, caducous. Fruit a 6-angled, flat-topped, erect capsule, sometimes with 6 longitudinal wings.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In species which normally have opposite or verticillate leaves some individuals, usually the smaller, have all the leaves alternate. Measurements of the style include the branches.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b F. persica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 304 (1753), with many spirally arranged leaves and a raceme of up to 40 small, purplish or greenish flowers is cultivated for ornament and naturalized in N. & C. Italy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perianth narrowly or conical-campanulate; nectary at base of
\par
  perianth-segment
\par
2 Perianth clear yellow
\par
3 Stem 7-25 cm; leaves shining green .............................................. {\b 20. conica}
\par
3 Stem 3-10 cm; leaves glaucous .................................................. {\b 21. euboeica}
\par
2 Perianth blackish, purplish or greenish, usually glaucous outside
\par
4 Style undivided
\par
5 Lower leaves alternate, the upper in whorls of 3;
\par
  capsule winged ............................................................................. {\b 22. stribrnyi}
\par
5 Lower leaves opposite, the upper alternate; capsule not winged {\b 23. ebrhartii}
\par
4 Style 3-fid
\par
6 Leaves 4-5(-9); style papillose ................................................ {\b 19. drenovskii}
\par
6 Leaves 8-20- style smooth
\par
7 Style-branches 2-3 mm; flowers usually 1-2 ............................... {\b 17. obliqua}
\par
7 Style-branches 1-1·5 mm; flowers 1-4(-6) .................................. {\b 18. tuntasia}
\par
1 Perianth broadly campanulate; nectary at point of 
\par
  inflection of perianth-segment
\par
8 Perianth yellow, purple or white, tessellated, without fascia;
\par
  nectary c. 10 mm above the base of the perianth-segment
\par
9 Lowest leaves linear; outer perianth-segments usually acute .... {\b 1. meleagris}
\par
9 Lowest leaves lanceolate; all perianth-segments rounded at apex
\par
10 All leaves alternate; inner perianth-segments entire ............... {\b 2. tubiformis}
\par
10 Lower leaves subopposite, the upper usually in a whorl
\par
   of 3; inner perianth-segments toothed .................................... {\b 3. macedonica}
\par
8 Perianth green, brown or blackish, usually with fascia;
\par
  nectary c. 5 mm above base of perianth-segment
\par
11 Nectary (6-)10-15 mm
\par
12 Nectary ovate-lanceolate
\par
13 Stem 15-30 cm; lowest leaves 3-7 mm wide ....................... {\b 6. messanensis}
\par
13 Stem 4-10 cm; lowest leaves 8-15 mm wide ............................. {\b 7. epirotica}
\par
12 Nectary linear to linear-lanceolate
\par
14 All leaves alternate
\par
15 Leaves 5-9; perianth-segments greenish- or reddish-
\par
   brown outside, usually with fascia; style smooth ..................... {\b 13. lusitanica}
\par
15 Leaves 3-6; perianth-segments blackish outside, without
\par
   fascia; style papillose .......................................................... {\b 16. meleagroides}
\par
14 Some of the leaves opposite or verticillate
\par
16 Uppermost leaves with filiform, tendril-like apex
\par
   capsule winged .......................................................................... {\b 14. ruthenica}
\par
16 Apex of uppermost leaves often curved or hooked, but 
\par
   not filiform or tendril-like; capsule not winged ........................ {\b 15. orientalis}
\par
11 Nectary 3-6 mm
\par
17 Perianth not tessellated
\par
18 Style papillose; capsule not winged ................................. {\b 11. rhodocanakis}
\par
18 Style smooth; capsule winged
\par
19 Some leaves opposite or verticillate ............................................ {\b 4. pontica}
\par
19 All leaves alternate .................................................................. {\b 8. gussichiae}
\par
17 Perianth tessellated
\par
20 Nectary lanceolate to linear
\par
21 Leaves usually glaucous; perianth-segments with fascia .............. {\b 9. graeca}
\par
21 Leaves usually not glaucous; perianth-segments without
\par
   fascia ............................................................................................. {\b 10. davisii}
\par
20 Nectary triangular to ovate-lanceolate
\par
22 All leaves alternate ................................................................. {\b 12. pyrenaica}
\par
22 Some of the leaves opposite or verticillate
\par
23 Lowest leaves 6-10 mm wide, linear to linear-lanceolate ..... {\b 5. involucrata}
\par
23 Lowest leaves 11-25 mm wide, ovate to lanceolate ..................... {\b 9. graeca}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. meleagris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 304 (1753). Stem 12-30 cm. Leaves (3-)4-6(-8), alternate, linear, somewhat glaucous. Perianth very broadly campanulate; segments purple, pink or white, usually tessellated inside and outside with purple, without fascia, the outer 30-45 × 10-15 mm, the inner 13-19 mm wide. Nectaries 7-10 × 1·5 mm, linear, green, 8-12 mm above the base of the perianth-segment. Filaments 10-13 mm, papillose. Style 13-16 mm, 3-fid, the branches 2-5 mm. Capsule not winged. 2n = 24. •{\i  From England and C. Russia southwards to the S. Alps and C. Jugoslavia; planted and naturalized in Fennoscandia, the Baltic region and elsewhere}. Au †Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, ?E) [Da Fe No Su Rs (B)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b meleagris}: Lowest leaves 6-13 cm × 5-12 mm, acute. Perianth-segments often white or pink, the outer acute, the inner usually acute, sometimes obtuse. Filaments papillose. Style papillose.{\i  Open woods and grassy places, usually on flood-plains. Throughout the range of the species except the Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b burnatii} (Planchon) Rix, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 356 (1978) ({\i F. burnatii }Planchon): Lowest leaves 5-8 cm × 5-10 mm, obtuse. Perianth-segments purple, the outer acute or obtuse, the inner obtuse. Filaments smooth or sparsely and shortly papillose. Style smooth. {\i Alpine pastures. S. & S.W. Alps}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. F. tubiformis} Gren. & Godron,{\i  Mém. Soc. Émul. Doubs}{\b  2}({\b 6}): 13 (1855) ({\i F. delphinensis} Gren. & Godron). Stems 8-24 cm. Leaves 5-6, alternate, glaucous, the lowest 5-9 cm × 8-15 mm. Perianth very broadly campanulate; segments purplish or yellowish, glaucous outside, tessellated and blotched inside with purple or brown, without fascia, the outer 32-48 × 13-22 mm, obtuse, the inner 18-24 mm wide, rounded at the apex. Nectaries greenish, 10 mm above the base of the perianth-segment. Filaments 12-18 mm, papillose. Style smooth. Capsule not winged.{\i  Alpine meadows and pastures,} 1500-2000{\i  m. • S.W. Alps}. Ga It.
\par

\par
31}
\par