{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 leaves 1-3 mm wide, pale green; male spike 5-20 × c. 2 mm, shortly pedunculate or subsessile; female spikes (1-)2-3, 5-15 × c. 5 mm, oblong to globose, with 5-15 flowers, the lowest with a peduncle 7-20 mm; lowest bract usually with a sheath up to 5-10(-15) mm; female glumes sometimes exceeding the utricles, obtuse to acute; utricles 3-4 mm, with distinct veins at base and a usually obscure, entire beak.{\i  Dry, open, stony or sandy places. From N.W. France and S. Czechoslovakia southwards to N. Spain, N. Greece and Krym.} Au Bu Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E) ?Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b liparocarpos}: Lowest bract not sheathing or with a sheath not more than 10 mm. Female glumes shorter than the utricles, ovate-orbicular, obtuse. 2n = 38. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b bordzilowskii} (V. Krecz.) Egorova,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  9}: 84 (1972) ({\i C. bordzilowskii} V. Krecz.): Lowest bract with a sheath up to 15 mm. Female glumes equalling or exceeding the utricles, oblong-ovate, acute. {\i Mountains of Krym,} 1100-1300{\i  m.} ({\i Caucasian region}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. AULOCYSTIS Dumort. (Sect.{\i  Frigidae} Christ). Caespitose or not. Stems trigonous. Terminal spike male, or female above and male below, or male above and female below, or male in the middle, usually pedunculate; lateral spikes entirely female (rarely the upper 1-2 entirely male), lax or dense; lowest bract usually leaf-like, shorter than or rarely equalling inflorescence, more or less sheathing. Female glumes shorter than or rarely equalling utricles, ovate to lanceolate, obtuse to acute or lanceolate. Utricles obovoid to linear-lanceolate, more or less compressed-trigonous to plano-convex, membranous, glabrous or hairy, with a distinct, 2-fid beak. Stigmas 3, rarely 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: W. Dietrich, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  75}: 1-40 (1967).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 131. C. sempervirens} Vill., {\i Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  2}: 214 (1787) (incl. subsp.{\i  tristis} auct. eur., non (Bieb.) Kük.). Densely caespitose, usually forming tussocks, without creeping rhizomes. Stems 10-40(-60) cm, erect, slender, obscurely trigonous, usually smooth; basal sheaths yellowish- to dark reddish-brown, with lamina, often fibrous. Leaves half as long to almost as long as stems, 1-3(-4) mm wide, more or less flaccid, green. Male spikes 1(-3), 10-15 × 2-3 mm. Female spikes 2-3, 10-20 × 4-5 mm, oblong-ovoid, fairly dense, erect or the lower somewhat pendent, distant, the upper subsessile or shortly pedunculate and usually overlapping the base of the male spike, the lower with peduncles 2-8(-12) cm; lowest bract with a sheath 10-30 mm. Female glumes blackish- or reddish-brown, with scarious margin. Utricles (3·5-)4-6·5(-7·5) × 1-1·5 mm, oblong-ellipsoid, yellowish-brown to dark brown, weakly veined, glabrous or more or less scabrid-pubescent, gradually narrowed into a long, serrulate, scarious-margined 2-fid beak. Stigmas 3. 2n = 30 (31, 32), 34, 68.{\i  Dry grassland and rocky slopes. • Mountains of C. & S. Europe from the Carpathians to N. Spain, N. Appennini and Macedonia.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge ?Gr He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Extremely variable, and perhaps divisible into several subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 132. C. firma} Host,{\i  Syn. Pl. Austr. }509 (1797). Like {\b 131} but forming dense cushions or mats; stems 5-20(-30) cm; basal sheaths yellowish- to blackish-brown, entire, persistent; leaves less than half as long as stems, tapered from the base, rigid; male spike solitary, 5-10 × 2-3 mm; female spikes 1-3, 5-10 × 3-4 mm, ovoid, with peduncles 0·3-1(-2) cm; lowest bract with a sheath 3-5(-10) mm; utricles 3·5-4·5 × 1-1·5 mm, glabrous on surface of body. 2n = 34, 68.{\i  Stony grassland and rocks, above 1300 m; calcicole. • Alps, Carpathians, N. & C. Appennini and mountains of N.W. Jugoslavia.} Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 133. C. kitaibeliana} Degen ex Becherer,{\i  Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges.}{\b  70}: 178 (1960) ({\i C. laevis }Kit. ex Willd., non J. F. Gmelin). Like {\b 131} but stems usually somewhat scabrid above; leaves often less than half as long as stems, 0·5-1 mm wide, the margins inrolled; male spike solitary, 3-4 mm wide; female spikes 1(-2), 4-15 × 3-4 mm; utricles 3·5-5 mm. 2n = 36.{\i  Dry, grassy or rocky places; calcicole. C. Appennini; mountains of Balkan peninsula. }Al Bu Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 134. C. macrolepis} DC.,{\i  Cat. Pl. Horti Monsp.} 89 (1813). Like {\b 131} but stems (15-)30-75 cm, rather stout, often somewhat scabrid above; basal sheaths reddish- or blackish-brown; leaves 1·5-4 mm wide; male spike solitary, 10-20 × 3-4 mm, oblong-clavate; female spikes 1-2(-3), 10-25 × 5-7 mm, erect, approximate, with peduncles 3-7 cm; lowest bract with a sheath 3-7 mm; female glumes with wide, prominent scarious margin; utricles 5-7 × 1·5-2 mm, obovoid or ellipsoid, trigonous, dark brown, prominently veined, appressed-pubescent. 2n = 36, 37.{\i  Dry woods and rocky pastures. • Appennini; mountains of Albania and W. & S. Greece}. Al It Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 135. C. mucronata} All., {\i Fl. Pedem. }{\b 2}: 268 (1805). Densely caespitose, without creeping rhizomes. Stems 7-40 cm, erect or nodding, filiform, obscurely trigonous, smooth; basal sheaths pale, often pinkish-brown, mostly with lamina, somewhat fibrous. Leaves shorter than stems, 0·3-0·5 mm wide, canaliculate, usually circinnate towards apex. Male spike solitary, 7-12 × 1·5-3 mm. Female spikes 1-2, 5-10 × 4-5 mm, ovoid, dense, sessile, overlapping each other and base of male spike; lowest bract sometimes glumaceous, scarcely sheathing. Female glumes dark, often reddish-brown, with scarious margin. Utricles 4-5 mm linear- to ovate-lanceolate, plano-convex, dark brown, with slender veins, sparsely puberulent, gradually narrowed into a long, scabrid, 2-fid beak. Stigmas 2. 2n = 34, 36.{\i  Dry, rocky places; calcicole. Alps, N. & C. Appennini and mountains of N.W. Jugoslavia}. Au ?Co Ga Ge He It Ju ?Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 136. C. fuliginosa} Schkuhr, {\i Beschr. Abbild. Riedgr.} 91 (1801). Caespitose, without creeping rhizomes. Stems (5-)10-30(-40) cm, erect or nodding, slender, obtusely trigonous, smooth or slightly scabrid; basal sheaths pale, often whitish-brown, rigid, with lamina, prominent and erect. Leaves usually not more than half as long as stems, 2-5 mm wide, flat. Spikes (2-)3-4(-5), 10-20(-25) × 6-8 mm, oblong-ellipsoid to clavate, dense, the terminal male at base and female above, the remainder female, usually all overlapping and nodding, with peduncles 1-5 cm lowest bract with a sheath 5-20 mm. Female glumes dark reddish- or blackish-brown, with narrow scarious margin. Utricles 4-5·5 mm, lanceolate, flattened-trigonous, greenish-yellow to dark reddish-brown, glabrous, veinless, gradually narrowed into a scabrid, 2-fid beak. {\i Rock-ledges, stream-sides and wet, stony places. Arctic Europe, mountains of Norway, N. & C. Ural; Alps and Carpathians; mountains of S.W. Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge It Ju No Rm Rs (N, W) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b fuliginosa}: Leaves c. ½ as long as stems. Spikes 15-20(-25) mm, the terminal clavate, the remainder oblong-ellipsoid. 2n = 40.{\i  Calcifuge. • Alps, Carpathians and mountains of S.W. Bulgaria}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b misandra} (R. Br.) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 771 (1882) ({\i C. misandra} R. Br.): Leaves 1/4-1/3 as long as stems. Spikes 10-15 mm, all clavate. 2n = 40.{\i  Calcicole. N. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 137. C. ferruginea} Scop.,{\i  Fl. Carn.} ed. 2,{\b  2}: 225 (1772). Laxly to densely caespitose, usually with creeping rhizomes. Stems
\par

\par
315}
\par