{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 blackish above, faintly veined, densely puberulent, rounded at apex and with a minute, emarginate beak. 2n = 38.{\i  Dry slopes, scrub and open woods. From C. England, S. Sweden and C. Russia southwards to N. Spain, Corse and S.W. Bulgaria.} Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da †Fe Da Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, ?E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 122. C. fritschii} Waisb., {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  44} ({\i Sitzungsber.}): 51 (1895). Like {\b 121} but stems (20-)40-65 cm; leaves (1·5-)2-4 mm wide, glabrous; male spike 15-25 × c. 5 mm, subclavate; female spikes up to 12 mm; female glumes acute, brown or reddish-brown; utricles whitish-green, sometimes glabrous, more or less abruptly contracted into a short but distinct, emarginate beak. 2n = 30. {\i Woods and dry grassland. C. Europe}. Au Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 123. C. markgrafii} Kük., {\i Ber. Deutsch. Bot. Ges.}{\b  44}: 420 (1926). Like {\b 121} but stems not more than 25 cm; basal sheaths brown; lower female spike distant, with a peduncle 10-15 mm; lowest bract leaf-like, up to as long as inflorescence; female glumes equalling utricles, lanceolate, dark brown; utricles 3·5-4 mm, prominently veined.{\i  Calcareous mountain rocks,} c. 1700{\i  m. C. Albania} ({\i Shën Ndue, E. of Tiranë}). Al.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Further information about this species is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 124. C. pilulifera} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 976 (1753). Densely caespitose. Stems 5-30(-40) cm, smooth or weakly (rarely strongly) scabrid above; basal sheaths yellowish- to reddish-brown, fibrous. Leaves 1·5-3 mm wide, shorter than stems, flat or slightly canaliculate, pale, usually greyish-green. Male spike solitary, 5-15 × c. 2 mm. Female spikes 2-4, 5-8 mm, globose to ovoid, sessile, overlapping or the lowest remote; lowest bract usually exceeding spike, leaf-like, usually patent, not sheathing. Female glumes acute or acuminate, dark, usually reddish-brown, with narrow scarious margin. Utricles 1·5-3·5 mm, obovoid, greyish-green, sparsely to densely puberulent, more or less veinless, abruptly contracted into an emarginate, usually conical beak not more than 0·5 mm. •{\i  Europe eastwards to the Leningrad region and the E. Carpathians; a few stations in C. Russia}. Au Az Be Br Co Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pilulifera}: Lowest bract usually shorter than inflorescence. Male spike up to 15 mm. Female spikes c. 5 mm wide. Utricles obovoid. Stigmas 3. 2n = 18.{\i  Dry places; calcifuge. Throughout the range of the species except Açores}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b azorica} (Gay) Franco & Rocha Afonso,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 366 (1978) ({\i C. azorica} Gay): Lowest bract usually exceeding inflorescence. Male spike not more than 8 mm. Female spikes c. 3 mm wide. Utricles biconvex. Stigmas 2.{\i  Damp, grassy places above} 600{\i  m. • Açores}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 125. C. tricolor} Velen.,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Bohm. Ges. Wiss.}{\b  7}: 58 (1890). Like {\b 124} ({\b a}) but often with creeping rhizomes; male spike c. 3 mm wide; lowest bract glumaceous; female glumes with wide scarious margin; utricles up to 4 mm, abruptly contracted into a more or less 2-fid, parallel-sided beak 0·75-1 mm. {\i Dry mountain grassland; calcifuge. • Mountains of W. Bulgaria}. Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 126. C. amgunensis} Friedrich Schmidt Petrop.,{\i  Mém. Acad. Sci. Pétersb.} ser. 7, {\b 12 }({\b 2}): 69 (1868). Like {\b 124} ({\b a}) but stems scabrid above; leaves not more than 2 mm wide, with more or less revolute margins; lowest bract often setaceous; female spikes 1-2, overlapping; female glumes pale reddish-brown, with wide scarious margin; utricles abruptly contracted into a more or less parallel-sided, sometimes 2-fid beak 0·5-1 mm.{\i  Coniferous woods and dry, stony slopes. E. Russia}. Rs (N, C). ({\i N. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CAREYANAE Kük. Densely caespitose, without creeping rhizomes. Stems trigonous, smooth or slightly scabrid above. Male spike solitary, shortly pedunculate. Female spikes oblong-cylindrical, lax; lowest bract leaf-like, exceeding spike and sometimes inflorescence, sheathing. Female glumes equalling or shorter than utricles, ovate, aristate. Utricles obovoid-trigonous stipitate, membranous, abruptly contracted into a short, conical often curved, scarcely emarginate beak. Stigmas 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 127. C. olbiensis} Jordan,{\i  Obs. Pl. Crit.}{\b  3}: 241 (1846). Stems 20-50(-100) cm; basal sheaths purplish-black, without lamina, entire. Leaves about equalling stems, 3-8 mm wide. Male spike 10-25 × 2-3 mm. Female spikes 2-3, 10-35 × 4-6 mm, with 3-12 flowers, suberect, the upper subsessile, the lower usually distant, with peduncles 1-8 cm; lowest bract with a sheath 10-40 mm. Female glumes whitish-scarious. Utricles 4-5 mm, brownish-white, prominently veined. 2n = 46.{\i  Dry woods. Mediterranean region, from N.E. Spain to Jugoslavia. }Co Ga Hs It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. LAMPROCHLAENAE ( Drejer) L.H. Bailey. More or less laxly caespitose and with long, slender, creeping rhizomes. Stems usually obtusely trigonous. Male spike solitary, cylindrical. Female spikes globose to oblong, more or less dense; lowest bract glumaceous or setaceous, usually shorter than spike. Female glumes oblong to ovate-orbicular, obtuse to acuminate, with scarious margin. Utricles obovoid-ellipsoid to -trigonous, subcoriaceous, glabrous, with a short, entire to 2-fid beak. Stigmas 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 128. C. alba} Scop., {\i Fl. Carn.} ed. 2,{\b  2}: 216 (1772). Stems 10-25(-40) cm, smooth or weakly scabrid above; basal sheaths yellowish-brown. Leaves usually shorter than stems, 0·5-1·5 (-2) mm wide, pale green. Male spike 10-15 × 1-1·5 mm, pedunculate. Female spikes 1-3, 5-10 × 4-7 mm, ovoid to oblong, on peduncles 1-5 cm, the upper usually overtopping the male spike, the lower overlapping at least the peduncle of the upper; lowest bract with a usually somewhat inflated sheath 7-15 mm. Female glumes 1/2-2/3 as long as utricles, obovate acute, whitish. Utricles 3·5-4 mm, brown or blackish-brown prominently veined, abruptly contracted into a short, conical, smooth, entire beak with a hyaline apex. 2n = 54. {\i Dry woods, scrub and stony slopes. S.C. Europe, extending to the E. Pyrenees and C. Jugoslavia; N.E. Russia.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 129. C. supina} Willd. ex Wahlenb.,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} nov. ser.,{\b  24}: 158 (1803). Stems 5-20(-30) cm scabrid above; basal sheaths purplish-brown, becoming fibrous Leaves 0·5-1·5 mm wide, shorter than stems, dark green. Male spike 8-13 × c. 2 mm, sessile or shortly pedunculate. Female spikes 1-3, 5-8 × c. 5 mm, ovoid or globose, with 3-10 flowers, sessile overlapping or separated; lowest bract not sheathing. Female glumes slightly shorter than utricles, ovate-oblong, acute or acuminate, reddish-brown. Utricles 2·5-3 mm, yellowish- to reddish-brown, shining, scarcely veined, abruptly contracted into a short, cylindrical, smooth, truncate to 2-fid beak. 2n = 38. {\i Dry places, usually on sandy soils. C. Europe, E. Romania, S. part of U.S.S.R.} Au Cz Ge Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The inflorescence is sometimes reduced to a solitary male spike with 1-2 female flowers at the base, and the plant is then difficult to distinguish from{\b  173}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 130. C. liparocarpos} Gaudin,{\i  Étrennes Fl.} 153 (1804) ({\i C. nitida} Host, non Hoppe). Like {\b 129} but stems often smooth above;
\par

\par
314}
\par