{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 10-90 cm, erect, nodding, slender, obscurely trigonous, smooth; basal sheaths dark purplish-brown, without lamina, scarcely fibrous. Leaves up to as long as stems, 1-3 mm wide, flat. Male spike solitary, 12-50 × 2-3 mm. Female spikes (1-)2-4, 10-30 × 2·5-4·5 mm, cylindrical, usually lax, nodding or erect, with long filiform peduncles, the lowest 1·5-10 cm; lowest bract with a sheath 10-50 mm. Female glumes reddish- or blackish-brown, sometimes with a scarious margin. Utricles 3-7 mm, ovoid-trigonous, greenish-, reddish- or blackish-brown, glabrous or hairy, with slender veins, gradually or abruptly contracted into a short, scabrid, 2-fid beak. {\i Grassy and rocky places. Alps; S. Carpathians; mountains of S. Europe from N. Spain to S.W. Bulgaria.} ?Al Au Bu Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Records of subsp. ({\b a}) from the E. Pyrenees require confirmation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Creeping rhizomes present
\par
2 Female spikes pendent; utricles 3-4 mm;
\par
   male spike 12-30 mm ..................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b ferruginea}
\par
2 Female spikes erect; utricles 4·5-7 mm; 
\par
  male spike 30-50 mm .......................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b caudata} 
\par
1 Creeping rhizomes absent
\par
3 Female spikes pendent, utricles hairy, abruptly 
\par
  contracted into the beak ................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b australpina}
\par
3 Female spikes erect; utricles glabrous or subglabrous,
\par
  gradually narrowed into the beak
\par
4 Utricles 3·5-4·5 mm; leaves not more than 1·5 mm wide;
\par
  stems 30-50 cm ..................................................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b tendae}
\par
4 Utricles 5-6 mm; leaves at least 1·5 mm wide;
\par
  stems 70-90 cm .......................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b macrostachys}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ferruginea}: Laxly caespitose, with creeping rhizomes. Stems 10-70 cm. Leaves c. 2 mm wide. Male spike 12-30 mm. Female spikes pendent. Female glumes without scarious margin. Utricles 3-4 mm, usually glabrous, gradually or abruptly contracted into beak. 2n = 39, 40. {\i Alps; S. Carpathians; mountains of W. Jugoslavia and S.W. Bulgaria}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b australpina} (Becherer) W. Dietr., {\i Feddes Repert. }{\b 75}: 18 (1967) ({\i C. refracta} auct., non Willd.): Densely caespitose, without creeping rhizomes. Stems 30-70 cm. Leaves c. 2 mm wide. Male spike 20-40 mm. Female spikes pendent. Female glumes with scarious margin. Utricles 3·5-4·5 mm, hairy, abruptly contracted into beak. 2n = 38, 40.{\i  S. Alps from} c. 9°{\i  to} c. 12° 15'{\i  E}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b caudata} (Kük.) Pereda & Laínz,{\i  Bol. Inst. Estud. Astur.} (Ser. C){\b  3}: 183 (1961): Densely caespitose, with creeping rhizomes. Stems 30-60 cm. Leaves c. 2 mm wide. Male spike 30-50 mm. Female spikes erect. Female glumes with scarious margin. Utricles 4·5-7 mm, glabrous, gradually narrowed into beak. 750-1300{\i  m. N. Spain} ({\i Cordillera Cantábrica}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b macrostachys} (Bertol.) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} 745 (1882): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but without creeping rhizomes; stems up to 90 cm; male spike 20-35 mm; utricles 5-6 mm, glabrous. 2n = 40. {\i Alpi Apuane}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b tendae} W. Dietr.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  75}: 20 (1967): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but without creeping rhizomes; leaves 1-1·5 mm wide; male spike 15-30 mm; utricles 3·5-4·5 mm, glabrous. 2n = 38.{\i  S.W. Alps}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 138. C. brachystachys} Schrank in Schrank & Moll,{\i  Naturh. Briefe}{\b  2}: 285 (1785) ({\i C. tenuis} Host.) Like {\b 137}({\b b}) but stems (5-)10-40 cm, very slender; basal sheaths sometimes pale purplish-brown; leaves 0·5-1 mm wide, the margins inrolled when dry; male spike 10-22 × c. 2 mm, sometimes female above; at least the lower female spikes nodding; utricles ellipsoid-ovoid or -lanceolate, pale greenish or pale brown, glabrous, gradually narrowed into a smooth, 2-fid beak. 2n = 40.{\i  Damp, shady places; calcicole. • Mountains of C. & S. Europe westwards to the C. Pyrenees, southwards to C. Appennini and C. Jugoslavia and eastwards to the S. Carpathians.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 139. C. fimbriata} Schkuhr,{\i  Beschr. Abbild. Riedgr., Nachtr.} 61 (1806). Not or scarcely caespitose, with short, stout rhizomes. Stems 10-45 cm, erect, slender, sharply trigonous, usually scabrid above; basal sheaths purplish-brown, without lamina, entire. Leaves shorter than stems, 2·5-4 mm wide, flat, prominently keeled. Male spike usually solitary, 15-25 × 2-3 mm. Female spikes 1-3, 10-25 × 3-4 mm, cylindrical, fairly dense, erect, the upper subsessile, the lower with peduncles 1-3·5 cm; lowest bract with a sheath 5-10(-15) mm. Female glumes dark reddish- or purplish-brown, with narrow scarious margin. Utricles 3-4 mm, ovoid-ellipsoid, greenish- to dark reddish-brown, usually sparsely hairy, with slender veins, gradually narrowed into a scabrid, 2-fid beak. 2n = 42.{\i  Rocky or grassy places, }1800-3050 {\i m. • Alps, eastwards to} c. 10°{\i  E.} Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 140. C. atrofusca} Schkuhr,{\i  Beschr. Abbild. Riedgr.} 106 (1801) ({\i C. ustulata }Wahlenb.). Laxly caespitose, with short rhizomes. Stems 10-40 cm, erect, nodding, rather stout, trigonous, smooth; basal sheaths yellowish-brown, without lamina, entire or slightly fibrous. Leaves not more than half as long as stems, 2-4 mm wide, flat. Male spike usually solitary, 7-12 × 3-4 mm, oblong-ovoid, often partly female. Female spikes 2-4(-6), 8-20 × 7-10 mm, ovoid, all (except sometimes the lowest) overlapping each other and the male in a secund cluster, pendent, with filiform peduncles; lower peduncles 1·5-4 cm; lowest bract shorter than spike, with a sheath 5-15(-25) mm. Female glumes purplish-black (rarely yellowish-brown) without or with an obscure scarious margin. Utricles 3·5-5 mm, broadly elliptical, flattened, purplish-black (rarely yellowish-brown), glabrous, veinless, abruptly contracted into a short, smooth or scabrid, 2-fid beak. 2n = 38, 40.{\i  Damp places. Alps, Carpathians, N. Ural, N. & W. Fennoscandia, Scotland.} Au Br Cz Fe Ga He It Ju No Rm Rs (N, ?W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 141. C. frigida} All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem.}{\b  2}: 270 (1785). Like {\b 140} but stems 20-50(-70) cm, often scabrid above; basal sheaths pale brown; leaves sometimes as long as stems; male spike 12-20 × 3-4 mm, cylindrical, sometimes with female flowers at base or at base and apex; female spikes 15-35 × 6-8(-10) mm, oblong-obovoid to subcylindrical, usually more or less distant, the lower suberect or nodding, with filiform peduncles (1-)2-12 cm; lowest bract usually exceeding spike, with a sheath 10-30 mm; female glumes dark reddish-brown; utricles 5-6(-7) mm, linear-ellipsoid, somewhat flattened, blackish-brown, usually scabrid on the angles, gradually narrowed into a long, usually scabrid, 2-fid beak. 2n = 56, 58.{\i  Streamsides and wet, mountain grassland. • Mountains of S.C. & S. Europe from the Vosges to N. Spain and C. Italy; Crna Gora.} Au Co Ga Ge He Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. LIMOSAE (O.F. Lang) Christ. Not caespitose, with slender rhizomes. Stems trigonous. Terminal spike male, or female above and male below; lateral spikes female, sometimes with a few male flowers at the base, ovoid to oblong, pendent; lowest bract leaf-like, shorter or longer than inflorescence, sometimes sheathing. Female glumes ovate to ovate-lanceolate. Utricles ellipsoid to obovoid, more or less compressed-trigonous, membranous, glabrous, with a very short or obscure, truncate beak. Stigmas 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The taxonomy of the species in this section is uncertain especially in N. Europe where{\b  142} and {\b 143} can be difficult to separate.
\par

\par
316}
\par