{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 2-4(-5), 5-10(-20) mm, oblong or ovoid-oblong, dense, the upper sessile, the lowest with a peduncle up to 1(-2) cm, all at more or less the same level, the terminal female above and male below (or rarely entirely male), the rest entirely female; lowest bract usually leaf-like and equalling or exceeding inflorescence. Female glumes equalling or slightly exceeding utricles, obtuse or mucronate, dark reddish- to blackish-brown. Utricles 1·5-2·5 mm, obovate, biconvex, pale greyish-green, papillose, rounded at apex. Stigmas 2. 2n = 16, c. 48, 50, 52. {\i Streamsides and damp sand or gravel. N. Europe, southwards to} c. 62°{\i  N.; C. & E. Pyrenees, Alps, E. Carpathians; very local}. Au Ga He Hs Is It Ju No Rm Rs (N, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. PHACOCYSTIS Dumort. (Sect. {\i Acutae} (Fries) Christ). Caespitose or not. Stems trigonous. Male spikes 1-several, more or less cylindrical, or the terminal spike female above and male below; lateral spikes female, cylindrical to oblong-ovoid, usually dense; lowest bract leaf-like, not sheathing. Female glumes 1- or 3-veined. Utricles narrowly elliptical to obovate, plano-convex or lenticular, membranous, glabrous, more or less abruptly contracted into a very short, entire or emarginate beak. Stigmas 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Partially fertile hybrids have been synthesized between many of the species in this section. Sterile or partially fertile hybrids also occur in the wild, and some of the species recognized here are probably of hybrid origin. Much information on these problems can be found in J. S. Faulkner,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 271-300 (1972); {\b 67}: 233-253 (1973).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 154. C. rufina} Drejer, {\i Revis. Crit. Caric. Bor. }28 (1841). Laxly caespitose and with short rhizomes. Stems 2-8 cm, procumbent or ascending, curved and concealed by the leaves, trigonous, smooth; basal sheaths greyish- or yellowish-brown. Leaves exceeding stems, 1-1·5 mm wide, pale green. Spikes 3-4(-5), 5-10 mm, oblong-ovoid, dense, sessile or the lowest with a peduncle up to 0·5 cm, all at more or less the same level, the terminal female above and male below (or rarely entirely male), the lateral female; lowest bract usually equalling or exceeding inflorescence. Female glumes slightly shorter than utricles, ovate-orbicular, rounded at apex, blackish-purple. Utricles 2-2·5 mm, obovate, pale greenish-brown, purplish-black at apex, scarcely veined, with margin scabrid above. 2n = 60.{\i  Snow-patches. Iceland, W. Fennoscandia.} Is No Su. ({\i Greenland, C. Canada.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 155-161}). {\b C. paleacea }group. Usually not caespitose, with creeping rhizomes. Leaves yellowish- or greyish-green. Terminal spike entirely male. Female glumes usually 3-veined, often with an awn. Utricles faintly veined or veinless.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   This group consists largely of plants of seashore and estuarine habitats in N. Europe; their taxonomic status is confused.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 At least the lower spike pendent, with a long, filiform peduncle
\par
2 Female glumes yellowish- to pale reddish-brown, with a 
\par
  serrulate awn .............................................................................. {\b 155. paleacea}
\par
2 Female glumes dark reddish-brown to purplish-black,
\par
  without or with an entire awn .................................................... {\b 156. lyngbyei}
\par
1 Spikes erect or drooping, but not pendent
\par
3 At least the lower female glumes at least twice as long
\par
  as utricles, with a long awn
\par
4 Female glumes strongly papillose on the back, not more
\par
  than 3 times as long as utricles .................................................. {\b 157. vacillans}
\par
4 Female glumes smooth on the back, up to 5 times as long
\par
  as utricles ......................................................................................... {\b 158. recta}
\par
3 Female glumes less than twice as long as utricles, 
\par
  awnless or with a short awn
\par
5 Stems 3-5(-20) cm, usually ascending; female spikes 5-10 mm;
\par
  lowest bract dilated and ± enfolding stem at base .............. {\b 161. subspathacea}
\par
5 Stems (5-)10-50(-70) cm, erect; female spikes 15-50 mm
\par
  lowest bract not dilated or sheathing
\par
6 Stems 30-50(-70) cm; female glumes dark brown or dark
\par
  reddish-brown ........................................................................... {\b 159. halophila}
\par
6 Stems (5-)10-20(-40) cm; female glumes pale reddish brown ...... {\b 160. salina}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 155. C. paleacea} Schreber ex Wahlenb.,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.Akad. Handl.} nov. ser., {\b 24}: 164 (1803) ({\i C. paralia }V. Krecz.). Rhizomes stout, creeping. Stems 25-50 cm, sharply trigonous or almost winged, with concave faces, smooth; basal sheaths without lamina, greyish- or blackish-brown, mostly entire. Leaves equalling or longer than stems, 4-8 mm wide, yellowish-green. Male spikes 1-3. Female spikes 5-7, 20-50 mm, remote, long-pedunculate and pendent, the uppermost sometimes subsessile and male above; lowest bract exceeding inflorescence. Female glumes 3-5 times as long as utricles, oblong-oblanceolate, yellowish- to pale reddish-brown, 3-veined, with narrow scarious margin, abruptly contracted into a very long greenish-brown, serrulate awn. Utricles 3-3·5 mm, obovate, greyish- or pale brownish-green, faintly veined; beak c. 0·2 × 0·2 mm. 2n = 72, 73.{\i  Salt-marshes and estuarine mud and sand. Coasts of Fennoscandia and N.W. Russia.} Fe No Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 156. C. lyngbyei} Hornem.,{\i  Fl. Dan.}{\b  32}: 6 (1827). Rhizomes stout, creeping. Stems 20-90(-125) cm, sharply trigonous, smooth or slightly scabrid at apex; basal sheaths purplish-brown, mostly entire. Leaves shorter than stems, 3-6 mm wide, yellowish-green. Male spikes 2-3. Female spikes 2-4, 20-80 mm, dense or rather lax, long-pedunculate and pendent; lowest bract exceeding the inflorescence. Female glumes 2-3 times as long as utricles lanceolate, acuminate, dark reddish-brown to purplish-brown 3-veined, often with a short awn. Utricles c. 3 mm, ovate-orbicular, greyish-green, faintly veined; beak c. 0·2 × 0·2 mm, 2n = 72.{\i  Wet places. Iceland, Faeröer.} Fa Is. ({\i Greenland, North America, N.E. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 157. C. vacillans} Drejer in Hartman,{\i  Svensk Norsk Excurs.-Fl.} 131 (1846) ({\i C. kattegatensis} Fries ex Lindman). Laxly caespitose and with stout, creeping rhizomes. Stems 30-50(-70) cm, sharply trigonous, smooth or scabrid at apex; basal sheaths without lamina, blackish- or reddish-brown, entire. Leaves equalling or exceeding stems, 3-4(-5) mm wide, green or yellowish-green. Male spikes 1-3(-4), female spikes 2-4, 20-50 mm overlapping, erect or suberect, the lower with peduncles 1-3 cm, lowest bracts exceeding inflorescence. Female glumes 1½-3 times as long as utricles, ovate-lanceolate, acute, dark brown or dark reddish-brown, 3-veined, strongly papillose on the back, at least the lower more or less abruptly contracted into a pale brown, more or less scabrid awn. Utricles 2·5-3 mm, obovate, pale greenish-brown, faintly veined; beak c. 0·2 × 0·2 mm. {\i Saltmarshes and estuarine mud. • W. coasts of Fennoscandia from} 57° {\i to} 67°{\i  N}. No Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Probably of hybrid origin from {\b 155} and {\b 167}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 158. C. recta} Boott in Hooker,{\i  Fl. Bor.-Amer.}{\b  2}: 220 (1839). Like {\b 157} but larger in all its parts and often tussock-forming; stems up to 100 cm; leaves up to 6 mm wide; female spikes up to 80 mm; female glumes up to 5 times as long as utricles, smooth on the back, usually with a longer awn. 2n = ?73, c. 74, ?75.{\i  Estuarine mud. N.E. Scotland.} Br ?Fa ?No. ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Probably of hybrid origin from {\b 155} and {\b 162}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 159. C. halophila} F. Nyl., {\i Spicil. Pl. Fenn.}{\b  2}: 21 (1844) ({\i C. recta} auct., non Boott). Like {\b 157} but leaves often shorter than
\par

\par
319}
\par