{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 from 2/3 as long as to equalling stems, 2-4 mm wide, dark green, flat. Peduncle of male spike almost absent or up to 10 mm. Female spikes 7-12 × 7-10 mm, the upper crowded or at least overlapping, the lowest sometimes remote; lowest bract exceeding inflorescence, patent or deflexed. Utricles 3·5-5 mm, broadly ellipsoid, greenish-yellow, prominently veined, the central ones patent, the lower deflexed, curved, gradually narrowed into a curved beak 1-2 mm usually comprising at least 1/3 of the length of the utricle.{\i  Fens. • Fennoscandia and Baltic region}. Fe ?He No Rs (N, B) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 98. C. lepidocarpa} Tausch, {\i Flora }({\i Regensb}.) {\b 17}: 179 (1834) ({\i C. flava} subsp.{\i  lepidocarpa} (Tausch) Nyman). Stems (10-)20-35(-75) cm, erect. Leaves c. ½ as long as stems, 2-3(-4) mm wide, green or yellowish-green, flat. Peduncle of male spike 5-30 mm. Female spikes 6-13 × 6-8 mm, the upper often overlapping, the lower usually somewhat remote; lowest bract equalling or exceeding inflorescence, patent or deflexed. Utricles (3-)3·5-5 mm, obovoid-ellipsoid, greenish- or brownish-yellow, prominently veined, the central ones patent, the lower deflexed, all curved and rather abruptly contracted into a recurved or deflexed beak 1·5-2 mm usually comprising at least 1/3 of the length of the utricle. 2n = 58, 68.{\i  Wet places; usually calcicole. N., N.W. & C. Europe, extending very locally southwards to N. Spain and C. Greece. }?Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, ?.W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 99. C. nevadensis} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 118 (1852) (incl.{\i  C. flava }var.{\i  alpina} Kneucker). Stems 3-15 cm, erect. Leaves c. ½ as long as stems, 1·5-3 mm wide, green or yellowish-green, flat. Peduncle of male spike 3-15 mm. Female spikes 5-10 × 5-7 mm, the upper often overlapping, the lower usually somewhat remote; lower bract equalling or slightly exceeding inflorescence, patent or deflexed. Utricles 1·5-3(-3·5) mm, obovoid-ellipsoid, greenish-yellow to reddish-brown, prominently veined, the central ones patent, the lower deflexed, all slightly curved and abruptly contracted into a curved beak 1-1·5 mm comprising more than 1/3 of the length of the utricle. 2n = 68.{\i  Wet places. • Alps; Sierra Nevada; mountains of Corse.} Au Co Ga Ge He Hs It ?Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 100. C. bergrothii} Palmgren, {\i Comment. Biol.}{\b  20}({\b 3}): 4 (1958). Stems 12-30 cm, erect. Leaves about equalling stems, 1-3·5 mm wide, green or yellowish-green, flat. Male spike sessile or with peduncle up to 10 mm. Female spikes 5-12 × 6-8 mm, the upper overlapping, the lowest sometimes remote; lowest bract usually exceeding inflorescence and suberect. Utricles 3-3·5(-4) mm, broadly ellipsoid and distinctly inflated, greenish- or brownish-yellow, prominently veined, the central ones patent, the lower sometimes deflexed, straight, abruptly narrowed into a straight beak c. 1 mm comprising less than 1/3 of the length of the utricle.{\i  Fens and wet woods. •  Fennoscandia and N.W. Russia.} ?Da Fe No Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 101. C. demissa} Hornem., {\i Dansk Oekon. Plantel.} ed. 3, {\b 1}: 939 (1821) ({\i C. tumidicarpa }N. J. Andersson). Stems 5-20(-40) cm, ascending. Leaves at least as long as stems, 2-5 mm wide, green or yellowish-green, flat. Peduncle of male spike 3-25 mm. Female spikes 7-13 × 6-8 mm, the upper usually overlapping, the lowest often very remote; lowest bract usually greatly exceeding inflorescence, erect to deflexed. Utricles (3-)3·5 mm, broadly ellipsoid, usually green, prominently veined, all patent or ascending, straight, gradually narrowed into a straight beak c. 1 mm usually comprising less than 1/3 of the length of the utricle. 2n = 70. {\i Damp places; usually calcifuge. N., W. & C. Europe, southwards to N.W. Portugal and eastwards to S. Finland.} Au Az Be Br Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Is Lu No Po Rs (B) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Plants from Açores (and Madeira), described as{\b  C. tumidicarpa }subsp.{\b  cedercreutzii}  Fagerström,{\i  Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  79} ({\b 3}): 3 (1967), differ from {\b 101} chiefly in having narrower leaves 1-2(-4) mm wide, usually sessile male spikes, and narrower utricles 3-3·5 mm, more abruptly narrowed into an often slightly curved beak. Very similar plants occur in Ireland, and the relationship between these plants and {\b 101} and {\b 102} is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 102. C. serotina} Mérat, {\i Nouv. Fl. Env. Paris} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 54 (1821). Stems 2-20(-40) cm, erect or ascending. Leaves about equalling or exceeding stems, 1-3(-4) mm wide, flat or canaliculate, yellowish- to greyish-green. Male spike usually sessile. Female spikes 3-8 × 3-6 mm, crowded, the lowest sometimes remote; lowest bract greatly exceeding inflorescence, patent. Utricles 1·75-3·5 mm, obovoid, greenish-yellow to greyish-green, with slender veins, the central ones patent or ascending, the lower sometimes deflexed, straight, with a straight beak 0·25-1 mm comprising less than 1/3 of the length of the utricle.{\i  Europe eastwards to} c. 40° {\i E. in C. Russia, but rare in the Mediterranean region; some isolated stations in S. Ural.} All except Al Bl Cr Rs (K, E) Sa Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b serotina} ({\i C. oederi }auct., non Retz., {\i C. flava} subsp. {\i oederi} Syme pro parte; incl.{\i  C. kotilaini} Palmgren): Stems (3-)8-20(-40) cm. Leaves (1-)1·5-3(-4) mm wide, flat, yellowish-green. Female spikes 5-8 mm. Utricles (2-)2·5-3(-3 5) mm, greenish-yellow, abruptly contracted into a beak 0·5-1 mm; nut not filling utricle. 2n = 35, 68, 70.{\i  Wet places; somewhat calcicole. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pulchella} (Lönnr.) Van Ooststr. in Heukels & Wachter,{\i  Bekn. Schoolfl. Nederl.} ed. 7, 319 (1949) ({\i C. pulchella} (Lönnr.) Lindman, non S. Berggren): Stems (2-)5-8(-18) cm. Leaves 1-2·5 mm wide, flat or canaliculate, greyish-green. Female spikes 3-5 mm. Utricles 1·75-2 mm, greyish-green, gradually narrowed into a beak less than 0·5 mm; nut filling utricle. 2n = 70. {\i Maritime sands, salt-marshes and lake-shores. • Coasts of N.W. Europe and the Baltic region, and inland in scattered localities in C. Europe and N.W. Russia.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. POROCYSTIS Dumort. Caespitose, without creeping rhizomes. Stems sharply trigonous, scabrid above. Male spike solitary, cylindrical. Female spikes oblong, dense, erect, usually all at about the same level or only the lowest distant; lowest bract leaf-like, usually exceeding inflorescence, not or scarcely sheathing. Female glumes shorter than utricles, ovate to lanceolate, acuminate. Utricles oblong-ellipsoid, membranous, glabrous, faintly veined, not beaked. Stigmas 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 103. C. pallescens} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 977 (1753). Stems (5-)15-60(-90) cm; basal sheaths pale to dark brown, often reddish. Leaves 2-5 mm wide, shorter than the stems, usually hairy beneath. Male spike 7-12 × 1-2 mm, often exceeded by the female. Female spikes 2-3(-4), (5-)10-20(-30) × 4-6 mm, the lowest with a peduncle 5-20(-40) mm. Female glumes pale or whitish-brown, often largely scarious, with brownish midrib. Utricles 2·5-4 mm, whitish to brownish-green, shining. 2n = 62, 64, 66.{\i  Damp grassland and open woods. Much of Europe, but absent from parts of the south and north-east.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Lu Sa Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. HALLERANAE (Ascherson & Graebner) Rouy. Caespitose or not. Stems obtusely trigonous. Male spike solitary, cylindrical, sessile or shortly pedunculate. Female spikes ovoid to subglobose, dense, overlapping, the lower 1-3 usually on long peduncles arising from base of stem. Female glumes usually
\par

\par
310}
\par