{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 fusiform, with 2-4 flowers, distant and not overlapping, with peduncles 2-8 mm; lowest bract glumaceous, with a sheath 3-8 mm. Female glumes about equalling utricles, obovate, obtuse or mucronate, reddish-brown. Utricles 2·5-3 mm, greenish- or yellowish-brown, often reddish at apex, puberulent, obscurely veined, abruptly contracted into a minute, entire beak. 2n = 36, 38.{\i  Dry places. Europe,from S. England, N. Poland and C. Russia southwards, but rare in the Mediterranean region}. Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 110. C. glacialis} Mackenzie,{\i  Bull. Torrey Bot. Club}{\b  37}: 244 (1910). Densely caespitose, with short, creeping rhizomes. Stems 3-15(-20) cm, suberect, smooth; basal sheaths reddish-brown. Leaves much shorter than stems, 0·5-1(-1·5) mm wide, plicate or canaliculate, pale green, often curled towards apex. Male spike 4-8 × 0·5-1 mm wide, subsessile. Female spikes 1-3, 4-8 × 2-3 mm, oblong, lax, subsessile or with peduncles up to 5 mm, overlapping, the upper not overtopping the male spike; lowest bract setaceous, with a sheath c. 1 mm. Female glumes ½-¾ as long as utricles, subglobose, obtuse to subacute, dark reddish- or purplish-brown. Utricles 2-2·5 mm, not stipitate, brownish-green, veinless, abruptly contracted at apex into a very short, cylindrical beak with a scarious apex. 2n = 34. {\i Dry, stony, exposed places; calcicole. N. Europe, southwards to} 59° 30' {\i N. in Norway and C. Ural.} Fe Is No Rs (N, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. MITRATAE Kük. Caespitose, often with creeping rhizomes. Stems trigonous, usually scabrid above. Male spike usually solitary, sessile or shortly pedunculate. Female spikes ovoid to oblong, dense; lowest bract glumaceous to leaf-like, sheathing. Female glumes ovate-lanceolate to obovate, obtuse to acuminate, usually with a scarious margin. Utricles obovoid, membranous, more or less puberulent, with a usually short, emarginate beak. Stigmas 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 111. C. caryophyllea} Latourr.,{\i  Chlor. Lugd.} 27 (1785) ({\i C. praecox} Jacq., non Schreber, {\i C. verna} Chaix, non Lam.; incl. {\i C. ruthenica }V. Krecz.). Laxly caespitose, with short, creeping rhizomes. Stems 3-30(-50) cm, obtusely trigonous, usually scabrid above; basal sheaths pale to dark brown, becoming fibrous. Leaves 1·5-3 mm wide, usually shorter than stems, green or greyish-green. Male spike solitary, 10-15(-30) × 2-3 mm. Female spikes 1-2(-3), 5-15 × 3-5 mm, with peduncles 3-5 (-10) mm, overlapping; lowest bract glumaceous or setiform, usually shorter than spike (rarely leaf-like and longer), with a sheath 3-5 mm. Female glumes equalling utricles, ovate, obtuse to acute or acuminate, reddish- to yellowish-brown. Utricles 2-3 mm, brown or greenish-brown, sparsely puberulent, more of less veinless, narrowed at apex into a short, conical, often obscure, emarginate beak. 2n = 62, 64, 66, 68.{\i  Dry, grassy or stony places. Europe, northwards to} 63°{\i  N. in Sweden}. All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 112. C. umbrosa} Host, {\i Gram. Austr.}{\b  1}: 52 (1801) ({\i C. polyrrhiza} Wallr.). Densely caespitose, without creeping rhizomes. Stems 5-45 cm, obtusely trigonous, usually scabrid above; basal sheaths pale to blackish-brown, fibrous. Leaves 1·5-3·5 mm wide, up to about as long as stems, pale green. Male spike 1(-2), 5-15 × 3-5 mm. Female spikes 1-3, 5-12(-20) × 4-5 mm, at least the lowest with peduncle 5-10 mm, usually overlapping; lowest bract setiform or leaf-like, usually about as long as the spike, with a sheath 5-10 mm. Female glumes shorter than utricles, obovate to ovate-lanceolate, obtuse or acute, usually mucronate, reddish- or orange-brown. Utricles 2·5-4 mm, whitish- or yellowish-green, more or less puberulent, rarely glabrescent, usually obscurely veined, abruptly contracted into a usually short conical, slightly emarginate beak.{\i  From Belgium and C. Poland southwards to N. Spain, C. Italy and S.W. Bulgaria; Ural.} Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, C, W) Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves less than half as long as the stems, more or 
\par
  less appressed to the ground in a rosette ........................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b huetiana}
\par
1 Leaves at least half as long as the stems, erect or suberect
\par
2 Stems ± scabrid above; female spikes overlapping;
\par
  utricles 2·5-3 mm .............................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b umbrosa}
\par
2 Stems smooth; female spikes not overlapping; utricles 
\par
  3-4 mm ........................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b sabynensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b umbrosa}: Stems 15-45 cm, more or less scabrid above. Leaves about as long as stems, erect. Male spike 10-15 × c. 5 mm, subsessile. Female spikes up to 12(-20) mm, overlapping. Female glumes obovate, mucronate. Utricles 2·5-3 mm, obscurely veined, with short, conical, slightly emarginate beak. 2n = 62, 66.{\i  Woods and other shady places. • Throughout the range of the species except Ural}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b huetiana} (Boiss.) Soó, {\i Acta Bot, Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  16}: 311 (1970) ({\i C. mixta} Miégeville): Stems 5-15(-20) cm, smooth. Leaves less than half as long as stems, more or less appressed to the ground in a rosette. Male spike 5-10 × c. 3 mm, subsessile. Female spikes 5-8 mm, overlapping. Female glumes ovate-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, not or scarcely mucronate. Utricles 2·5-3 mm, obscurely veined, with long, slightly emarginate beak.{\i  Damp, stony or grassy slopes. Pyrenees and mountains of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b sabynensis} (Less. ex Kunth) Kük. in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  38} ({\b IV. 20}) ({\i Cyper.-Caric.}): 468 (1909) ({\i C. sabynensis} Less. ex Kunth): Stems 15-30 cm, very slender, smooth. Leaves at least half as long as stems, suberect. Male spike 5-10 × c. 3 mm, pedunculate. Female spikes 5-8 mm, not overlapping. Female glumes ovate-lanceolate, acute, not or scarcely mucronate. Utricles 3-4 mm, distinctly veined, with long, 2-fid beak.{\i  Mountain woods, bogs and tundra. Ural.} ({\i Caucasian region and Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 113. C. depressa} Link in Schrader,{\i  Jour. für die Bot.}{\b  1799} ({\b 2}): 309 (1800). Densely caespitose, with very short rhizomes. Stems 5-20(-50) cm, obtusely trigonous, often scabrid at apex; basal sheaths brown or reddish-brown, fibrous. Leaves 1-4 mm wide, shorter or longer than stems, pale green. Male spike solitary, 5-10 × 1·5-2 mm. Female spikes (1-)2-3(-4), 10-20 × 4-7 mm, the upper shortly pedunculate and often overlapping, the lower with long peduncles arising from base of stem; lowest bract leaflike, usually exceeding inflorescence. Female glumes exceeding utricles, ovate-lanceolate to obovate, acuminate, mucronate or aristate, pale to reddish-brown. Utricles 2-4 mm, greenish-brown, puberulent, more or less veined, gradually narrowed into an obscure, conical, weakly emarginate beak. {\i Woods and dry grassland. S.W. Europe; Carpathians; very local in S.E. Europe.} ?Bl Co Cz Ga Hs It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W, K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b depressa} (incl.{\i  C. basilaris} Jordan): Stems scabrid above. Leaves rather rigid. Upper female spikes usually not overlapping; usually 2 or more female spikes arising from base of stem. Female glumes greatly exceeding utricles, acuminate. Utricles obscurely veined.{\i  S.W. Europe.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b transsilvanica} (Schur) Egorova,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 9}: 80 (1972) ({\i C. transsilvanica} Schur; incl.{\i  C. euxina} (Woronow & Marc.) V. Krecz.): Stems smooth. Leaves flaccid. Upper female spikes overlapping; usually only a solitary female spike arising from base of stem. Female glumes only slightly exceeding utricles, mucronate or shortly aristate. Utricles with distinct but slender veins.{\i  Carpathians and S.E. Europe.}
\par

\par
312}
\par