{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 stems; female glumes usually not more than twice as long as utricles, without or with a short awn, smooth or only very weakly papillose on the back; beak of utricle c. 0·2 × 0·4 mm.{\i  Saltmarshes and estuarine mud. • Coasts of N. Fennoscandia southwards to} 63°{\i  N. in Finland.} Fe No Su Rs (N).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   More or less indistinguishable from transient hybrids between{\b  155} and {\b 162} except by its fertility; it is probably of hybrid origin from these species and occurs over a wide area and is stable in its characters. The relationship between {\b 159} and {\b 158} is uncertain, but there is a fairly clear distinction in the size of the plants and in the development of the awn on the female glumes, as well as in the beak of the utricle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 160. C. salina} Wahlenb.,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} nov. ser., {\b 24}: 165 (1824) ({\i C. discolor} F. Nyl.). Rhizomes stout, creeping. Stems (5-)10-20(-40) cm, obtusely trigonous, smooth or scabrid at apex; basal sheaths without lamina, reddish-brown. Leaves exceeding stems, 2-4 mm wide, greyish-green. Male spikes 1-2; female spikes 2-4, 15-30 mm, overlapping, erect, with peduncles up to 1(-2) cm; lowest bract equalling or exceeding inflorescence. Female glumes about equalling utricles, ovate-lanceolate, acute or shortly aristate, pale reddish-brown, 3-veined. Utricles 2·5-3·5 mm, obovate, pale-yellowish- or greenish-brown, faintly veined; beak c. 0·2 × 0·4 mm.{\i  Salt-marshes and estuarine mud. Coasts of N. Europe, southwards to} 62°{\i  N. in Norway and eastwards to} 41°{\i  E. in N.W. Russia}. ?Fa Is No Rs (N).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Morphologically intermediate between {\b 155} and {\b 161} and possibly of hybrid origin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 161. C. subspathacea} Wormsk. in Hornem.,{\i  Fl. Dan.}{\b  26}: 6 (1816). Rhizomes very long and slender. Stems 3-5(-20) cm, obtusely trigonous, smooth; basal sheaths brownish, soon decaying. Leaves usually equalling or exceeding stems, greyish-green. Male spike usually solitary. Female spikes (1-)2-3, 5-15 mm, overlapping, erect, subsessile or with peduncles up to 1·5 cm; lowest bract equalling the inflorescence, dilated and more or less enfolding the stem at the base. Female glumes slightly shorter than utricles, ovate, subacute, dark blackish- or reddish-brown, usually 3-veined. Utricles (2·5-)3-3·5(-4) mm, oblong-ovate, greyish-green, not or faintly veined, rather gradually narrowed into beak c. 0·3 × 0·4 mm. 2n = 42.{\i  Lowest zones of salt-marshes and on mud-flats and gravelly sea-shores. Arctic and Atlantic coasts of Europe, southwards to} 63°{\i  N.} Is No Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 162. C. aquatilis} Wahlenb.,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl}. nov. ser.,{\b  24}: 165 (1803). Laxly caespitose and with stout, creeping rhizomes. Stems 20-100(-130) cm, obtusely trigonous, smooth, brittle; basal sheaths purplish- or reddish-brown, entire, mostly with lamina. Leaves 3-5(-7) mm wide, exceeding stems, somewhat glaucous and papillose above, green and smooth beneath; margins rolling inwards on drying. Male spikes (1-)2-3. Female spikes 3-5, (15-)40-70(-100) mm, dense, erect, overlapping, shortly pedunculate; lowest bract exceeding the inflorescence. Female glumes equalling or shorter than utricles, oblong-ovate, subobtuse, purplish- to reddish-brown, usually with lateral veins, with a narrow scarious margin. Utricles 2-3 mm, obovate or broadly elliptical, green, veinless. 2n = 76, 77, 84.{\i  Riversides and other wet places. N. Europe, extending southwards to S. Ireland and White Russia.} Br Fe Ge Hb Ho No Rs (N, B, C, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Small plants from the Arctic with pale green, more or less smooth leaves, a solitary male spike, female spikes 1-3 cm, rather longer, acute female glumes and brownish utricles are intermediate between {\b 162} and {\b 163} and may either be hybrids, or be referable to subsp.{\b  stans} (Drejer) Hultén,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} ser. 4, {\b 8}({\b 5}): 74 (1962) ({\i C. stans} Drejer), which occurs in North America, Greenland and N. Siberia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 163. C. bigelowii} Torrey ex Schweinitz,{\i  Ann. Lyc. New York }{\b 1}: 67 (1824). Usually not caespitose, with stout, creeping rhizomes. Stems 5-40 cm, sharply trigonous, smooth or slightly scabrid at apex; basal sheaths blackish- or reddish-brown, shining, entire, mostly without lamina, persistent. Leaves 1·5-7 mm wide, shorter than stems, often arcuate, somewhat glaucous, somewhat papillose above; margins rolling outwards on drying. Male spikes 1(-2). Female spikes 2-3, 10-35 mm, overlapping and often crowded, shortly pedunculate (or the lowest with a long peduncle from the base of the stem); lowest bract shorter than the inflorescence. Female glumes equalling or exceeding utricles, ovate, obtuse or acute, sometimes mucronate, purplish-black, usually with narrow scarious margin. Utricles 2-3·5 mm, broadly elliptical, green, usually blackish- or purplish-brown above, veinless. 2n = 70. {\i Heaths and dry, stony places. N. Europe, extending southwards to S. Ural; mountains of C. Europe from the Harz to the S. Carpathians.} Au Br ?Bu Cz Fa Fe Ge Hb Is ?Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, C, W) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    An extremely variable species whose infraspecific taxonomy is confused by its apparent similarity to small variants of {\b 162} in the Arctic, by the occurrence of numerous hybrids and by the fact that published work on it has never taken full account of the variation over the whole range. The precise distribution of subsp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}), and the validity of the distinction between them in N. Europe, is very uncertain; some authors indeed consider that subsp. ({\b a}) does not occur in Europe at all. The following treatment represents a summary of the available information. For further details see V. N. Gorodkov,{\i  Zur. Russk. Bot. Obsc}.{\b  15}: 179-186 (1930); T. V. Egorova in A. I. Tolmachev,{\i  Flora arctica URSS}{\b  3}: 107-111. Moskva & Leningrad. 1966; J. Holub,{\i  Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}){\b  3}: 183-192 (1968); and W. Schultze-Motel, {\i Willdenowia}{\b  4}: 322-325 (1968).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Male spike with a peduncle 0·5-2·5 cm, distinctly exserted -
\par
  above the female spikes; female spikes at least 5 times as
\par
  long as wide; utricles not beaked ..................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b bigelowii}
\par
1 Male spike subsessile or with a peduncle not more than
\par
  0·5 cm, not exserted; female spikes not more than 4 
\par
  times as long as wide; utricles with a minute beak
\par
2 Leaves 1·5-4 mm wide; female glumes purplish-black
\par
  throughout .................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b arctisibirica}
\par
2 Leaves 4-7 mm wide; female glumes with pale midrib
\par
3 Laxly caespitose, with short creeping rhizomes, stems up to 
\par
  40 cm; male spike 15-20 mm, pale or reddish-brown ....... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b ensifolia}
\par
3 Not caespitose, with long creeping rhizomes; stems not
\par
  more than 30 cm; male spike 10-15 mm, purplish-black ....... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b rigida}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b bigelowii} ({\i C. hyperborea} Drejer): Not caespitose with long creeping rhizomes. Stems 20-40 cm. Leaves 2-4(-5) mm wide. Male spike 10-15(-20) × 2·5-3 mm, purplish-black, with a peduncle 0·5-2·5 mm. Female spikes 15-35 mm, at least 5 times as long as wide. Female glumes obtuse, mostly equalling utricles in length and width, purplish-black, with paler midrib. Utricles 2·5-3·5 mm, not beaked. 2n = 68-71.{\i  N. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b rigida} Schultze-Motel, {\i Willdenowia }{\b 4}: 326 (1968) ({\i C. rigida }Good., non Schrank): Not caespitose, with long creeping rhizomes. Stems 5-30 cm. Leaves 4-7 mm wide. Male spike (5-)10-15 × 3-5 mm, purplish-black, subsessile or with a peduncle up to 0·5 cm. Female spikes 10-20 mm, not more than 4 times as long as wide. Female glumes obtuse, mostly equalling utricles in length and width, purplish-black, with paler
\par

\par
320}
\par