{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. epipactoides} Fischer & C. A. Meyer,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 4, {\b 1}: 30 (1854). Like {\b 3} but stem 30-100 cm; spike 10- to 20-flowered; outer perianth-segments 25-36 mm, the inner 18-25 mm; hypochile with truncate lateral lobes; epichile triangular-lanceolate, with 7-9 ridges; spur 3-4 mm, subacute.{\i  N. Aegean region.} Gr Tu. ({\i W. Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Perhaps better treated as a subspecies of {\b 3}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. rubra} (L.) L. C. M. Richard,{\i  Orchid. Eur. Annot.} 38 (1817). Stem 20-60 cm, erect, striate and glandular-pubescent above, with a few brownish, sometimes green-tipped, basal sheaths. Leaves 5-8, 5-12 cm, acute, the lower oblong-lanceolate to lanceolate, the upper linear-lanceolate. Spike up to 12 cm, (2-)3- to 10(-12)-flowered. Flowers bright pink or purplish, open, exceeding most or all of the bracts. Outer perianth-segments 17-22(-25) mm, lanceolate, subacute, patent, glandular-pubescent outside; inner lateral 15-18(-20) mm, ovate-lanceolate, subacute, connivent. Labellum about as long as outer perianth-segments, white, the epichile acute, with purple margin and 7-9 narrow yellowish ridges; spur absent. Ovary glandular-pubescent. 2n = 48.{\i  Woods; usually calcicole. Most of Europe, northwards to S. England and S. Finland.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cr Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He †Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.     Limodorum}        Boehmer
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.M. Moore. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Violet saprophytes with short rhizome. Stem clothed with scalelike sheaths. Green leaves absent. Flowers in an erect, spike-like raceme. Perianth-segments free, patent. Labellum entire. Spur long, slender, curved upwards. Column long. Viscidium solitary; bursicles absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. abortivum} (L.) Swartz,{\i  Nova Acta Reg. Soc. Sci. Upsal.}{\b  6}: 80 (1799) ({\i Ionorchis abortiva} (L.) G. Beck). Rhizome densely covered with thickish roots. Stems 40-80 cm, erect, robust, rigid; scales numerous. Racemes (10-)15-33 cm, lax, 4- to 25-flowered. Perianth-segments c. 2 cm, the outer oblong-lanceolate, the inner slightly shorter and narrower, violet. Labellum 1·6-1·7 cm, triangular, with undulate margins, yellow and violet. Spur up to 1·5 cm, cylindrical. 2n = 56.{\i  Woods and shady grassland; calcicole. C. & S. Europe, extending north-westwards to Belgium.} Al Au Be Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants found in W.C. Portugal (N. of Lisboa), and also in N. Africa, have been distinguished as subsp.{\b  trabutianum} (Batt.) Rouy,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  13}: 208 (1912), which has a very short spur, a sublinear labellum and 2n = 60. It occurs intermingled with the typical form and probably merits no more than varietal status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.          Epipogium}      R.Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.M. Moore. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Pinkish saprophytes with coralloid rhizomes; roots absent. Stem with few sheathing scales. Green leaves absent. Flowers pendent, in a raceme. Perianth-segments free, directed downwards. Labellum 3-lobed, directed upwards. Spur slender, directed upwards. Column short. Rostellum small. Viscidia 2, distinct; bursicles absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. aphyllum} Swartz,{\i  Summa Veg. Scand}. 32 (1814). Rhizome whitish, with many short, lobed branches and 1-2 filiform stolons. Stem 5-20 cm, erect, pinkish, with many short reddish streaks, turgid, with swelling near base, with 2-5 short, brownish, sheathing scales. Flowers 1-5(-7), pendent on short, slender pedicels. Perianth-segments subequal, curved downwards; outer linear, yellowish or reddish; inner lanceolate, obtuse, yellowish, with short violet lines. Labellum with 2 short, rounded, lateral lobes and a large concave, ovate to triangular, undulate middle lobe, white or pinkish, with violet spots and papillae. Spur c. 8 mm, rounded at apex, white tinged with yellow or reddish outside.{\i  Woods. N. & C. Europe, extending southwards in the mountains to the Pyrenees, C. Appennini, N. W. Greece and Krym.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 6.          Neottia}       Ludwig
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.M. Moore. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Yellowish-brown saprophytes, with short, creeping rhizome covered with thick, fleshy roots to form a nest-like mass. Green leaves absent. Stem covered with brownish scales. Flowers numerous, in a spike-like raceme, fragrant. Perianth-segments subequal or the inner somewhat shorter, somewhat convergent into an open galea. Labellum saccate at base, 2-lobed distally; spur absent. Column long, slender. Rostellum wide, flat. Viscidia absent; bursicles absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. nidus-avis} (L.) L. C. M. Richard,{\i  Orchid. Eur. Annot.} 37 (1817). Stem 20-45 cm, erect; scales 3-5 cm, scarious, sheathing. Racemes 5-21 cm, rather lax below; bracts shorter than ovary, lanceolate-acuminate, scarious; pedicels 3-6 mm, twisted. Perianth-segments 4-6 mm, ovate- to elliptic-oblong, obtuse, yellowish-brown, rarely whitish or yellowish. Labellum 8-12 mm, obliquely pendent, greyish-brown, the undivided part oblong, with 2 small lateral teeth near base, the lobes cordate-oblong, obtuse, divergent. 2n = 36.{\i  Shady woodland, especially on humus-rich soils. Most of Europe, but rare in the extreme north.} All except Az Cr Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 7.         Listera}      R.Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.M. Moore. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants with short rhizome and slender roots. Leaves usually 2, subopposite, sessile, borne just below middle of stem. Inflorescence a rather lax, spike-like raceme. Perianth-segments subequal, patent or somewhat convergent. Labellum 2-3 times as long as other segments, deeply 2-fid distally, rarely with 2 small basal lobes, secreting nectar in central furrow; spur absent. Column short, erect. Rostellum wide, flat. Viscidia absent; bursicles absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Leaves 5-20 cm; raceme 7-25 cm, many-flowered .............................. {\b 1. ovata}
\par
Leaves 1-2·5 cm; raceme 1·5-6 cm, 4- to 12-flowered ..................... {\b 2. cordata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. ovata} (L.) R. Br. in Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew}. ed. 2,{\b  5}: 201 (1813). Rhizome rather thick. Stem 20-60 cm, erect, glabrous below, pubescent above, with 2-3 brownish, membranous basal sheaths and 1-3 minute bract-like leaves distally. Leaves 2, 5-20 cm, broadly ovate-elliptical, obtuse or mucronate. Raceme 7-25 cm; flowers numerous, shortly pedicellate; bracts minute, ovate-lanceolate. Perianth-segments 4-5 mm; outer ovate, obtuse, green; inner narrowly oblong, yellowish-green. Labellum 7-15 mm, obcuneate, divided almost to middle into 2 narrowly oblong lobes, yellowish-green; basal lobes tooth-like, or absent. 2n = 34+0-2B, 35, 36, 37, 38.{\i  Woods, scrub, grassland and marshy ground. Almost throughout Europe, but less common in the south.} All except Az Bl Fa Lu Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. cordata} (L.) R. Br.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1813). Rhizome slender, creeping. Stem (4·5-)6-20 cm, erect, glabrous below, sparsely pubescent above, with 1-2 brownish, membranous basal sheaths.
\par

\par
329}
\par