{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 1500 m in Corse, Sicilia and S. Spain (Sierra Nevada), with long, creeping rhizomes, stems 2-5 cm, rather wide, short leaves and obscurely veined utricles, have been called{\b  C. intricata }Tineo in Guss., {\i Fl. Sic. Syn.}{\b  2}: 574 (1843) ({\i C. rigida} subsp.{\i  intricata} (Tineo) Nyman, {\i C. rigida} var.{\i  intricata} (Tineo) Briq.,{\i  C. nigra} subsp.{\i  intricata} (Tineo) Rivas Martínez, {\i C. fusca} var.{\i  intricata} (Tineo) C. vicioso,{\i  C. cespitosa} var. {\i intricata} (Tineo) Fiori,{\i  C. goodenowii} var.{\i  intricata} (Tineo) H. Lindb. fil.; incl. {\i C. navasi }Merino); they have usually been referred to{\b  163} but must certainly be considered a variant of{\b  167}. Plants from the Carpathians and mountains of the Balkan peninsula with purplish-black, shining basal sheaths have been called{\b  C. dacica} Heuffel,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 18}: 247 (1835) ({\i C. nigra }subsp.{\i  dacica} (Heuffel) Soó,{\i  C. fusca} subsp.{\i  dacica} (Heuffel) Serbanescu & E. I. Nyárády); these have also erroneously been referred to {\b 163}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. reuterana} Boiss. in Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 216 (1852) ({\i C. fusca} var.{\i  reuterana} (Boiss.) C. vicioso), from Portugal and N. & C. Spain, has smooth stems, slender female spikes and rather elliptical utricles; similar plants can be found elsewhere in the range of {\b 167} and this variant is probably of little taxonomic significance.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 168. C. acuta} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 978 (1753) ({\i C. gracilis} Curtis; incl. {\i C. graciliformis} V. Krecz.,{\i  C. fuscovaginata} sensu V. Krecz., non Kük., {\i C. mauritanica }Boiss. & Reuter, {\i C. sareptana} V. Krecz.). Caespitose and with long, stout rhizomes. Stems 30-120(-150) cm, sharply trigonous, usually scabrid above; basal sheaths usually with lamina, pale to dark reddish-brown, usually with prominent transverse veins, entire. Leaves (3-)5-10 mm wide, equalling or exceeding stems, green, papillose beneath; margins rolling outwards on drying. Male spikes (1-)2-4, 20-60 mm. Female spikes 2-4(-8), 30-100(-150) mm, dense, usually overlapping, erect or nodding; lowest bract usually exceeding the inflorescence. Female glumes shorter or longer than utricles, ovate-oblong to lanceolate, obtuse or acute, blackish- or reddish-brown. Utricles 2-3·5 mm, elliptical to broadly ovate, green or pale brownish-green, often purplish above, with slender but distinct veins. 2n = 72, 74-76, 78, 82-85.{\i  Riversides, marshes and other wet places. Most of Europe, but rare in the extreme south.} All except Co Cr Fa Is ?Rs (K) Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable, especially in C. & E. Europe, but it does not seem that subspecies can be usefully recognized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 169. C. trinervis} Degl. in Loisel., {\i Fl. Gall.}{\b  2}: 731 (1807) ({\i C. glauca} subsp.{\i  trinervis} (Degl.) Ascherson & Graebner). Rhizomes long, slender. Stems 10-30(-60) cm, obtusely trigonous, smooth or scabrid at apex; basal sheaths few, pale brown, entire. Leaves 1·5-2(-3) mm wide, equalling or exceeding stems, canaliculate, greyish- or glaucous-green. Male spikes 1-4, 20-40 mm. Female spikes 2-4, 10-40 mm, dense, crowded; lowest bract canaliculate, exceeding inflorescence. Female glumes equalling or slightly shorter than utricles, oblong-ovate, subobtuse, brownish, with 2 lateral veins. Utricles 3·5-5 mm, elliptical to broadly ovate, yellowish- to greyish-green, often purplish-spotted, prominently veined. {\i Damp maritime sands and heaths. • Coasts of W. Europe from Denmark to C. Portugal.} Be Da Ga Ge Ho ?Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Primocarex} Kük. Dioecious, or monoecious with male flowers at top of spike and female flowers below. Spike solitary. Stigmas 2-3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A very heterogeneous assemblage of sections whose affinities are a matter of much conjecture. Other sections formerly included here have, following Kreczetowicz and other authors, been treated as reduced members of Subgen. {\i Vignea} and will be found there.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. LEUCOGLOCHIN Dumort. Monoecious. Spike lax. Female glumes caducous. Utricles fusiform-oblong or ellipsoid-lanceolate, with faint veins, glabrous, patent or deflexed, gradually narrowed into a long, conical, smooth beak. Stigmas 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 170. C. microglochin} Wahlenb.,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} nov. ser., {\b 24}: 140 (1803). Rhizomes short, ascending. Stems 5-15(-25) cm, erect, slender, subterete, smooth; basal sheaths pale brown. Leaves usually not more than half as long as stems, c. 0·5 mm wide. Spike 8-15 mm, with 3-12(-17) female flowers. Female glumes 2-2·5 mm, ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, brown, with scarious margin. Utricles (2·5-)3·5-4·5(-6) mm, ellipsoid-lanceolate, pale greenish-brown; bristle-like prolonged axis of spikelet arising from base of nut protruding for 0·5-2·5 mm from aperture of beak. 2n = 48, 58.{\i  Wet, base-rich habitats. N. Europe, southwards to N.E. Poland; Alps.} Au Br Fe Ga †Ge He Is It No Po Rs (N, ?B) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 171. C. pauciflora} Lightf., {\i Fl. Scot.}{\b  2}: 543 (1777). Rhizome long, ascending. Stems 5-20(-40) cm, erect, slender, obtusely trigonous, smooth; basal sheaths pale brown. Leaves usually not more than half as long as stems, up to 1(-1·5) mm wide. Spike 5-10 mm, with 2-5 female flowers. Female glumes 4-6 mm, ovate to oblong, subacute, pale to reddish-brown. Utricles 5-7 mm, fusiform-oblong, yellowish- to pale reddish-brown, with faint veins, without a protruding bristle. 2n = 46, 76.{\i  Peat-bogs and wet moorland; usually among} Sphagnum{\i  spp. N. & C. Europe, extending locally to S.C. France and N. Ukraine.} Au Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. PETRAEAE (O. F. Lang) Kük. Monoecious. Spike lax or dense. Female glumes persistent. Utricles ovoid-oblong or obovoid, with faint veins, glabrous, erecto-patent or erect, abruptly contracted into a short, smooth beak. Stigmas 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 172. C. rupestris} All., {\i Fl. Pedem.}{\b  2}: 264 (1785). Caespitose and with long creeping rhizomes. Stems 5-20 cm, erect or curved, obtusely trigonous, scabrid at apex; basal sheaths pale to dark reddish-brown. Leaves shorter than or equalling stems, 1-2 mm wide, flat or folded, conspicuously curled towards apex. Spike 10-20 mm, with 3-6 female flowers. Female glumes equalling or exceeding utricles, ovate, obtuse, reddish-brown, with scarious margin. Utricles 2·5-4 mm, obovoid, greenish-brown. 2n = 50, 52.{\i  Dry, rocky and stony places; usually calcicole. N. Europe, southwards to C. Scotland and C. Ural; mountains of C. & S. Europe southwards to the Pyrenees; S.W. Bulgaria.} Au Br Bu ?Co Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs Is It Ju No Rm Rs (N, C, W) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 173. C. obtusata} Liljeblad, {\i Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} nov. ser., {\b 14}: 69 (1793). Rhizomes long-creeping. Stems 5-15 (-40) cm, erect, trigonous, scabrid above; basal sheaths dark purplish-brown. Leaves shorter than or equalling stems, 1-2 mm wide, flat, straight. Spike 5-10(-20) mm, with 5-10 female flowers. Female glumes c. ½ as long as utricles (the lowest sometimes longer and aristate or leaf-like), ovate, subacute, reddish-brown, with a wide scarious margin. Utricles 2·5-4(-4·5) mm, ovoid-oblong, orange- or reddish-brown, shining.{\i  Dry, sandy places. N.E. Germany; S. Sweden; W. Ukraine; a few localities in C. & N. Russia.} Ge Rs (N, C, W) Su. ({\i N. Asia, W. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. NARDINAE Kük. Monoecious. Spike dense. Female glumes persistent. Utricles ovate or elliptical, plano-convex, veinless or with faint veins, glabrous, erect or erecto-patent, gradually narrowed into a more or less distinct, smooth or scabrid beak. Stigmas 2.
\par

\par
322}
\par