{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 midrib. Utricles 2·5-3 mm, with a minute beak. {\i C. & N.W. Europe, W. Fennoscandia.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b arctisibirica} (Jurtzev) Á. & D. Löve, {\i Univ. Colorado Stud. Biol.}{\b  24}: 22 (1966): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but laxly caespitose and with shorter creeping rhizomes; stems more slender; leaves 1·5-4 mm wide; female glumes purplish-black even on the midrib.{\i  N. Russia.} ({\i N. Siberia}.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b ensifolia} (Turcz. ex Gorodkov) J. Holub, {\i Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}) {\b 3}: 190 (1968) ({\i C. ensifolia} (Turcz. ex Gorodkov) V. Krecz.): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but laxly caespitose and with shorter creeping rhizomes; stems 20-40 cm, more slender; male spike 15-20.mm, pale or reddish-brown; female glumes mostly longer and narrower than utricles, acute, dark reddish-brown. {\i S. Ural.} ({\i Siberia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 164. C. elata} All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem. }{\b 2}: 272 (1785). Densely caespitose and tussock-forming, without creeping rhizomes. Stems 20-120 cm, sharply trigonous, usually scabrid above; basal sheaths without lamina, strongly keeled, yellowish-brown, becoming conspicuously reticulately fibrous. Leaves (1-)2-6 mm wide, shorter than or equalling stems, glaucous; margins rolling outwards on drying. Male spikes 1-2(-3), 20-50(-70) mm. Female spikes 2-4, 15-70 mm, dense, usually overlapping; lowest bract usually shorter than the spike and rarely more than half as long as inflorescence, erect. Female glumes about as long as to slightly shorter than utricles, lanceolate-elliptical, blackish-brown, usually without a scarious margin. Utricles 2·5-4 mm, narrowly elliptical to obovate-orbicular, pale to dark greyish-green, often reddish or brownish above, veinless or with slender veins. 2n = 74-78, 80.{\i  Fens and shallow water. Europe, northwards to Scotland, C. Finland and C. Ural, but absent from much of the south}. Au Be Br Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Sa Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Two subspecies can be recognized. Slender plants with leaves 1-2 mm wide and broad utricles from N.C. Europe have been called subsp. {\b fallax} (Marsson) Suess. in Hegi, {\i Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 101 (1939); they lack the anatomical characters of subsp. (b) and are best regarded as a variant of subsp. ({\b a}), although they are in other respects intermediate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b elata} ({\i C. stricta} Good., non Lam.): Stems up to 120 cm. Leaves up to 4(-6) mm wide; outer cell-walls and cuticle of upper epidermis thin; papillae on lower epidermis oblong-conical. Female glumes usually obtuse. Utricles narrowly to broadly elliptical, greyish-green, with distinct but slender veins.{\i  Mainly in base-rich habitats. Throughout the range of the species eastwards to} c. 30° {\i E}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b omskiana} (Meinsh.) Jalas,{\i  Ann. Bot. Fenn. }{\b 1}: 49 (1964) ({\i C. omskiana} Meinsh.): Stems not more than 80 cm. Leaves not more than 3·5 mm wide; outer cell-walls and cuticles of upper epidermis thickened; papillae on lower epidermis low, rounded. Female glumes usually acute. Utricles obovate-orbicular to broadly elliptical, pale greyish-green, often reddish or brownish above, veinless or obscurely veined.{\i  Mainly in base-poor habitats. E. & E.C. Europe, southwards to N.W. Ukraine.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 165. C. cespitosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 978 (1753) (incl. {\i C. inumbrata} V. Krecz.,{\i  C. retorta} (Fries) V. Krecz.). Like {\b 164}({\b a}) but stems not more than 50(-80) cm, slender, the basal sheaths dark reddish-brown or -black, not or weakly keeled, usually with lamina; leaves 1-3(-4) mm wide, bright or yellowish-green, usually purplish below; male spike solitary, 10-20 mm; female spikes 1-2(-3), 10-20(-30) mm; utricles 2-2·5 mm, suborbicular to broadly elliptical, greyish- to brownish-green, not or very obscurely veined. 2n = 78-80. {\i Damp meadows and woods. N. & C. Europe, extending to S.C. France, N. part of Balkan peninsula and W. Kazakhstan, but absent from most of the north-west.} Au Cz Da Fe Ga Ge ?He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 166. C. buekii} Wimmer,{\i  Fl. Schles.} ed. 3, 81 (1857). Rhizomes stout, creeping. Stems 40-120 cm, sharply trigonous, scabrid above; basal sheaths without lamina, keeled, reddish- or blackish-brown, becoming conspicuously reticulately fibrous. Leaves 4-10 mm wide, shorter than stems, bright or greyish-green; margins rolling outwards on drying. Male spikes 1-3, 25-60 mm. Female spikes 3-5, 40-100 mm, erect or drooping, overlapping; lowest bract usually exceeding spike but shorter than inflorescence. Female glumes slightly shorter than utricles, oblong-lanceolate, obtuse or acute, blackish-brown. Utricles 2-2·5 mm ovate or obovate, yellowish-green, often purple-spotted, veinless.{\i  By rivers and lakes, and in other intermittently flooded places. From C. Germany eastwards to E. Bulgaria and W. Kazakhstan}. Au Bu Cz Ge Hu ?It Ju Po Rm Rs (?C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 167. C. nigra} (L.) Reichard,{\i  Fl. Moeno-Francofurt.}{\b  2}: 96 (1778) ({\i C. goodenowii} Gay, {\i C. vulgaris} Fries,{\i  C. acuta} auct., non L.). Rhizomes slender, long or short, or sometimes absent and plant caespitose or often tussock-forming. Stems (2-)10-60(-90) cm, sharply trigonous, usually scabrid above; basal sheaths brown or reddish-brown, not keeled, mostly with lamina, not or scarcely fibrous. Leaves 1-3(-5) mm wide, shorter than or equalling stems, green; margins rolling inwards on drying. Male spikes 1(-2), 5-30 mm. Female spikes 1-3(-4), 10-40(-50) mm, dense, overlapping or the lower distant; lowest bract usually exceeding the spike but shorter than the inflorescence. Female glumes slightly shorter than utricles, oblong-ovate to -lanceolate, obtuse or acute, dark blackish- or reddish-brown, sometimes with a narrow scarious margin. Utricles 2-3·5 mm, ovate to obovate-elliptical, green, usually blackish or brownish above, obscurely to more or less prominently veined. 2n = 82-85.{\i  Usually in marshes or wet grassland. Most of Europe, but rare in the extreme south.} All except Bl Cr ?Rs (K) Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Extremely variable, especially in the development of tussocks and creeping rhizomes and in other vegetative characters, but the taxonomic significance of this variation is not well understood. Much experimental work is needed before any useful subdivision into subspecies can be attempted. The most frequently recognized variants are discussed below.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   In N. & N.C. Europe there is a clinal tendency, increasing with latitude, to form large tussocks. Plants of this kind from N. Russia, completely lacking creeping rhizomes, have been called{\b  C. wiluica} Meinsh. ex Maack, {\i Viljujsk. Okr. Jakutsk. Obl.}{\b  2}: 308 (1886) ({\i C. juncella }subsp. {\i wiluica} (Meinsh. ex Maack) Egorova), while such plants with creeping rhizomes, widespread in N. Europe, have been called{\b  C. juncella} (Fries) Th. Fries, {\i Bot. Not. }{\b 1857}: 207 (1857) ({\i C. nigra }var.{\i  juncea} (Fries) Hyl.,{\i  C. nigra} subsp.{\i  juncella} (Fries) Lemke, {\i C. goodenowii} subsp.{\i  juncea} (Fries) Lindman, {\i C. vulgaris} subsp.{\i  juncella} (Fries) Nyman). The latter have 2n = 76, 84. Both are best considered as varieties of {\b 167}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Several variants, mostly dwarf plants with long creeping rhizomes, have been described from the mountains of C. & S. Europe. Dwarf, very slender plants from the mountains of C. & S.W. Europe, with long, slender, creeping rhizomes, stems 5-15 cm and rather prominently veined utricles, have been called subsp.{\b  alpina} (Gaudin) Lemke,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  67}: 3 (1963) (subsp.{\i  obesa} (All.) H. P. Fuchs ex Janchen, {\i C. vulgaris} subsp.{\i  alpina} (Gaudin) Arcangeli,{\i  C. stolonifera} Hoppe,{\i  C. fusca} var.{\i  stolonifera} (Hoppe) C. vicioso); Very dwarf plants from over
\par

\par
321}
\par