{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr11}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr11\min1}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1044}{\nofchars5953}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 20 Labellum entire or with median lobe not much exceeding
\par    the lateral and not spirally twisted
\par 22 Labellum divided by a constriction into a concave basal
\par    part (}{\i\fs28 hypochile}{\fs28 ) and a flat distal part (}{\i\fs28 epichile}{\fs28 ) ................. }{\b\fs28 3. Cephalanthera}{\fs28 
\par 22 Labellum not divided into hypochile and epichile
\par 23 Labellum entire or crenulate
\par 24 Spur not more than 2 mm ....................................................... }{\b\fs28 17. Nigritella}{\fs28 
\par 24 Spur more than 2 mm
\par 25 Flowers greenish-white ........................................................ }{\b\fs28 13. Platanthera}{\fs28 
\par 25 Flowers white or pink to purple or brownish, not greenish-white
\par 26 Spur 25-30 mm ..................................................................... }{\b\fs28 13. Platanthera}{\fs28 
\par 26 Spur less than 25 mm
\par 27 Bracts membranous ..................................................................... }{\b\fs28 24. Orchis}{\fs28 
\par 27 Lower bracts herbaceous ................................................... }{\b\fs28 19. Dactylorhiza}{\fs28 
\par 23 Labellum 3- or 5-lobed or 3-dentate at apex
\par 28 Perianth-segments free, not forming a galea
\par 29 Flowers yellowish-green; spur saccate ................................... }{\b\fs28 10. Gennaria}{\fs28 
\par 29 Flowers pinkish-lilac; spur cylindrical-conical ............... }{\b\fs28 23. Traunsteinera}{\fs28 
\par 28 At least some perianth-segments connivent to form a galea
\par 30 Spur more than 10 mm
\par 31 Spur c. 1 mm wide
\par 32 Labellum shallowly 3-lobed, without ridges at base;
\par    tubers palmately lobed ........................................................ }{\b\fs28 15. Gymnadenia}{\fs28 
\par 32 Labellum deeply 3-lobed, with 2 longitudinal ridges
\par    at base; tubers entire ............................................................. }{\b\fs28 28. Anacamptis}{\fs28 
\par 31 Spur more than 1 mm wide
\par 33 All bracts membranous ............................................................... }{\b\fs28 24. Orchis}{\fs28 
\par 3  Lower bracts herbaceous .................................................... }{\b\fs28 19. Dactylorhiza}{\fs28 
\par 30 Spur not more than 10 mm
\par 34 Labellum 3-dentate at apex, the lateral teeth parallel
\par    and much longer than the median ..................................... }{\b\fs28 18. Coeloglossum}{\fs28 
\par 34 Labellum 3- or 5-lobed, the lateral lobes not parallel
\par 35 Lobes of labellum prolonged into long, filiform, \'b1 spiral 
\par    processes .................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 21. Comperia}{\fs28 
\par 35 Lobes of labellum without long, filiform processes
\par 36 All bracts membranous
\par 37 Lateral lobes of labellum linear ............................................... }{\b\fs28 22. Neotinea}{\fs28 
\par 37 Lateral lobes of labellum oblong, ovate or rhombic ...................}{\b\fs28  24. Orchis}{\fs28 
\par 36 At least the lower bracts herbaceous
\par 38 Outer perianth-segments connate almost to apex ................. }{\b\fs28 20. Steveniella}{\fs28 
\par 38 Outer perianth-segments free, though sometimes connivent
\par    to form a galea 
\par 39 Perianth-segments at least 5 mm
\par 40 Spike secund; lateral lobes of labellum linear-setaceous .... }{\b\fs28 12. Neottianthe}{\fs28 
\par 40 Spike not secund; lateral lobes of labellum oblong .......... }{\b\fs28 19. Dactylorhiza}{\fs28  
\par 39 Perianth-segments not more than 3 mm
\par 41 Spur 4-5 mm, as long as or slightly shorter than ovary;
\par    flower pinkish-lilac, purple or white ................................... }{\b\fs28 15. Gymnadenia}{\fs28 
\par 41 Spur not more than 2\'b75 mm,1/3-1/2 as long as ovary;
\par    flower yellowish- or greenish-white ..................................... }{\b\fs28 16. Pseudorchis}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  Subfam.      }{\b\fs28 Cypripedioideae}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Fertile stamens 2; pollen not united in pollinia. Fertile stigmas 3.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.     Cypripedium}{\fs28      L.
\par }{\fs24  By D.M. Moore. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Plants with creeping rhizomes. Stems with 2-4 leaves. Flowers solitary, rarely 2(-3), large. Perianth-segments patent; outer median ovate to elliptical, erect, the outer lateral connate in basal half; inner oblong to lanceolate, often twisted. Labellum large, concave, inflated, slipper-shaped; spur absent. Column stout, surmounted by large petaloid sterile anther partly closing mouth of labellum. Stigmas peltate; rostellum absent. Viscidia absent; bursicles absent.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Stem with 2 leaves; median outer perianth-segment 
\par   1\'b78-2\'b78 cm ..................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. guttatum}{\fs28 
\par 1 Stem with 3-4 leaves; median outer perianth-segment
\par   3\'b75-6 cm
\par 2 Labellum yellow, distinctly shorter than other perianth-
\par   segments ....................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. calceolus}{\fs28 
\par 2 Labellum pinkish to purplish, not or slightly shorter 
\par   than other perianth-segments ................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. macranthos}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. C. calceolus}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  951 (1753). Rhizome long. Stem 15-50 cm, glandular-pubescent, with brown basal sheaths. Leaves 3-4, (7-)10-17 \'d7 3\'b75-7(-10) cm, elliptical to oblong, acute to acuminate, sparsely pubescent. Flowers 1(-3), subtended by a large leaf-like bract. Perianth-segments 6-9 cm, reddish-brown, rarely yellow-green (f. }{\i\fs28 viridiflorum}{\fs28  Blytt) outer median 3\'b75-5 cm, ovate- to elliptic-lanceolate, the lateral forming a slightly narrower, downward-pointing bifid segment; inner 4-6 cm, asymmetrical, linear-lanceolate, acuminate. Labellum c. 3 cm, shorter than other perianth-segments, obovoid, rounded at apex, pale yellow, with reddish spots inside. 2n = 20. }{\i\fs28 Woods and meadows; calcicole. N., C., E. & S.E. Europe, westwards to Norway and the S. W. Alps; isolated stations in N. England and the Pyrenees. Much rarer than formerly over much of its range.}{\fs28  Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. C. macranthos}{\fs28  Swartz, }{\i\fs28 Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl}{\fs28 . nov. ser.,}{\b\fs28  21}{\fs28 : 251 (1800). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but rhizome short; perianth-segments lilac, the outer median 4-6 cm, the inner ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate; labellum (4-)4\'b75-7 cm, slightly shorter to longer than other perianth-segments, pinkish to purplish.}{\i\fs28  Woods and clearings. U.S.S.R., from E. White Russia to C. & S. Ural}{\fs28 . Rs (C).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. C. guttatum}{\fs28  Swartz, }{\i\fs28 loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1800). Rhizome long. Stem 15-50 cm, glandular-pubescent, with brown basal sheaths, with 2 leaves at about the middle. Leaves 6-12 \'d7 3\'b75-6 cm, elliptical to elliptic-ovate, acute to acuminate, sparsely pubescent. Flower solitary, subtended by large leaf-like bract. Median outer perianth-segment 1\'b78-2\'b78 cm, white, often with purple blotches or spots, the lateral outer shorter, green; inner c. 2 cm, panduriform. Labellum 2-2\'b73 cm, obovoid, rounded at apex, white, with large, more or less confluent lilac spots. }{\i\fs28 Woods and clearings. Russia, from }{\fs28 c. 51\'b0}{\i\fs28  to}{\fs28  c. 60\'b0}{\i\fs28  N}{\fs28 . Rs (N, C, E).
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  Subfam.  }{\b\fs28  Orchidoideae}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Fertile stamen 1; pollen united in pollinia. Fertile stigmas 2, often confluent.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 2.          Epipactis}{\fs28         Zinn
\par  (}{\i\fs28 Helleborine}{\fs28  Miller)
\par }{\fs24  By D.M. Moore. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Plants with horizontal or vertical rhizome and numerous fleshy roots. Stem leafy. Flowers pedicellate, patent or pendent, in more or less secund spikes. Perianth-segments free, patent or connivent, the inner similar to the outer but smaller. Labellum with concave or cupuliform basal part (}{\i\fs28 hypochile}{\fs28 ) separated by narrow joint or fold from the flat, forward-directed distal part (}{\i\fs28 epichile}{\fs28 ), with basal tubercles or ridges; spur absent. Column short. Rostellum usually large and globose, sometimes absent. Viscidia absent; bursicles absent.
\par 
\par  A difficult genus, particularly with regard to those species (}{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 -}{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 7}{\fs28 ) which are largely or entirely autogamous.
\par 
\par 326}
\par }