{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. indica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1 (1753). Plant up to 150 cm, glabrous. Leaves up to 50 × 25 cm, elliptical, acuminate; petiole very short or absent. Inflorescence lax, each branch with 2 shortly pedicellate flowers. Bracts 1·5 × 1 cm, pruinose. Sepals c. 1 cm, pruinose. Petals 3-4 cm, subequal, lanceolate, acuminate, erect, pale pink. Staminodes 4, the outer three 4-6 × 1-1·5 cm, obovate-oblanceolate, pinkish-red, suberect and all standing on adaxial side of flower, the fourth staminode and the semi-fertile stamen about as long but narrower, both twisted and somewhat deflexed abaxially, orange-yellow spotted with crimson. Capsule 3 × 2 cm. {\i Cultivated for ornament in the warmest parts of Europe, and locally naturalized.} [Az Si.] ({\i Tropical America and West Indies}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc  MICROSPERMAE
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 203.         ORCHIDACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.M. Moore. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs with rhizomes, vertical stock or tuberous roots, terrestrial, sometimes saprophytic, usually with mycorrhiza. Stems sometimes swollen at base to form pseudobulbs. Leaves entire, spirally arranged or distichous, rarely subopposite, reduced to scales or sheaths in saprophytes. Inflorescence a spike or raceme. Flowers zygomorphic, epigynous, usually hermaphrodite. Perianth-segments 6, in 2 whorls; median inner segment ({\i labellum}) usually larger and of different shape from the others, usually directed downwards owing to the ovary or the pedicel twisting through 180°, often with basal spur. Anthers and stigma borne on a{\i  column} formed from fused filaments and style; stamens 1, rarely 2, with sessile or subsessile, 2-locular anthers behind or at the summit of the column; pollen-grains single or in tetrads, bound by elastic threads in packets ({\i pollinia}) which may be narrowed into a sterile, stalk-like{\i  caudicle}. Ovary inferior, 1-locular, with parietal placentation, rarely 3-locular; stigmas 3, all fertile, or with the median sterile and often consisting of a beak-like process ({\i rostellum}) between the anthers and fertile stigmas; rostellum often forming 1 or 2 viscid bodies ({\i viscidia}) to which the pollinia are attached; viscidia sometimes enclosed in 1(2), simple or 2-lobed, membranous, pocket-like outgrowths ({\i bursicles}) of the rostellum. Fruit a capsule, dehiscing by 3 or 6 longitudinal slits; seeds numerous, minute, with undifferentiated embryo and no endosperm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: E. G. Camus,{\i  Iconographie des Orchidées d'Europe et du Bassin méditerranéen.} Paris. 1921; {\i Texte.} Paris. 1929. G. Keller, R. Schlechter & R.von Soó,{\i  Monographie und Iconographie der Orchideen Europas und des Mittelmeergebietes }{\b 1-5}. Berlin. 1925-1944. H. Sundermann, {\i Europäische und mediterrane Orchideen}. Hildesheim. 1975.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant without green leaves
\par
2 Spur long, slender
\par
3 Labellum entire, directed downwards .....................................{\b  4. Limodorum}
\par
3 Labellum 3-lobed, directed upwards ........................................{\b  5. Epipogium}
\par
2 Spur very short or absent
\par
4 Stem with numerous scales; labellum c. twice as long as
\par
  other perianth-segments ..................................................................{\b  6. Neottia}
\par
4 Stem with 2-4 scales; labellum about as long as other
\par
  perianth-segments ................................................................. {\b 31. Corallorhiza}
\par
1 Plant with green leaves or green, bract-like scales on 
\par
  a green stem
\par
5 Flowers without a spur
\par
6 Labellum large, inflated, slipper-shaped
\par
7 Plant with solitary pseudobulb and one foliage-leaf;
\par
  anther 1 ........................................................................................{\b  32. Calypso}
\par
7 Plant with creeping rhizomes and 2-4 foliage-leaves;
\par
  anthers 2 ................................................................................{\b  1. Cypripedium}
\par
6 Labellum neither inflated nor slipper-shaped
\par
8 Labellum with distinctively coloured and shaped central
\par
  area ({\i speculum}) ............................................................................. {\b 30. Ophrys}
\par
8 Labellum without speculum
\par
9 Labellum directed upwards
\par
10 Labellum shorter than outer perianth-segments; inner
\par
   perianth-segments c. ½ as long as the outer ......................... {\b 35. Hammarbya}
\par
10 Labellum about as long as outer perianth-segments; inner 
\par
   perianth-segments as long as or slightly shorter
\par
   than the outer
\par
11 Outer perianth-segments not more than 3 mm; labellum 
\par
   densely tuberculate beneath towards apex; plant with 2
\par
   pseudobulbs borne one above the other ................................. {\b 34. Microstylis}
\par
11 Outer perianth-segments at least 5 mm; labellum not
\par
   tuberculate towards apex; plant with 2 pseudobulbs 
\par
   joined by short horizontal stolon .................................................. {\b 33. Liparis}
\par
9  Labellum directed downwards
\par
12 Labellum divided by a constriction into a concave basal part 
\par
   ({\i hypochile}) and a flat, downward- or forward-pointing 
\par
   distal part ({\i epichile})
\par
13 Plant with tubers; epichile pendent ..........................................{\b  29. Serapias}
\par
13 Plant with rhizomes or stolons; epichile not pendent
\par
14 Outer perianth-segments not more than 4 mm .........................{\b  9. Goodyera}
\par
14 Outer perianth-segments at least 7 mm
\par
15 Flowers patent or pendent, pedicellate, in a ± secund
\par
   spike; column not longer than wide ............................................{\b  2. Epipactis}
\par
15 Flowers suberect, sessile or subsessile, not in a 
\par
   secund spike; column longer than wide .............................{\b  3. Cephalanthera}
\par
12 Labellum not clearly divided by a constriction into
\par
   hypochile and epichile
\par
16 Flowers white, arranged in 1-3 spiral rows or in a
\par
   secund spike .............................................................................. {\b 8. Spiranthes}
\par
16 Flowers yellowish, greenish or purplish, neither 
\par
   arranged in spiral rows nor in a secund spike
\par
17 Leaves about equalling stem, linear; labellum entire 
\par
   or shallowly lobed ................................................................. {\b 14. Chamorchis}
\par
17 Leaves distinctly shorter than stem, oblong to linear-
\par
   lanceolate; labellum conspicuously lobed
\par
18 Plant with rhizomes; labellum 2-lobed ......................................... {\b 7. Listera}
\par
18 Plant with 1 or 2 tubers; labellum 3-lobed, the median
\par
   lobe sometimes 2-fid
\par
19 Plant with 1 tuber at anthesis; median lobe of labellum
\par
   entire ...................................................................................... {\b 11. Herminium}
\par
19 Plant with 2 tubers at anthesis; median lobe of 
\par
   labellum deeply 2-fid ................................................................... {\b 25. Aceras }
\par
5  Flowers with a spur
\par
20 Labellum with median lobe much exceeding the lateral
\par
   and spirally twisted
\par
21 Bracts equalling or shorter than flowers; outer perianth-
\par
   segments connivent with inner lateral to form a galea . {\b 26. Himantoglossum}
\par
21 Bracts exceeding flowers; outer perianth-segments
\par
   erecto-patent, not connivent to form a galea ................................. {\b 27. Barlia}
\par

\par
325}
\par