{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. E. phyllanthes} G.E. Sm.,{\i  Gard. Chron. }{\b 1852}: 660 (1852). Rhizome short, horizontal or oblique. Stem (8-)20-45(-65) cm, glabrous or sparsely pubescent, green. Leaves distichous, 3-6, 3·5-7 × 3-5 cm, orbicular to lanceolate, acute to acuminate, often concave, the margin sometimes undulate. Raceme up to 15 cm, 15- to 35-flowered; bracts linear-lanceolate, acuminate, the lower usually exceeding flowers. Flowers pendent; outer perianth-segments 8-10 mm, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, pale yellowish-green, the inner pale yellowish-green, sometimes with violet tinge. Labellum 6-8 mm; hypochile cupuliform to shallowly concave, whitish or greenish; epichile sometimes not clearly separated from hypochile, ovate-lanceolate to cordate, acute or acuminate, usually longer than wide, greenish-white to pinkish, often rugose or with two protuberances at base. Rostellum absent. Ovary more or less glabrous. 2n = 36.{\i  Open woodland, scrub and among coastal dunes; calcicole. • N.W. & W.C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden.} ?Au Br Da Ga Hb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  An autogamous species showing much variation, particularly in labellum shape, but intermediates are frequent and it is not possible to recognize categories above the varietal level.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Denmark and S. Sweden, which have been called {\b E. confusa} D. P. Young,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1953}: 263 (1953) ({\i E. persica} auct., non (Soó) Hausskn. ex Nannf.), seem to differ from {\b 7} only in their smaller size and in chromosome number (2n = 40) and do not merit recognition at specific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. E. atrorubens} (Hoffm.) Besser,{\i  Prim. Fl. Galic.}{\b  2}: 220 (1809) ({\i E. atropurpurea} Rafin., {\i E. rubiginosa} (Crantz) Gaudin, {\i Helleborine atropurpurea} (Rafin.) Schinz & Thell.). Rhizome short, more or less horizontal. Stem (15-)20-60(-100) cm, glabrous or sparsely pubescent, violet below, with sheathing scales. Leaves distichous, 5-10, 4-10 × 1·5-4·5 cm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, acute to acuminate. Raceme 7-25 cm, 8- to 18-flowered, the rhachis densely pubescent; bracts lanceolate, acute, the lowest equalling or sometimes exceeding flowers. Flowers patent; perianth-segments deep purple, the outer 6-7 mm, ovate, acuminate, the inner elliptical. Labellum 5·5-6·5 mm; hypochile cupuliform, green, with red margin, with red spots inside; epichile cordate-reniform, acute, with recurved apex, wider than long, deep reddish-purple, with 2(-3) rugose protuberances at base. Rostellum persistent. Ovary densely pubescent. 2n = 40+0-7B.{\i  Woods and rocky slopes; calcicole. Much of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region}. Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. E. microphylla} (Ehrh.) Swartz,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} nov. ser.,{\b  21}: 232 (1800) ({\i Helleborine microphylla} (Ehrh.) Schinz & Thell.). Rhizome short, vertical or oblique. Stem 15-40 cm, pubescent above, with basal sheathing scales. Leaves spirally arranged, 3-6, 1-2·5(-3) × c. 1 cm, shorter than internodes, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, acuminate. Raceme 3-12 cm, 4- to 15-flowered, the rhachis densely pubescent; bracts lanceolate, acuminate, the lower as long as flowers. Flowers patent, outer perianth-segments c. 7 mm, elliptic-ovate, subobtuse, greenish with reddish tinge outside, whitish-green inside, the inner ovate, whitish-green. Labellum 6·5-7 mm; hypochile cupuliform, greenish-brown; epichile orbicular-ovate, subobtuse, whitish or pale pink, with crenate, slightly undulate margin and 2 rugose protuberances at base. Rostellum persistent. Ovary densely pubescent. 2n = 40.{\i  Woods; calcicole. S. & C. Europe, extending to N.C. France.} Al Au Be Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (K) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.     Cephalanthera}     L.C.M. Richard
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.M. Moore. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants with short, creeping rhizome. Stem leafy. Flowers few, large, suberect, sessile or subsessile, in a lax spike, scentless. Perianth-segments similar, usually connivent to give campanulate flowers. Labellum constricted between the suberect concave basal part ({\i hypochile}) and the forward-directed distal part ({\i epichile}) which has a recurved apex and 3-9 interrupted longitudinal ridges above; spur absent or very short. Column long, erect. Rostellum absent. Viscidia absent; bursicles absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spur present, short
\par
2 Outer perianth-segments not more than 20 mm; spur 1-2 mm;
\par
  epichile with 3-6 ridges ................................................................ {\b 3. cucullata}
\par
2 Outer perianth-segments at least 25 mm; spur 3-4 mm;
\par
  epichile with 7-9 ridges ........................................................... {\b 4. epipactoides} 
\par
1 Spur absent
\par
3 Flowers pink or purplish; upper part of stem and ovaries
\par
  pubescent; epichile acute .................................................................... {\b 5. rubra}
\par
3 Flowers white; upper part of stem and ovaries glabrous;
\par
  epichile obtuse
\par
4 Lower leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate; bracts exceeding
\par
  the ovary; outer perianth-segments obtuse ............................. {\b 1. damasonium}
\par
4 Lower leaves lanceolate; bracts much shorter than ovary;
\par
  outer perianth-segments acute ..................................................... {\b 2. longifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. damasonium} (Miller) Druce, {\i Ann. Scott. Nat. Hist.}{\b  1906}: 225 (1906) ({\i C. alba }(Crantz)) Simonkai, {\i C. grandiflora} S. F. Gray, {\i C. pallens} L. C. M. Richard). Stem 15-60 cm, erect, angled, glabrous, with 2-3 brownish basal sheaths. Leaves 4-10 cm, subobtuse to acuminate, the lowest short, ovate-lanceolate, the middle oblong-ovate, the upper lanceolate. Spike up to 12 cm, 3- to 12(-16)-flowered. Flowers white or creamy-white, usually closed and tubular-campanulate, all but lowest much exceeded by bracts. Perianth-segments 15-20 mm, obtuse; outer oblong; inner lateral oblong-lanceolate, shorter than the outer. Labellum shorter than other perianth-segments, white, yellowish within, with an orange-yellow crescentic mark at base of hypochile; epichile with 3-5 orange-yellow ridges, obtuse; spur absent. Ovary glabrous. 2n = 32. {\i Woods and other shady places; somewhat calcicole. S., C. & W. Europe, northwards to England and S.E. Sweden, and extending eastwards to S.W. part of U.S.S.R.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. longifolia} (L.) Fritsch,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  38}: 81 (1888). Like {\b 1} but stem slightly ridged above and with 2-4 whitish, sometimes greenish-tipped, basal sheaths; leaves 7-20 cm, lanceolate, the uppermost linear; flowers exceeding all but lowest bracts, usually more open; perianth-segments 10-16 mm, the outer lanceolate, acute. 2n = 32.{\i  Woods and other shady places. Most of Europe except the extreme north and most of the north-east.} All except Az Cr Fa Is Rs (N, E) Sb; extinct in Ho.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. cucullata} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 13}): 12 (1853). Stem 15-30 cm, erect, glabrous, with c. 4 whitish basal sheaths. Leaves 2·5-6 cm, oblong-lanceolate, acute, cucullate. Spike 4-15 cm, (4-)7- to 24-flowered. Flowers white or pinkish, open, all but the lowest exceeding the bracts. Outer perianth-segments 14-20 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acute; inner lateral 12-16 mm, ovate-oblong, subobtuse or acute. Labellum slightly shorter than other perianth-segments; hypochile with rounded lateral lobes; epichile cordate, subacute, with 3-6 ridges; spur 1-2 mm, conical, obtuse. Ovary glabrous.{\i  Mountain woods and scrub. Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par
328}
\par