{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 174. C. nardina} Fries,{\i  Nov. Fl. Suec., Mantissa}{\b  2}: 55 (1839). Densely caespitose, forming flattened cushions. Stems 3-10 cm, procumbent or erect, usually curved, terete, smooth; basal sheaths numerous, reddish-brown. Leaves usually exceeding stems, setaceous, rigid, usually curved and often procumbent. Spikes 5-8 mm, ovoid. Female glumes 2·5-3 mm, ovate, obtuse, reddish-brown, with a narrow scarious margin. Utricles 3-3·5 mm, elliptical, pale brown, with faint veins, strongly stipitate. 2n = 70. {\i Dry, exposed, stony places in the mountains; calcicole. Svalbard; Iceland; Arctic Sweden and Norway}. Is No Sb Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 175. C. capitata} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1261 (1759) (incl. {\i C. arctogena} H. Sm.). Densely caespitose. Stems 10-40 cm, erect, trigonous, scabrid above; basal sheaths purplish-brown. Leaves usually shorter than stems, setaceous. Spike 4-9 mm, ovoid or suborbicular. Female glumes 1·5-2·5 mm, ovate, obtuse, yellowish to reddish-brown, with scarious margin. Utricles 2-3·5 mm, ovate, greenish, often brownish at apex, veinless. 2n = 50.{\i  Damp, usually base-rich and peaty places. N. Europe, southwards to} c. 60°{\i  N. in E. Russia; E. Alps.} Au Fe †Ge Is It No Rs (N, C) Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. SCIRPINAE (Tuckerman) Kük. Dioecious. Female spike dense, with persistent glumes. Utricles ovoid-oblong, with distinct veins, densely pubescent, erect, with a distinct, short beak. Stigmas 3.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 176. C. scirpoidea} Michx., {\i Fl. Bor.-Amer.}{\b  2}: 171 (1803). Laxly caespitose or with creeping rhizomes. Stems 5-15 (-20) cm, erect trigonous, scabrid above; basal sheaths dark brown, fibrous. Leaves shorter than stems, 1·5-3 mm wide, flat. Male spike 10-15 mm. Male glumes reddish-brown. Female spike 10-15 × 3-4 mm, cylindrical or oblong. Female glumes 2-3 mm, ovate, obtuse, blackish. Utricles 2·5-3 mm, yellowish-brown.{\i  Wet mountain grassland. Arctic Norway} ({\i Solvågtind, near Saltdal}). No. ({\i North America, Greenland, N.E. Asia.})
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. UNCINIIFORMES Kük. Monoecious. Spike lax or dense. Female glumes caducous. Utricles oblong to ovoid-ellipsoid, or lanceolate to oblong-elliptical and plano-convex, veinless, glabrous, patent or deflexed, acute or with a beak. Stigmas usually 2.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 177. C. pyrenaica} Wahlenb., {\i Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} nov. ser.,{\b  24}: 139 (1803). Densely caespitose. Stems 5-35 cm, erect, rather stout, sometimes curved, obtusely trigonous, smooth or scabrid at apex; basal sheaths dull brown. Leaves usually shorter than stems, 1-2 mm wide, flat. Spike (5-)10-15(-25) mm, oblong-ovoid, dense, with 10-30 female flowers. Male glumes linear-lanceolate, acute. Female glumes 2·5-3·5 mm, oblong-ovate, subobtuse, dark reddish-brown, with narrow scarious margin. Utricles 3-4 mm, oblong- to ovoid-ellipsoid, reddish-brown, shining, gradually narrowed into an obscure, smooth beak. Stigmas sometimes 3. {\i Mountain pastures and damp, rocky places. Pyrenees and Cordillera Cantabrica; S. Carpathians; S.W. Bulgaria.} Bu Ga Hs Rm.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 178. C. pulicaris} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 972 (1753). Usually laxly caespitose, without creeping rhizomes. Stems 5-25(-40) cm, erect, very slender, obtusely trigonous or terete, smooth; basal sheaths dull brown. Leaves shorter than or equalling stems, setaceous. Spike 10-25 mm, with 5-10 female flowers, lax. Lower male glumes acute. Female glumes 3·5-4·5 mm, ovate-oblong, acute, reddish-brown, with scarious margin near apex. Utricles 4·5-5·5 mm, lanceolate to oblong-elliptical, plano-convex, orange- to blackish-brown, shining, more or less stipitate at base, acute but not beaked at apex, deflexed at maturity. 2n = 58, 60.{\i  Damp places. • N., C. & W. Europe, southwards to N. Spain and eastwards to Estonia.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Is It Ju No Po Rs (B) Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 179. C. peregrina} Link.,{\i  Hort. Berol.}{\b  1}: 334 (1827). Like {\b 178} but densely caespitose; stems (12-)20-40 cm; leaves up to 1·5 mm wide; spike (20-)25-35 mm, very lax; lower male glumes obtuse; female glumes obtuse, usually pale brown or darker but not reddish towards apex; utricles 5·5-7 mm, oblong-ellipsoid, usually greenish-brown, rather abruptly contracted into a long beak. {\i Woods and scrub. Açores}. Az. ({\i Madeira}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 180. C. macrostylon} Lapeyr.,{\i  Hist. Abr. Pyr.} 562 (1813) ({\i C. decipiens} sensu Willk., non Gay). Like {\b 178} but densely caespitose; leaves much shorter than stems; spike with 8-13 female flowers; lower male glumes obtuse; female glumes 4-5 mm; utricles 5-6 mm, fusiform, gradually narrowed into a long beak.{\i  Dry grassland. • Pyrenees and Cordillera Cantábrica.} Ga Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs36\qc   SCITAMINEAE
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 200.        MUSACEAE}
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.A. Webb. 
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs or trees. Leaves alternate or basal, often very large, with sheathing base, long petiole and entire lamina. Flowers hermaphrodite or unisexual, zygomorphic. Perianth petaloid, the 6 segments variously connate or free. Stamens 5. Ovary inferior, 3-locular; fruit a capsule or berry.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: K. Schumann in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  1}({\b IV. 45}): 1-45 (1900).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.          Musa}         L.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Giant, scapose herbs with monocarpic shoots, but in many species perennating by suckers. Stock a subglobose, underground tuber. Leaves basal; sheaths very long, fibrous, persistent, tubular but with free margins, each wrapped around the younger sheaths so as to form a rigid, erect false stem; lamina oblong, obtuse, splitting very readily at right angles to the midrib. Scape slender, enclosed in the cavity of the false stem and emerging from between the youngest leaves. Inflorescence a long spike, often pendent; flowers in whorls, each whorl in the axil of a large bract. Flowers of basal whorls female, those of middle and distal whorls male; some hermaphrodite flowers sometimes present between the two. Staminodes present in female flowers and abortive gynoecium in male. Perianth with 5 segments connate to form a shortly 5-lobed tube open along the adaxial side; the sixth segment (adaxial) shorter, free. Stigma shortly 3-lobed. Fruit an elongate berry; seeds (in wild species) numerous.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    Literature: N. W. Simmonds, {\i The Evolution of the Bananas.} London. 1962.{\i  Bananas}, ed. 2. London. 1966.
\par
\par 323}
\par