{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: J. Holub,{\i  Preslia}{\b  42}: 330-349 (1970). A. & C. Nieschalk,{\i  Abh. Ver. Naturk. Kassel}{\b  63}: 1-40 (1970). L. Reichling, {\i Arch. Inst. G.-D. Luxemb.} ({\i Sci. Nat.}) nov. ser.,{\b  22}: 123-145 (1955). K. Senghas & H. Sundermann (edit.),{\i  Jahresb. Naturw. Ver. Wuppertal}{\b  23}: 1-132 (1970). D. P. Young, {\i Watsonia }{\b 2}: 253-276 (1952);{\b  5}: 127-139 (1962); {\i Bot. Not.}{\b  1953}: 253-270 (1953); {\i Bull. Jard. Bot. Bruxelles}{\b  28}: 123-127 (1958).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Rhizome long, creeping; hypochile with 2 erect lateral
\par
  lobes, connected to epichile by a narrow joint .............................. {\b 1. palustris} 
\par
1 Rhizome short, horizontal or vertical; hypochile without
\par
  lateral lobes, connected to epichile by 1 or more folds
\par
2 Rhachis, pedicels and ovary densely pubescent
\par
3 Leaves 4-10 cm, distichous; flowers deep purple ..................... {\b 8. atrorubens}
\par
3 Leaves 1-3 cm, spirally arranged; flowers greenish,
\par
  with reddish tinge .................................................................... {\b 9. microphylla} 
\par
2 Rhachis, pedicels and ovary ± glabrous to scabridulous
\par
4 Leaves distichous; rostellum absent, at least at maturity;
\par
  flowers frequently cleistogamous or partially so
\par
5 Flowers patent or obliquely pendent; hypochile purplish
\par
  or pinkish inside ......................................................... ({\b 3-5}). {\b leptochila} group
\par
5 Flowers pendent; hypochile greenish-white inside ................. {\b 7. phyllanthes}
\par
4 Leaves spirally arranged; rostellum prominent and persistent;
\par
  flowers not cleistogamous
\par
6 Leaves greyish or purplish; epichile at least as long as wide .... {\b 6. purpurata}
\par
6 Leaves green; epichile not longer than wide ........................... {\b 2. helleborine}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. palustris} (L.) Crantz, {\i Stirp. Austr.} ed. 2,{\b  2}: 462 (1769) ({\i Helleborine palustris} (L.) Schrank). Rhizome long, creeping. Stem 15-50(-70) cm, pubescent above, purplish below, with sheathing scales. Leaves spirally arranged, 4-8, 5-15 × 2-4 cm, oblong to oblong-lanceolate, subacute to acuminate, the upper smaller. Raceme 6-15(-20) cm, 7- to 14-flowered; bracts lanceolate, the lower equalling flowers, the others shorter. Flowers patent when mature; outer perianth-segments 8-12 mm, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, greenish, with faint violet stripes, the inner whitish, pinkish below. Labellum 10-12 mm; hypochile slightly concave, with an erect triangular lobe at each side, pinkish-white, with orange-yellow papillae and purplish lines inside; epichile connected by narrow joint, ovate, obtuse, as long as wide, white, with red veins, with undulate margin and lobed basal protuberance. Rostellum persistent. Ovary pubescent. 2n = 40, 44, 46, 48.{\i  Marshes and other damp places. Most of Europe except the extreme north and parts of the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be ?Bl Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. helleborine} (L.) Crantz, {\i op. cit.} 467 (1769) ({\i Helleborine latifolia} (L.) Moench). Rhizome short, oblique or horizontal. Stem 35-80(-100) cm, pubescent above, often purplish below, with sheathing scales. Leaves spirally arranged, 4-10, 5-17 × 2·5-10 cm, ovate-elliptical to suborbicular, acute to shortly acuminate. Raceme (7-)10-40 cm, 15- to 50-flowered; bracts lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, the lower equalling or exceeding flowers. Flowers obliquely pendent; outer perianth-segments 10-13 mm, elliptic-ovate, greenish, the inner pinkish-violet towards the base. Labellum 9-11 mm; hypochile cupuliform, greenish outside, dark reddish-brown inside; epichile cordate to broadly ovate, with recurved acute apex, shorter than to as long as wide, greenish-white, pink or purplish, with 2(-3) smooth or slightly rugose basal protuberances. Rostellum persistent. Ovary glabrous or sparsely hairy. 2n = 36, 38, 40, 44. {\i Woods and scrub; sometimes among maritime sand-dunes. Almost throughout Europe}. All except Az ?Bl Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 3-5}). {\b E. leptochila} group. Rhizome short, vertical or oblique. Stem 20-70 cm, pubescent, especially above, usually purplish below, with sheathing scales. Leaves distichous, 4-10, ovate to lanceolate, acute, with more or less undulate margin. Bracts linear-lanceolate, the lower exceeding the flowers. Hypochile cupuliform, pale greenish, reddish-mottled inside.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A group of largely autogamous taxa which are probably derived from the allogamous facies of {\b 3} and which are possibly conspecific. The distributions are not well-known and dubious records have been omitted below.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Epichile acuminate, with flat apex; outer perianth-
\par
  segments acuminate ..................................................................... {\b 3. leptochila} 
\par
1 Epichile subobtuse, with recurved apex; outer perianth-
\par
  segments obtuse
\par
2 Epichile as long as wide; anther stipitate ..................................... {\b 5. dunensis}
\par
2 Epichile wider than long; anther sessile ....................................... {\b 4. muelleri}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. E. leptochila} (Godfery) Godfery,{\i  Jour. Bot. }({\i London}) {\b 59}:146 (1921). Leaves 5-10 × (1·5-)2-5 cm, dull yellow- or dark green. Raceme 7·5-25 cm, up to 25-flowered. Flowers patent or obliquely pendent; perianth-segments pale green, the outer 7-15 mm, lanceolate, acuminate. Labellum 4-9 mm; hypochile usually with nectar; epichile cordate, acuminate, with flat apex, as long as or longer than wide, somewhat concave and yellow-greenish with white margin, rarely flat and green (var.{\i  cleistogama }(C. Thomas) D. P. Young), with 2 smooth or slightly rugose, white or pinkish basal protuberances. Rostellum absent at anthesis; anther prominently stipitate. Ovary tuberculate, with sparse, blackish hairs. 2n = 36. {\i Woods and scrub, usually in dense shade; calcicole. • N.W. & C. Europe; one station in N. Greece}. Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. E. muelleri} Godfery,{\i  op. cit.} 106 (1921). Leaves 4-8(-10) × (1·5-)2-4 cm, yellowish-green. Raceme 5-12(-17) cm, (10-)15 to 25(-40)-flowered. Flowers patent or slightly erecto-patent; perianth-segments yellowish-green, the outer 7-11 mm, ovate-lanceolate. Labellum 7-9(-10) mm; hypochile without nectar; epichile cordate, subobtuse, usually with recurved apex, wider than long, pale pink or greenish, with 2(-3) smooth basal protuberances. Rostellum usually absent; anther sessile, attached almost directly above the stigma.{\i  Open woods and clearings; calcicole. • W. & C. Europe.} Au Be Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. E. dunensis} (T. & T. A. Stephenson) Godfery, {\i op. cit.} 64: 68 (1926). Like {\b 4} but epichile as long as wide; anther stipitate.{\i  Maritime sand-dunes. • N. England and N. Wales. }Br.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Records for continental Europe are probably referable to {\b 4}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. E. purpurata} Sm.,{\i  Engl. Fl.}{\b  4}: 41 (1828). Rhizome short, vertical. Stem 20-70 cm, pubescent above, purplish below, with sheathing scales. Leaves spirally arranged, 5-10, 6-10 × 2-5 cm, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, acute to shortly acuminate, greyish or purplish. Raceme 15-25 cm, many-flowered; bracts linear, acuminate, the lower usually exceeding flowers. Flowers obliquely pendent when mature; outer perianth-segments 10-12 mm, lanceolate, subobtuse, green outside, whitish inside, the inner whitish, sometimes with pinkish tinge. Labellum 8-10 mm; hypochile cupuliform, greenish outside, usually mottled with violet inside; epichile triangular-cordate, acute, with recurved apex, as long as or longer than wide, whitish, with 2-3 smooth, confluent basal protuberances. Rostellum persistent. Ovary scabridulous. 2n = 40.{\i  Woods; somewhat calcicole. • N.W. & C. Europe, extending south-eastwards to Bulgaria.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge ?Gr He Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par
327}
\par