{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tubiformis}: Perianth-segments purplish outside, whitish and heavily tessellated with purple inside. Nectaries 3 × 1 mm, triangular. Style 12-13 mm, 3-fid, the branches 1 mm.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b moggridgei} Boiss. & Reuter ex Rix,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 356 (1978): Perianth-segments yellowish to greenish, lightly tessellated with brown. Nectaries 4-5 × 1 mm, linear. Style 13-17 mm, 3-fid, the branches 1-4 mm. {\i S.W. Alps, northwards to} 45° {\i N}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. F. macedonica} Bornm., {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  19}: 200 (1923). Stem 7-14 cm. Leaves 5-6, the lowest 4-6(-8) cm × 5-10(-16) mm, oblong to lanceolate, obtuse, subopposite, the upper 3 in a whorl. Perianth very broadly campanulate; segments lilac, heavily tessellated with dark purple, without fascia, the outer 30 × 11-14 mm, ovate-lanceolate, the inner 12-16 mm wide, toothed at the margin. Nectaries 3 mm, oblong. Filaments 10 mm, smooth. Style 12 mm, 3-fid, the branches 2-5 mm. Capsule not winged.{\i  Wet mountain grasslands} 1200-2500{\i  m. • E.C. Albania, just extending into S.W. Jugoslavia.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. F. pontica} Wahlenb.,{\i  Isis}{\b  21}: 984 (1828). Stem 15-45 cm. Leaves usually 8, not glaucous, the lowest 5-8(-10) cm × 5-17 mm, opposite or subopposite, the intermediate opposite or alternate, the upper in a whorl of 3, 5-11 cm × 3-10 mm. Perianth broadly campanulate; segments green, often tinged with reddish-brown but not tessellated, the outer 24-45 × 8-10 mm, usually acute, the inner 10-15 mm wide, obtuse. Nectaries 3-5 mm in diameter, circular, blackish, 5 mm above the base of the perianth-segment. Filaments 12 mm, papillose. Style 12-15 mm, 3-fid, the branches 5-7 mm, slender, smooth. Capsule winged.{\i  Open woods and scrub. Balkan peninsula, from} 40° 15' {\i to }43° 30' {\i N}. Al Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. F. involucrata} All., {\i Auct. Fl. Pedem. }34 (1789). Stem 15-25 cm. Leaves 7-10, linear-lanceolate or linear, somewhat glaucous, the lowest 5-11 cm × 6-10 mm, opposite, the intermediate opposite or alternate, the uppermost 4-9 mm, in a whorl of 3. Perianth broadly campanulate; segments green, tessellated with brown or purple, without clear fascia, obtuse, the outer 25-40 × 7-16 mm, the inner somewhat wider. Nectaries 4 mm wide, ovate, blackish, 5-6 mm above the base of the perianth-segment. Filaments 9-14 mm, papillose. Style 8-12 mm, 3-fid, the branches 3-4 mm, smooth, slender. Capsule not winged.{\i  Open woods, scrub and rocky places. • S.E. France, N.W. Italy.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. F. messanensis} Rafin. in Desv.,{\i  Jour. Bot. Appl.}{\b  4}: 272 (1814). Stem 15-30 cm. Leaves 7-10, linear, the lowest 4-9 cm × 3-7 mm, usually opposite, the rest alternate, or the upper sometimes in a whorl of 3. Perianth broadly campanulate; segments yellowish or brownish outside, tessellated or marked with brownish-purple, sometimes with greenish fascia, the outer 22-32 × 8-15 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acute or obtuse, the inner 12-17 mm wide, apiculate or rounded. Nectaries 6-10 × 3-4 mm, ovate-lanceolate, green, blackening on drying, 3-5 mm above the base of the perianth-segment. Filaments 10-13 mm, sparsely papillose. Style 10 mm, 3-fid, the branches 5-6 mm, smooth. Capsule not winged.{\i  Open woods, scrub and grassy places. S. & W. parts of Balkan peninsula, Kriti; S. Italy and Sicilia.} Al Cr Gr It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b messanensis} (incl.{\i  F. sphaciotica }Gand.): Upper leaves usually in a whorl of three. Perianth expanded at the mouth, usually tessellated; inner segments apiculate. 2n = 24. {\i Throughout the range of the species except the north}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b gracilis} (Ebel) Rix,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 356 (1978) ({\i Lilium gracile} Ebel,{\i  F. gracilis} (Ebel) Ascherson & Graebner {\i F. neglecta} Parl.): Upper leaves alternate. Perianth not expanded at the mouth, rarely tessellated; inner segments usually rounded at apex. 2n = 24. •{\i  W. & S. Jugoslavia, N. Albania}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. F. epirotica} Turrill ex Rix, {\i Kew Bull. }{\b 30}: 160 (1975). Stem 4-10 cm. Leaves 6-8, somewhat glaucous, the lowest 3-6 cm × 8-15 mm, sometimes opposite, linear-lanceolate, the rest alternate, linear, the upper sometimes in a whorl of 3. Perianth broadly campanulate, not expanded at the mouth; segments dark brownish-purple outside and without fascia, yellowish and tessellated with reddish-brown inside, the outer 20-25 × 5-7 mm, narrowly oblong, acute, the inner oblanceolate, acute, 8-10 mm wide. Nectaries 10 × 3 mm, ovate-lanceolate, green, 5 mm above the base of the perianth-segment. Filaments 8-9 mm, papillose; style 8 mm, 3-fid, the branches 3 mm, smooth. Capsule not winged.{\i  Serpentine screes,} 2500 {\i m. • N.W. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. F. gussichiae} (Degen & Dörfler) Rix, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 356 (1978) ({\i F. graeca} var.{\i  gussichiae} Degen & Dörfler). Stem 20-30 cm. Leaves 5-8, glaucous, alternate, the lowest 6 cm × 15 mm, ovate, amplexicaul, the rest narrower. Flowers 1-3, in an elongated raceme. Perianth broadly campanulate; segments green, often tinged with reddish-brown but not tessellated, obtuse, the outer 30 × 8 mm, the inner c. 14 mm wide. Nectary 5 × 3 mm, ovate, green, 6 mm above the base of the perianth-segment. Filaments 10 mm, papillose. Style 9 mm, 3-fid, the branches 4 mm, smooth, slender. Capsule winged.{\i  Woods, shady rocks and subalpine pastures. • Macedonia.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b F. skorpilii} Velen.,{\i  Fl. Bulg., Suppl.} 269 (1898), reported from S. Bulgaria (Rila and Rodopi), differs from {\b 8} in its narrower leaves and smaller flowers. It is known only from the original collection and needs further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. F. graeca} Boiss. & Spruner in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 7}): 104 (1846). Leaves 5-12, sometimes glaucous, the lowest 3·5-11 cm × 11-25 mm, ovate to lanceolate, often opposite, the rest narrower, opposite or alternate, the uppermost sometimes in a whorl of 3. Flowers 1-2(-3), in a condensed raceme. Perianth broadly campanulate; segments green or purplish, tessellated, often heavily, with purplish-brown, obtuse or acute, the outer 18-35 × 7-10 mm, the inner 12-14 mm wide. Nectaries 4-5·5 mm, 5-6 mm above the base of the perianth-segment. Filaments 7-10 mm, papillose. Style 7-10 mm, 3-fid, the branches 3-6 mm smooth. Capsule without wings. 2n = 24.{\i  Open woods and scrub. • S. part of Balkan peninsula and Aegean region.} Al Cr Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b graeca} ({\i F. guicciardii} Heldr. & Sart.): Stem 6-20 (-30) cm. Lowest leaves up to 15 mm wide, often opposite, the rest alternate. Perianth-segments 18-28 mm, dark purple or blackish. Nectaries lanceolate to linear.{\i  S. & E. Greece, Kriti.} ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b thessala} (Boiss.) Rix, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 76}: 356 (1978) ({\i F. ionica} Halácsy,{\i  F. thessalica }Spruner): Lowest leaves opposite, up to 25 mm wide, the intermediate opposite or subopposite, the upper in a whorl of 3. Perianth-segments 28-38 mm, green, usually lightly tessellated. Nectaries ovate to ovate-lanceolate.{\i  S. Albania, S. Jugoslavia, N.W. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. F. davisii} Turrill,{\i  Kew Bull.}{\b  1940}: 265 (1940). Like {\b 9}({\b a}) but stem 10-20(-25) cm; leaves shining green, not glaucous, the lowest up to 32 mm wide; perianth-segments usually without fascia; style 7-9 mm, 3-fid, the branches 3-7 mm.{\i  Scrub, olive-groves and cornfields. • S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. F. rhodocanakis} Orph. ex Baker,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}){\b  16}: 323 (1878). Like {\b 9}({\b a}) but perianth-segments dark brownish
\par

\par
32}
\par