{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min34}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min35}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords840}{\nofchars4792}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. M. cavendishii}{\fs28  Lamb. ex Paxton,}{\i\fs28  Paxton's Mag. Bot.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 : 51 (1837). Glabrous except for pubescent scape and inflorescence-axis. Suckers present. False stems 2-3 m. Leaves 120-200 \'d7 40-60 cm. Inflorescence up to 1 m, pendent. Bracts c. 10 cm, broadly ovate, dull reddish-purple. Perianth-tube 2-3 cm, yellowish-white. Stamens shorter than perianth-tube; anthers longer than filaments. Berry 12-18 cm, oblong, obscurely trigonous, more or less curved, bright yellow, later brown, recurved upwards towards base of inflorescence; seeds abortive; pulp firm, pale yellow.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated on a small scale in the warmest parts of Europe for its fruits}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 bananas}{\fs28 ). [Az Cr ?Gr Hs Si.] (}{\i\fs28 Originated under the influence of human selection in India or S.E. Asia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par   The dimensions given refer to the species as seen in Europe. Other cultivars grown in the tropics can have much larger false stems and leaves.
\par 
\par   It seems almost impossible to devise a satisfactory scientific nomenclature for cultivated bananas. It is generally agreed that the great majority of cultivars are either autotriploids (with a few autotetraploids) of}{\i\fs28  M. acuminata}{\fs28  Colla, or else triploid hybrids between}{\i\fs28  M. acuminata}{\fs28  and }{\i\fs28 M. balbisiana}{\fs28  Colla. The name }{\i\fs28 M. paradisiaca}{\fs28  L. is based on a cultivar of the latter (hybrid) origin, as is also the later name }{\i\fs28 M. sapientum }{\fs28 L., which may therefore be regarded as a synonym. It seems probable, however, that all bananas cultivated for fruit in Europe (as well as the great majority of those imported to Europe) are autopolyploids deriving solely from }{\i\fs28 M. acuminata}{\fs28 . They can hardly, therefore, be included under }{\i\fs28 M}{\fs28 . \'d7 }{\i\fs28 paradisiaca}{\fs28 ; on the other hand they are much closer to it in morphology than they are to}{\i\fs28  M. acuminata}{\fs28 , and they are virtually isolated genetically from the latter. The name }{\i\fs28 M. cavendishii}{\fs28  Lamb. ex Paxton is therefore used, as being apparently the earliest binomial which can with confidence be regarded as based on a cultivated }{\i\fs28 acuminata}{\fs28 -triploid. It must be realized, however, that the context is one in which the species-concept has little relevance.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 201.           ZINGIBERACEAE}{\fs28 
\par }{\fs24  Edit.D.A. Webb. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  Rhizomatous, perennial herbs. Leaves alternate, with sheathing base, short petiole and entire lamina, the sheath produced distally on either side of the petiole as a ligule. Flowers hermaphrodite, zygomorphic. Perianth with distinct calyx and corolla, the members of each whorl connate, at least at the base. Stamens 3-5, inserted at apex of corolla-tube; one (the adaxial of the inner whorl) fertile and with normal structure; the others represented by staminodes, of which the two of the inner whorl are united to form a conspicuous, petaloid labellum on the abaxial side of the flower. Ovary inferior; seeds numerous.
\par 
\par   The structure of the flower is confusing. In many species (including the only European representative) the calyx could be mistaken for a bracteole, the corolla-lobes resemble staminodes, the staminodes are petaloid, and the style is invisible without dissection.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.          Hedychium}{\fs28       Koenig
\par }{\fs24  By D.A. Webb. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Stems simple, erect, leafy. Leaves distichous, mostly basal, but with very long sheathing base, so as to appear evenly distributed up the stem. Flowers in terminal, bracteate spikes. Calyx narrowly tubular, not lobed. Corolla-tube long and slender; lobes linear to oblanceolate. Lateral staminodes petaloid, similar to labellum but smaller. Ovary 3-locular. Fruit a subglobose, loculicidal capsule; seeds remaining }{\i\fs28 in situ}{\fs28  long after dehiscence.
\par 
\par    Literature: K. Schumann in Engler,}{\i\fs28  Pflanzenreich}{\b\fs28  20}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 IV. 46}{\fs28 ): 40-59 (1904).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. H. gardneranum}{\fs28  Sheppard ex Ker-Gawler, }{\i\fs28 Bot. Reg.}{\b\fs28  9}{\fs28 : t. 774 (1824). Glabrous. Stems 1-2 m, stout. Leaves c. 30 \'d7 15 cm, elliptic-oblong, acuminate, with truncate, subamplexicaul base; petiole appressed to stem. Spike 20-30 cm; flowers very fragrant. Calyx 3 cm, membranous. Corolla-tube 4-5 cm, very slender. lobes c. 4 cm, linear, green, pendent. Staminodes pale yellow, the two lateral 3 \'d7 0\'b77 cm, narrowly oblong, the labellum 3 \'d7 2 cm, with broadly elliptical, 2- or 3-lobed limb and short orange claw. Filament of fertile stamen 5-6 cm, bright orange-red, deeply canaliculate; anther c. 0\'b77 cm. Style filiform, concealed in the groove of the filament; stigma green, capitate, just appearing above the anther. Seeds red, later grey, with aril.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated ground and woodland-margins. Extensively naturalized in the A\'e7ores.}{\fs28  [Az.] (}{\i\fs28 Himalaya.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 202.      CANNACEAE}{\fs28 
\par }{\fs24  Edit.D.A. Webb. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Rhizomatous, perennial herbs. Leaves basal, distichous, with sheathing base, sometimes distinct petiole, and entire lamina. Flowers hermaphrodite, asymmetrical. Perianth of distinct calyx and corolla, each with 3 segments. Androecium of 1-4 petaloid staminodes and one asymmetrical member, which is mainly petaloid but bears at one side near the apex a single fertile anther-lobe; style petaloid, adnate in its lower half to the semi-fertile stamen. Ovary inferior, 3-locular; fruit a capsule; seeds numerous.
\par 
\par   Literature: F. Kranzlin in Engler,}{\i\fs28  Pflanzenreich}{\b\fs28  56}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 IV. 47}{\fs28 ): 1-77 (1912).
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.           Canna}{\fs28         L.
\par }{\fs24  By D.A. Webb. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Leaf-bases convolute, forming an erect false stem as in}{\i\fs28  Musa,}{\fs28  up the centre of which grows the scape. Flowers in terminal, bracteate, spike-like panicles. Sepals usually herbaceous, free, equal, persistent in fruit. Petals often somewhat unequal, free for most of their length, but united with each other and the staminodes near the base to form a short tube. Staminodes large and brightly-coloured. Ovary and capsule verrucose.
\par 
\par    The large-flowered plants of this genus widely used for decorative bedding in S. Europe are complex hybrids, mostly of obscure origin;}{\b\fs28  C. flaccida}{\fs28  Salisb., }{\i\fs28 Icon. Stirp. Rar.}{\fs28  t. 2 (1791), from the S.E. United states, is perhaps the most important parent species.
\par 
\par 324}
\par }