{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 7 Labellum undivided ..................................................................... {\b 15. saccata}
\par
7 Labellum 3-lobed
\par
8 Spike long-cylindrical; spur saccate; base of labellum
\par
  with 2 inconspicuous ridges ........................................................... {\b 16. patens}
\par
8 Spike ovoid or shortly cylindrical; spur conic-
\par
  cylindrical; base of labellum with 2 conspicuous ridges ............. {\b 17. spitzelii}
\par
6 Two lateral outer perianth-segments deflexed, rarely 
\par
  erecto-patent; spur patent; bracts 1- to 3-veined
\par
9 Flowers pink to purple; outer perianth-segments ovate 
\par
  or oblong-lanceolate, obtuse to acuminate .................................. {\b 18. mascula}
\par
9 Flowers pale yellow; outer perianth-segments ovate-
\par
  oblong, obtuse
\par
10 Spur slightly shorter than ovary; spike dense; leaves 
\par
   oblong or oblong-obovate, distributed along lower half
\par
   of stem .......................................................................................... {\b 19. pallens}
\par
10 Spur as long as or longer than ovary; spike lax to dense;
\par
   leaves lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, crowded at 
\par
   base of stem .......................................................................... {\b 20. provincialis}
\par
1 All 5 perianth-segments ± convergent into a galea 
\par
11 Labellum entire .................................................................... {\b 1. papilionacea} 
\par
11 Labellum 3-lobed
\par
12 Spur patent or somewhat curved upwards; labellum about
\par
   as wide as or somewhat wider than long
\par
13 Spur filiform; flowers at apex of spike opening first ...................... {\b 2. boryi}
\par
13 Spur cylindrical; flowers at base of spike opening first
\par
14 Spur about as long as to slightly longer than labellum .................. {\b 3. morio}
\par
14 Spur much longer than labellum ............................................. {\b 4. longicornu}
\par
12 Spur directed downwards; labellum longer than wide
\par
15 Middle lobe of labellum entire or denticulate, without
\par
   purple spots
\par
16 Stem with 4-7 leaves; leaves linear to narrowly lanceolate;
\par
   spur conical, slightly incurved and not narrowly 
\par
   attenuate towards apex ............................................................. {\b 5. coriophora}
\par
16 Stem with sheaths only; leaves oblong-lanceolate; spur
\par
   subhamate-incurved, narrowly attenuate towards apex ................... {\b 6. sancta}
\par
15 Middle lobe of labellum deeply emarginate to 2-fid,
\par
   usually with purple spots
\par
17 Bracts somewhat shorter than to about as long as ovary;
\par
   median lobe of labellum not apiculate between the 
\par
   lobules
\par
18 Outer perianth-segments 3-3·5 mm; spike ovoid, becoming
\par
   cylindrical; spur ¼-½ as long as ovary ..................................... {\b 7. ustulata}
\par
18 Outer perianth-segments 6-12 mm; spike conical,
\par
   becoming ovoid; spur at least ½ as long as ovary
\par
19 Stem 15-45 cm; flowers pale violet-lilac; middle lobe
\par
   of labellum cuneate-obovate, emarginate; spur ½ as 
\par
   long as ovary ............................................................................... {\b 8. tridentata}
\par
19 Stem 7-20 cm; flowers white or greenish-pink; middle 
\par
   lobe of labellum orbicular-obovate, usually not 
\par
   emarginate; spur sometimes longer than ovary ................................ {\b 9. lactea}
\par
17 Bracts much shorter than ovary; middle lobe of labellum
\par
   with an apiculum, teeth or laciniae between the lobules
\par
20 Lobules of middle lobe of labellum linear, with teeth 
\par
   or linear laciniae between them
\par
21 Base of labellum with 2 triangular lamellae, scarcely 
\par
   papillose; lateral lobes and lobules of the middle lobe
\par
   of the labellum ± flat, acute ........................................................... {\b 10. italica}
\par
21 Base of labellum without lamellae, minutely papillose;
\par
   lateral lobes and lobules of middle lobe of labellum 
\par
   subfalcate, obtuse ............................................................................ {\b 11. simia}
\par
20 Lobules of middle lobe of labellum ovate or oblong,
\par
   with an apiculum or teeth between them
\par
22 Perianth-segments brownish-purple ........................................ {\b 14. purpurea}
\par
22 Perianth-segments pink, whitish or yellowish-green
\par
23 Spur narrowly cylindrical, ½ as long as ovary; galea
\par
   whitish or greyish-pink; labellum purple, white at base ............ {\b 12. militaris}
\par
23 Spur broadly cylindrical, ¼-½ as long as ovary;
\par
   galea and labellum yellowish-green ....................................... {\b 13. punctulata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. papilionacea} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1242 (1759). Tubers globose. Stem 20-40 cm, erect, with basal rosette of leaves and sheaths above. Leaves lanceolate to linear-lanceolate. Spike ovoid, lax, few-flowered, rarely cylindrical and rather dense. Bracts lanceolate, 3- to 4-veined, longer than ovary. Flowers purple, rarely red or brownish. All perianth-segments convergent into a galea; outer 10-15(-18) mm, ovate-oblong, the inner similar. Labellum 12-16(-25) × 12-16(-25) mm, undivided, unguiculate, suborbicular or obcordate, constricted at the base, rarely ovate-flabellate or obscurely 3-lobed. Spur deflexed, cylindrical, shorter than ovary. 2n = 32.{\i  Grassland; calcicole. S. Europe.} ?Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Var.{\i  grandiflora} Boiss., from Spain, has the labellum 20-25 × 20-25 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. O. boryi} Reichenb. fil.,{\i  Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  13}: 19 (1851). Tubers globose. Stem 20-45 cm, with a basal rosette of leaves and crowded sheaths above. Leaves lanceolate to oblong-obovate. Spike short, often capitate, dense, the distal flowers opening first. Bracts lanceolate, ½ as long as ovary. Flowers violet. Outer perianth-segments c. 7 mm, oblong-ovate, more or less patent; inner 4-5 mm, ovate. Labellum c. 8 × 8 mm, suborbicular, with 3 subequal lobes; middle lobe entire, longer than the lateral. Spur c. 15 × 2 mm, filiform, obtuse, somewhat shorter than ovary, patent or somewhat curved upwards. •{\i  S. Greece, Kriti.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. O. morio} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 940 (1753). Tubers subglobose or ellipsoid. Stem 5-50 cm, erect, with a basal rosette of leaves and crowded sheaths above. Leaves broadly lanceolate to oblong-ovate. Spike shortly oblong or pyramidal, rarely cylindrical, the basal flowers opening first. Bracts lanceolate, with several veins, shorter to slightly longer than ovary. Flowers purplish-violet, red, pink, green or white. All perianth-segments convergent into a galea; outer oblong-ovate, rarely divaricate, the inner somewhat smaller. Labellum up to 10 × 10 mm, usually glabrous, suborbicular to reniform, shallowly 3-lobed, sometimes with darker spots; middle lobe dilated, truncate, sometimes emarginate, usually longer than the lateral. Spur cylindrical, almost equalling to slightly longer than the labellum, patent or somewhat curved upwards. 2n = 36.{\i  Europe, northwards to N. England, S. Norway and Estonia, and eastwards to C. Russia.} All except Az Cr Fa Fe Is Rs (N, E) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Tubers 3 (1 subsessile, 2 long-stipitate); labellum 
\par
  plicate; spur clavate, wider towards the apex, truncate
\par
  or emarginate .......................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b champagneuxii}
\par
1 Tubers 2, shortly stipitate; labellum flat; spur not 
\par
  clavate, narrowed towards apex, obtuse or acuminate
\par
2 Spur usually shorter than ovary; outer perianth-
\par
  segments 8-10 mm ................................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b morio}
\par
2 Spur usually as long as ovary; outer perianth-segments 
\par
  6-8 mm .................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b picta}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b morio}: Tubers 2, shortly stipitate. Outer perianth-segments 8-10 mm. Labellum flat. Spur narrowed towards apex, obtuse or acuminate, usually shorter than ovary. 2n = 36.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species, but absent from much of the south-east.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b picta} (Loisel.) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} ed. 2, 167 (1894): Tubers 2, shortly stipitate. Outer perianth-segments 6-8 mm. Labellum flat. Spur narrowed towards apex, obtuse or acuminate, usually as long as ovary.{\i  S. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b champagneuxii} (Barn.) Camus,{\i  Icon. Orchid. Eur}.
\par

\par
338}
\par