{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i mountain heaths. Arctic Fennoscandia.} No Su. ({\i E. & E.C. Asia, North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The European plant belongs to subsp.{\b  oligantha} (Turcz.) Hultén, {\i Lunds Univ. Årsskr.} nov. ser., {\b 39}({\b 1}): 481 (1943) ({\i P. oligantha} Turcz., {\i Lysiella oligantha} (Turcz.) Nevski), which is also found in E. Siberia. Subsp.{\i  obtusata}, which is confined to America, has an obovate leaf, a laxer spike, a longer, narrower labellum and a longer spur. Plants from E. North America are very distinct from those from Europe and Asia, but intermediates are found in Alaska.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 14.        Chamorchis}     L.C.M. Richard
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Tubers 2, ellipsoid. Leaves all basal; stem without scale-leaves. Perianth-segments connivent into a galea, the three outer equal, somewhat longer than the inner. Labellum slightly longer than the other perianth-segments, ovate, entire or shallowly 3-lobed. Spur absent. Rostellum inconspicuous. Viscidia distinct; bursicle simple.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. alpina} (L.) L. C. M. Richard, {\i Orchid. Eur. Annot.} 35 (1817) ({\i Herminium alpinum} (L.) Lindley). Glabrous. Stem 4-10 cm. Leaves 4-8, about equalling stem, linear, erect. Flowers 3-10 in a short, rather lax spike. Perianth-segments greenish-yellow, variably tinged with purplish-brown, the outer 3·5 mm, broadly oblong, the inner narrower and slightly shorter. Labellum 4 mm, yellowish-green. 2n = 42.{\i  Mountain pastures; calcicole. • Fennoscandia; Alps; Carpathians.} Au Cz Fe Ga Ge He It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 15.         Gymnadenia}        R.Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.M. Moore. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Tubers laterally compressed, palmately lobed. Stem leafy. Flowers in a spike. Outer lateral perianth-segments patent or curved downwards, the outer median connivent with the inner lateral to form a galea. Labellum shallowly 3-lobed, directed downwards. Spur long, slender. Column short,erect. Rostellum long. Viscidia 2, long, linear; bursicles absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Spur 11-18 mm, longer than ovary ................................................ {\b 1. conopsea}
\par
Spur 4-5 mm, not longer than ovary ......................................... {\b 2. odoratissima}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. conopsea} (L.) R. Br. in Aiton, {\i Hort. Kew}. ed. 2, {\b 5}: 191 (1813). Tubers with 3-6 obtuse lobes. Stem 15-65 cm, erect, glabrous, with 2-3 brownish basal sheaths. Leaves 4-8, linear-lanceolate, denticulate, the lower 6-20(-25) cm, slightly conduplicate and keeled, obtuse or subacute, the upper smaller, acuminate, bract-like. Spike (3-)6-16 cm, cylindrical, sometimes pyramidal at first, many-flowered. Flowers pinkish- or reddish-lilac, rarely purple or white, usually fragrant. Perianth-segments 4-5 mm, obtuse; outer oblong-ovate, patent or curved downwards, the median concave; inner broadly ovate. Labellum 3·5-5 mm, rhombic, the lobes subequal, rounded. Spur 11-18 mm, 1½-2 times as long as ovary, somewhat arcuate, acute, rarely obtuse. 2n = 40, 80, c. 97, c. 117, c. 119.{\i  Grassland, marshes, fens and scrub; somewhat calcicole. Most of Europe except for parts of the south-west and south-east.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Three subspecies have been recognized by J. Bisse,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  67}: 187-188 (1967), based primarily on material from Germany and utilizing leaf-width and -disposition, spike-density, diameter and odour of the flowers, and spur-width. It is uncertain whether the characters used are valid over the whole range of the species and further study is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 2. G. odoratissima} (L.) L. C. M. Richard, {\i Orchid. Eur. Annot.} 35 (1817) ({\i Orchis odoratissima} L.). Like {\b 1} but stem 15-30(-45) cm; leaves linear, acute; perianth-segments 2·5-3 mm, the outer lateral patent; labellum 2·3-3 mm, the lateral lobes much shorter than the middle; spur 4-5 mm, obtuse, as long as or slightly shorter than ovary. 2n = 40.{\i  Grassland; calcicole. From S. Sweden and W.C. Russia southwards to N. Spain, N. Italy and C. Jugoslavia.} Au Be Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Su.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A record from N. England requires confirmation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 16.        Pseudorchis}         Séguier 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Leucorchis} E.H.F. Meyer)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.M. Moore. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\b Gymnadenia} but with outer and inner perianth-segments more or less connivent to form a galea. Spur short.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Tubers divided to base; leaves 4-6; bracts 3-veined;
\par
  spur 1/3-1/2 as long as ovary, cylindrical, obtuse ............................. {\b 1. albida} 
\par
Tubers divided to about 1/2 way to base; leaves 3-4; bracts 
\par
  1-veined; spur c. 1/2 as long as ovary, filiform, acute ................... {\b 2. frivaldii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. albida} (L.) Á. & D. Löve,{\i  Taxon}{\b  18}: 312 (1969). ({\i Leucorchis albida} (L.) E. H. F. Meyer, {\i Gymnadenia albida} (L.) L. C. M. Richard). Tubers divided to base, with the slender cylindrical divisions thickened distally. Stem 12-30(-40) cm, erect, glabrous, with 2-3 membranous sheathing scales at base. Lower leaves c. 4, 2·5-8 × 1-1·5 cm, obtuse; upper leaves 1-2, narrower, acute. Spike 3-7 cm, cylindrical, dense, many-flowered; bracts 3-veined. Flowers 2-3 mm, yellowish- or greenish-white. Outer perianth-segments obtuse, the lateral obliquely ovate, the median ovate, concave; inner slightly shorter, oblong-ovate, obtuse. Labellum 3-lobed; lateral lobes linear-lanceolate, acuminate; middle lobe larger, rather obtuse. Spur 2(-2·5) mm, 1/3-1/2 as long as ovary, cylindrical, obtuse, thickened distally and somewhat curved downwards.{\i  Damp meadows, pastures and grassy heaths. Europe, southwards to the Pyrenees, S. Appennini and S. Bulgaria, but absent from the U.S.S.R. except the extreme north and west}. Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He †Ho Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b albida}: Lower leaves usually oblong-spathulate, erect. Spike very dense; bracts equalling ovary, with minutely denticulate margin. Lateral outer perianth-segments 2-3 mm. •{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species, northwards to C. Sweden}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b straminea} (Fernald) Á. & D. Löve, {\i loc. cit.} (1969) ({\i Leucorchis albida} subsp. {\i straminea }(Fernald) Á. Löve): Lower leaves usually ovate-oblong, more or less patent. Spike often shorter and less dense than in subsp. ({\b a}). Bracts exceeding ovary, with entire or minutely crenulate margin. Lateral outer perianth-segments more than 3 mm. 2n = 40, 42.{\i  N. Europe, southwards to S. Norway}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. frivaldii} (Hampe ex Griseb.) P. F. Hunt,{\i  Orchid Rev.}{\b  79}: 141 (1971) ({\i Leucorchis frivaldii} (Hampe ex Griseb.) Schlechter). Like {\b 1} but leaves 3-4, narrower, the upper bract-like; spike shorter; bracts 1-veined; flowers rather larger, white (rarely pale pink). •{\i  Mountains of Balkan peninsula, from Crna Gora to N. Greece; one station in S. Carpathians.} ?Al Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 17.        Nigritella}     L.C.M. Richard 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.M. Moore. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Tubers digitate. Stem with numerous leaves. Flowers in a dense spike, vanilla-scented. Perianth-segments free, subequal.
\par

\par
332}
\par