{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Labellum entire. Spur short. Column short. Rostellum small. Viscidia small; bursicle very rudimentary. Ovary straight.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: G. Beauverd, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Genève }ser. 2, {\b 17}: 335-338 (1926).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. nigra} (L.) Reichenb. fil., {\i Icon Fl. Germ. }{\b 13-14}: 102 (1851) ({\i Gymnadenia nigra} (L.) Reichenb.). Stems 5-30 cm, somewhat angled, rather slender. Leaves 3-20 cm, linear to linear-lanceolate, acute to subobtuse, canaliculate, with denticulate margins. Spike 10-25 cm, many-flowered. Flowers 5-10 mm. Perianth-segments lanceolate to sublinear, acute. Labellum subtriangular to lanceolate-ovate, acuminate, entire or sometimes crenulate. Spur saccate, obtuse, violet or whitish. 2n = 64.{\i  Meadows; somewhat calcicole. Norway and Sweden; mountains of Europe southwards to N. Spain, C. Appennini and S. Greece.} Al Au Bu Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju No Rm Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lateral inner perianth-segments c. ½ as wide as the
\par
  outer; flowers usually blackish-crimson ................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b nigra}
\par
1 Lateral inner perianth-segments about as wide as the 
\par
  outer; flowers red to whitish
\par
2 Spike ± cylindrical; basal leaves 7-12 ................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b rubra}
\par
2 Spike conical; basal leaves 12-18 .................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b corneliana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nigra}: Basal leaves 7-10. Spike conical, later elongating somewhat. Flowers blackish-crimson, rarely red, white or yellowish. Inner perianth-segments 2- to 3-veined, the lateral c. ½ as wide as the outer. {\i Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b rubra} (Wettst.) Beauverd, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Genève} ser. 2, {\b 17}: 337 (1926) ({\i N. rubra} (Wettst.) K. Richter): Basal leaves 7-10. Spike more or less cylindrical. Flowers red. Inner perianth-segments 3-veined, the lateral about as wide as the outer. {\i C. & E. Alps; mountains of Romania}.
\par
 ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b corneliana} Beauverd, {\i op. cit.} 336 (1926): Basal leaves 12-18. Spike conical, later elongating somewhat. Flowers white, tinged with pink. Inner perianth-segments 1-veined, the lateral about as wide as the outer. •{\i  S.W. Alps}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 18.     Coeloglossum}       Hartman
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.M. Moore. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Tubers 2, ovoid, palmately lobed. Basal and cauline leaves present. Flowers in a lax spike. Outer lateral perianth-segments erecto-patent, the outer median connivent with the inner lateral to form a galea. Labellum 3-dentate at apex. Spur very short. Column short. Rostellum 3-angled, with 2 lateral lobes. Viscidia 2, oblong; bursicle very rudimentary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. viride} (L.) Hartman,{\i  Handb. Skand. Fl. }329 (1820). Tubers with 2-4 tapering segments. Stem 6-35(-40) cm, angled above, with brownish, sheathing basal scales. Leaves 2-5, 3-8(-11) cm, the basal suborbicular to elliptic-ovate or -lanceolate, obtuse, the upper smaller, lanceolate, acute. Spike 2-10 (-15) cm, cylindrical, 5- to 25-flowered. Flowers inconspicuous, greenish, sometimes with reddish or purplish-brown tint. Perianth-segments 4·5-6(-7) mm, subequal; outer ovate, subobtuse, the median concave; inner narrower, linear, subobtuse. Labellum 6-8(-9) mm, obcuneate, flat, yellowish or yellowish-brown, the middle apical tooth shorter than the lateral. Spur c. 2 mm, saccate, obtuse, greenish-white. 2n = 40.{\i  Grassland and wood-margins. Europe southwards to C. Spain, S. Appennini, S. Bulgaria and Krym, but only on mountains in the south.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 19.      Dactylorhiza}      Necker ex Nevski
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By R. de Soó. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Tubers 2-3, usually palmately 2- to 5-fid, more or less elongated at the apex, rarely oblong-cylindrical and shallowly 2(-4)-fid. Perianth-segments free, equal or the inner smaller, patent or deflexed, rarely convergent. Labellum porrect or slightly decurved. Spur present. Lower bracts herbaceous. Rostellum 3-lobed, the middle lobe short, lamelliform. Viscidia in one simple bursicle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A taxonomically difficult genus in which many species show marked variation within and between different populations and in which interspecific hybrids are both frequent and of generally high fertility. Amongst the commonest hybrids are{\b  8} × {\b 4}, {\b 8} × {\b 6}({\b e}), {\b 8} × {\b 12}, {\b 6}({\b d}) × {\b 4}, {\b 6}({\b d}) × {\b 12},{\b  6}({\b e}) × {\b 11}({\b b}) and {\b 12} × {\b 11}({\b b}); hybrid plants can be more frequent, and more vigorous, than the parent species in a population, especially in the cases of {\b 6}({\b e}) × {\b 11}({\b b}) and {\b 6}({\b e}) × {\b 12}. In some instances populations of more or less stabilized hybrid segregates are known, as in {\b 6}({\b e}) × {\b 12}, while it has been suggested that some taxa, such as some subspecies of {\b 6}, have originated in this way. Intergeneric hybrids are known between {\b 6}({\b d}) and {\b 6}({\b e}) and both {\i Coeloglossum viride} and {\i Gymnadenia conopsea}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: J. Heslop-Harrison,{\i  Trans. Proc. Bot. Soc. Edinb.}{\b  35}: 26-66 (1948);{\i  Svensk Bot. Tidskr.} {\b 45}: 608-635 (1951); {\i Watsonia}{\b  2}: 371-391 (1953);{\i  Ber. Geobot. Inst. Rübel} ({\i Zürich}){\b  1953}: 53-82 (1954). E. Nelson, {\i Monographie und Ikonographie der Gattung} Dactylorhiza. Zürich. 1976. R. von Soó,{\i  Bot. Arch.} ({\i Leipzig}) {\b 23}: 61-83 (1928); {\i Ann. Univ. Sci. Budapest. Rolando Eötvös}{\b  3}: 335-357 (1960);{\i  Jahresb. Naturw. Ver. Wuppertal}{\b  25}: 37-48 (1972). P. Vermeulen, {\i Studies on Dactylorchids.} Utrecht. 1947. K. Senghas, {\i Jahresb. Naturw. Ver. Wuppertal}{\b  21-22}: 32-67 (1968).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 All 5 perianth-segments convergent into a galea; stem 
\par
  with stolons ....................................................................................... {\b 1. iberica} 
\par
1 Lateral outer perianth-segments not forming part of 
\par
  galea; stolons absent 
\par
2 Tubers shallowly 2- to 4-fid or -dentate at apex
\par
  rarely subentire
\par
3 Stem with 4-5 distant leaves in lower half; spur not 
\par
  more than 15 mm ....................................................................... {\b 2. sambucina}
\par
3 Stem with up to 10 leaves in a lax basal rosette;
\par
  spur 12-25 mm ............................................................................. {\b 3. sulphurea} 
\par
2 Tubers deeply 2- to 5-fid
\par
4 Lateral outer perianth-segments patent; stem usually
\par
  solid .......................................................................... ({\b 11-13}). {\b maculata} group
\par
4 Lateral outer perianth-segments suberect; stem usually
\par
  hollow ........................................................................ ({\b 4-10}). {\b incarnata} group
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 1. D. iberica} (Bieb.) Soó, {\i Nom. Nov. Gen. Dactylorhiza} 3 (1962) ({\i Orchis iberica} Bieb.). Tubers cylindrical to napiform, long-attenuate, 2- to 3-fid at apex. Stem 25-50 cm, erect, with 3-5 distant leaves in lower half, with stolons. Leaves erectopatent to suberect, linear-lanceolate, without dark spots. Raceme ovoid or cylindrical. Bracts narrowly lanceolate, as long as or longer than ovary. Flowers pink; labellum with purple spots; spur white towards the base. Perianth-segments oblong or ovate-lanceolate, acute, all convergent into a galea; outer 8-10 mm, 3-veined, the inner up to 8 mm, 1-veined. Labellum up to 10 × 7-8 mm, patent, obovate, cuneate-flabellate at base, 3-lobed (rarely entire) at apex, minutely papillose-puberulent; lobes equal, the middle narrowly triangular, the lateral broadly triangular, crenulate. Spur narrowly cylindrical, curved, up to c. ½ as long as ovary.{\i  Marshes. Mountains of Greece and Krym.} Gr Rs (K) ?Tu. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par
333}
\par