{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 flowers purplish-red; perianth-segments and labellum 6-7 mm; spur conical, ½ as long as ovary.{\i  Fens and calcareous grassland. • Norway and N. Sweden.} No Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. D. majalis} (Reichenb.) P. F. Hunt & Summerhayes{\i  Watsonia}{\b  6}: 130 (1965) ({\i D. latifolia} (L.) Soó pro parte). Tubers deeply 2- to 5-fid, somewhat elongated at apex. Stem up to 75 cm, with 4-8 distant leaves. Leaves erecto-patent, with or without brown spots, the upper reaching or exceeding the base of the inflorescence. Raceme ovoid to cylindrical. Outer perianth-segments 6-12 mm, ovate- to oblong-lanceolate, obtuse. Inner perianth-segments obliquely lanceolate to ovate. Labellum 5-14 × 6-15 mm, suborbicular or wider than long, entire, or 3-lobed with lateral lobes ovate-triangular, rounded or truncate crenulate, and middle lobe triangular, shorter to longer than the lateral. Spur deflexed, conical-cylindrical, ½ as long as to almost as long as ovary. 2n = 80. {\i Damp meadows and fens. W. & C. Europe; Baltic region and N. Russia.} Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves with small dark spots near apex or unspotted;
\par
  labellum subentire or obscurely 3-lobed
\par
2 Outer perianth-segments 6-7 mm; labellum 5-7 mm, with
\par
  irregular dark lines or spots ........................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b purpurella}
\par
2 Outer perianth-segments 9-10 mm; labellum 10-12 mm,
\par
  with a central cluster of small spots ........................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b praetermissa}
\par
1 Leaves usually with large or irregular spots
\par
3 Lower leaves elliptical or obovate, widest at or above
\par
  the middle; labellum usually subentire .............................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b alpestris}
\par
3 Lower leaves lanceolate to oblong-ovate, widest at or 
\par
  below the middle; labellum usually distinctly 3-lobed
\par
4 Flowers purplish-lilac; middle lobe of labellum without
\par
  markings .............................................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b majalis}
\par
4 Flowers deep violet-purple; middle lobe of labellum with
\par
  broken loop or line markings ....................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b occidentalis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b majalis} ({\i O. latifolia} L. pro parte): Stem up to 60 cm. Lower leaves broadly lanceolate, oblong or oblong-ovate, usually widest at or below the middle, with large or irregular spots. Flowers purplish-lilac. Labellum 9-10 mm, usually 3-lobed, rarely subentire; middle lobe without markings. Early-flowering.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b occidentalis} (Pugsley) P. D. Sell, {\i Acta Fac. Rer. Nat. Univ. Comen. Bot.}{\b  14}: 19 (1968): Stem up to 25 cm. Lower leaves broadly lanceolate, oblong or oblong-ovate, usually widest at or below the middle, usually with large or irregular spots. Flowers deep violet-purple. Labellum 9-10 mm, 3-lobed or subentire; middle lobe with broken loop or line markings. Early-flowering. 2n = 80. •{\i  Britain and Ireland}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b alpestris} (Pugsley) Senghas,{\i  Jahresb. Naturw. Ver. Wuppertal}{\b  21-22}: 51 (1968): Stem up to 30 cm. Lower leaves elliptical or obovate, widest at or above the middle, with large or irregular spots. Flowers purplish-lilac. Labellum 9-10 mm subentire, rarely 3-lobed; middle lobe without markings. Late flowering. •{\i  Alps, Pyrenees}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b purpurella} (T. & T. A. Stephenson) D. Moresby Moore & Soó,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 367 (1978) ({\i Orchis purpurella} T. & T. A. Stephenson, {\i Dactylorhiza purpurella} (T. & T. A. Stephenson) Soó): Stem 20-45 cm. Lower leaves lanceolate, widest below the middle, without spots or with small dark spots near the apex. Flowers bright or deep reddish-purple. Labellum 5-9 mm, subentire or shallowly and equally 3-lobed, with irregular dark lines or spots. 2n = 80. •{\i  N.W. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b praetermissa} (Druce) D. Moresby Moore & Soó,{\i  loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i Orchis praetermissa} Druce): Stem up to 75 cm. Lower leaves lanceolate, widest below middle, without spots. Flowers pale or dull reddish-purple. Labellum 10-14 mm, shallowly and equally 3-lobed, with a central cluster of small spots. 2n = 80. •{\i  N.W. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  D. baltica} (Klinge) Orlova in Min.,{\i  Konsp. Fl. Pskovsk. Obl.} 57 (1970) ({\i Orchis latifolia} subsp.{\i  dunensis} Soó), from parts of N.,C. & E. Europe, is like subsp. ({\b d}) but has narrower leaves, the labellum 5-8 mm and 3-lobed, and the spur usually ¾, not ½ as long as the ovary. It may perhaps merit subspecific status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. D. cordigera} (Fries) Soó,{\i  Nom. Nov. Gen. Dactylorhiza }5 (1962). Tubers deeply 2- to 4-fid, somewhat elongated at apex. Stem up to 30 cm, erect or slightly flexuous, with 2-5 distant leaves. Leaves usually with dark spots on both surfaces; lower lanceolate to obovate, patent; upper lanceolate, erect; uppermost seldom reaching the inflorescence. Raceme ovoid to oblong. Bracts longer than ovary. Flowers purple; labellum dark purple. Outer perianth-segments 8-12 mm, oblong-lanceolate, obtuse. Labellum 7-11 × 8-16 mm. Spur deflexed. 2n = 80.{\i  Mountain grassland. S.E. Europe}. Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spur 8-11 mm, conical-cylindrical, up to ¾ as long as ovary
\par
 ....................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b siculorum}
\par
1 Spur 6-8 mm, saccate, not more than ½ as long as ovary
\par
2 Labellum ± abruptly cuneate at base, ± suborbicular, 
\par
  sometimes shortly 3-lobed at apex .................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b bosniaca} 
\par
2 Labellum widest towards base, broadly rhombic ............ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b cordigera}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cordigera}: Inner perianth-segments oblong. Labellum broadly rhombic, widest at the base, subentire or 3-lobed. Spur 6-8 mm, saccate, up to ½ as long as ovary. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b bosniaca} (G. Beck) Soó, {\i loc. cit.} (1962): Inner perianth-segments obliquely ovate. Labellum abruptly cuneate at the base, more or less suborbicular, sometimes shortly 3-lobed at apex. Spur 6-8 mm, saccate, less than ½ as long as ovary. •{\i  Albania, Jugoslavia, Bulgaria}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b siculorum} (Soó) Soó,{\i  loc. cit.} (1962): Inner perianth-segments obliquely lanceolate. Labellum suborbicular, entire to deeply 3-lobed. Spur 8-11 mm, conical-cylindrical, up to 3/4 as long as ovary. •{\i  Romania and W. Ukraine}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. D. traunsteineri} (Sauter) Soó, {\i loc. cit.} (1962) ({\i Orchis traunsteineri} Sauter). Tubers deeply 2- to 4-fid, filiform-elongated at apex. Stem 20-50 cm, more or less flexuous, narrowly fistular with distant leaves. Leaves linear- to oblong-lanceolate, acute or obtuse. Raceme cylindrical, more or less lax, many-flowered. Bracts longer than ovary. Flowers purple. Outer perianth-segments 7-8 mm, oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, inner segments obliquely ovate. Labellum 5·5-9 mm, porrect, obcordate, subdeltate or suborbicular, subentire to 3-lobed, with deflexed margin; lateral lobes ovate or obovate, rounded, crenulate; middle lobe oblong, obtuse, at least as long as the lateral. Spur pendent, conical-cylindrical, ½ as long to nearly as long as ovary. 2n = 80, 122.{\i  Fens and marshes. N. & C. Europe. }Au Br Cz ?Da Fe Ge Hb He †Ho It Ju No Po Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Raceme few-flowered; labellum 5·5-7 mm, the lateral lobes
\par
  longer than the middle; spur c. 2/3 as long as ovary ....... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b lapponica} 
\par
1 Raceme many-flowered; labellum 7-9 mm, the middle lobe at 
\par
  least as long as the lateral; spur c. ½ as long as ovary
\par
2 Leaves erecto-patent, slightly introrsely curved;
\par
  labellum with middle lobes distinctly longer than the 
\par
  lateral .......................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b traunsteineri} 
\par
2 Leaves often arcuate-patent, strongly curved; labellum 
\par
  subentire to shallowly 3-lobed, with middle lobe 
\par
  slightly longer than the lateral ........................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b curvifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b traunsteineri} ({\i O. ruthei} M. Schulze): Leaves 3-5, erecto-patent, somewhat introrsely curved, usually without spots. Labellum 7-9 mm, 3-lobed; middle lobe longer than lateral
\par

\par
335}
\par