{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 lobes. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species, but rare in parts of the north}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b curvifolia} (Nyl.) Soó,{\i  op. cit}. 6 (1962): Leaves 2-4, often arcuate-patent and strongly curved, keeled on upper surface. Labellum 7-9 mm, subentire to shallowly 3-lobed; middle lobe slightly longer than lateral lobes.{\i  Sweden, Finland, N. Russia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b lapponica} (Laest. ex Hartman) Soó, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 367 (1978) ({\i Orchis lapponica} Laest. ex Hartman): Leaves 2-3, the lower patent, the upper erect. Labellum 5·5-7 mm, 3-lobed; lateral lobes longer than the middle lobe. •{\i  N. Fennoscandia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. D. russowii} (Klinge) J. Holub,{\i  Preslia}{\b  36}: 253 (1964). Like {\b 9}({\b a}) but tubers not elongated at apex; stem more or less erect, with 4-5 leaves; raceme dense; flowers pink; labellum flat, the middle lobe triangular, acute; spur slightly shorter than ovary. 2n = 120. • {\i From E. Germany to C. Russia.} Ge Po Rs (B, C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. D. elata} (Poiret) Soó,{\i  Nom. Nov. Gen. Dactylorhiza} 7 (1962). Tubers deeply 2- to 4-fid, more or less elongated at apex. Stem 30-110 cm, erect, narrowly fistular, with 6-10 distant leaves. Leaves erecto-patent, linear- to ovate-lanceolate, without spots, the uppermost bract-like. Raceme cylindrical, many-flowered, lax or dense. Bracts longer than the ovary. Flowers violet-purple, rarely pink. Outer perianth-segments 10-13 mm, lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate; inner segments obliquely lanceolate. Labellum 9-16 × 12-24 mm, porrect, flat or slightly convex, ovate, suborbicular or flabellate, subentire to 3-lobed, minutely papillose; lateral lobes often deflexed. Spur cylindrical or conical-cylindrical, about as long as ovary. 2n = 80. {\i Wet meadows and marshes. S.W. Europe, extending eastwards to Sicilia.} Co Ga Hs Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Only subsp.{\b  sesquipedalis} (Willd.) Soó,{\i  loc. cit. }(1962), occurs in Europe. Subsp.{\b  elata}, from N. Africa, is distinguished by its smaller flowers, the labellum being as long as or slightly longer than wide, and its saccate-cylindrical spur.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b 11-13}). {\b D. maculata} group. Tubers deeply 3- to 4-fid, more or less elongated at apex. Stem up to 60 cm, erect or slightly flexuous, usually solid. Leaves erecto-patent. Upper leaves bract-like. Raceme conical, becoming ovoid or oblong. Bracts lanceolate. Flowers yellowish-white, pink, lilac, reddish or purple. Outer perianth-segments ovate to oblong, obtuse, the 2 lateral patent, the median convergent into a galea with the obliquely ovate or ovate-lanceolate inner segments. Labellum 7-11 × 9-13 mm, flat, 3-lobed; lateral lobes oblong-triangular, ovate, or inconspicuous. Spur shorter than to as long as ovary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The distribution of {\b 12} and {\b 13} is difficult to ascertain because of frequent misidentification of specimens.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Middle lobe of labellum much narrower than the lateral .......... {\b 11. maculata}
\par
1 Middle lobe of labellum about as wide as the lateral 
\par
2 Lower bracts usually shorter than flowers; spur 6-9 mm,
\par
  cylindrical ....................................................................................... {\b 12. fuchsii} 
\par
2 Lower bracts usually longer than flowers; spur 7-13 mm,
\par
  saccate or conical-cylindrical ...................................................... {\b 13. saccifera}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. D. maculata} (L.) Soó,{\i  loc. cit.} (1962) ({\i Orchis maculata} L.). Stem with 5-12 distant leaves. Leaves with or without dark spots; lower linear-lanceolate to ovate or oblong, acute to obtuse. Bracts mostly shorter than the flowers. Outer perianth-segments 7-11 mm. Middle lobe of labellum shorter than to as long as (rarely longer than) and much narrower than the lateral lobes. Spur 3-11 mm, cylindrical, shorter than to as long as ovary. 2n = 40, 60, 80.{\i  Moorland, grassland and damp woods; mainly on acid soils. Much of Europe, but absent from most of the southeast.} ?Al Au Be ?Bl Br Co ?Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs ?Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers yellowish-white; leaves without dark spots ({\b e}) subsp. {\b transsilvanica}
\par
1 Flowers pink, lilac, reddish or purple; leaves with or
\par
  without dark spots
\par
2 Lower leaves broadly lanceolate to ovate
\par
3 Stem not more than 60 cm, solid; spur 2/3 as long to as
\par
  long as ovary .................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b maculata}
\par
3 Stem 10-20 cm, hollow; spur shorter than ovary ............ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b islandica}
\par
2 Lower leaves linear- to oblong-lanceolate or narrowly oblong
\par
4 Lower leaves narrowly oblong- middle lobe of labellum 
\par
  at least as long as lateral lobes ............................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b schurii}
\par
4 Lower leaves linear- to oblong-lanceolate; middle lobe of 
\par
  labellum much shorter than to as long as lateral lobes ........ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b elodes}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b maculata}: Stem up to 60 cm, solid. Cauline leaves 6-10, usually with spots, the lower ovate to oblong. Flowers purplish; labellum with middle lobe shorter than to as long as the lateral lobes. Spur 2/3-3/4 as long to as long as ovary.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b elodes} (Griseb.) Soó,{\i  loc. cit.} (1962): Stem up to 30 cm, solid. Cauline leaves 4-8, with or without spots, the lower oblong to linear-lanceolate. Flowers pink, pale lilac or reddish; labellum with middle lobe shorter than to as long as the lateral lobes. Spur c. ½ as long as ovary. 2n = 40, 80. {\i Throughout the range of the species, except parts of the south-east}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b schurii} (Klinge) Soó,{\i  Rev. Roum. Biol.} ({\i Bot}.) {\b 12}: 229 (1967): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but cauline leaves with a few spots, the lower narrowly oblong; middle lobe of labellum as long as or longer than the lateral lobes. •{\i  Carpathians}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b islandica} (Á. & D. Löve) Soó,{\i  Nom. Nov. Gen. Dactylorhiza} 7 (1962): Stem 10-20 cm, hollow. Cauline leaves 5-7, without spots, the lower ovate, elliptical or broadly lanceolate. Flowers pink, pale lilac or reddish; labellum with middle lobe as long as the lateral lobes. Spur shorter than ovary. 2n = 80. •{\i  Iceland}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b transsilvanica} (Schur) Soó,{\i  loc. cit.} (1962): Stem up to 60 cm, solid. Cauline leaves 6-10, without spots, the lower oblong-lanceolate or narrowly oblong. Flowers yellowish-white; labellum with middle lobe as long as to much longer than the lateral lobes. Spur shorter than ovary.{\i  S.E. & S.C. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. D. fuchsii} (Druce) Soó,{\i  op. cit.} 8 (1962) ({\i D. maculata }subsp.{\i  fuchsii} Hyl.). Leaves obovate-oblong to elliptical, usually erecto-patent. Bracts usually shorter than flowers. Outer perianth-segments 6-9 mm. Labellum deeply 3-lobed, the middle lobe at least as long as and about as wide as the lateral lobes. Spur 6-9 mm, cylindrical.{\i  Grassland and open woods; mainly on base-rich soils. Much of Europe but absent from most of the south.} Au Be Br Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers white, except for numerous purple markings on 
\par
  the labellum .......................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b sooana} 
\par
1 Flowers pink, pale lilac or reddish-purple, rarely entirely white
\par
2 Stem not more than 25 cm, with 1-2 leaves .............. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b psychrophila} 
\par
2 Stem not more than 60 cm, with 7-12 leaves ...................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b fuchsii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b fuchsii}: Stem up to 60 cm, with 7-12 leaves. Flowers pink, pale lilac or reddish-purple, rarely white. 2n = 40. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b psychrophila} (Schlechter) J. Holub, {\i Preslia}{\b  36}: 252 (1964): Stem up to 25 cm, with 1-2 leaves. Flowers pink to reddish-purple. rarely white. •{\i  C. Europe and Fennoscandia}.
\par

\par
336}
\par