{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b sooana} (Borsos) Borsos, {\i Ann. Univ. Sci. Budapest. Rolando Eötvös}{\b  4}: 76 (1961): Stem up to 60 cm, with 7-12 leaves. Flowers white except for stripes or spots on the labellum. •{\i  Hungary}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. D. saccifera} (Brongn.) Soó,{\i  Nom. Nov. Gen. Dactyloriza} 8 (1962) ({\i Orchis maculata} subsp.{\i  macrostachys} (Tineo) Hayek). Leaves without spots, the lower obovate to elliptical. At least the lower bracts usually distinctly (up to 2 times) longer than the flowers. Outer perianth-segments up to 10 mm. Labellum deeply 3-lobed, the middle lobe about as long and as wide as the lateral lobes. Spur 7-13 mm, saccate- or conical-cylindrical. 2n = 40, 80.{\i  Damp meadows and woods. S. Europe.} Al Bu Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm ?Sa Si ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 20.     Steveniella}     Schlechter
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By R. de Soó. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Tubers 2, orbicular or oblong, entire. Outer perianth-segments connate almost to apex; inner small, about as long as the anther. Labellum patent, papillose, 3-lobed. Spur short. Rostellum 3-lobed; middle lobe erect, cucullate. Viscidia in one 2-lobed bursicle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. satyrioides} (Steven) Schlechter,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  15}: 295 (1918). Stem 25-40 cm, erect, with 1 leaf just above base and 2 acute, leaf-like sheaths above. Leaf oblong-ovate to oblanceolate. Spike cylindrical. Bracts erecto-patent, lanceolate to ovate, acuminate. Perianth-segments greenish, tinged with brown or purple; outer 6-8 mm, erect, oblong-ovate, acute; inner c. 4 mm, linear-ligulate, obtuse. Labellum 6-7 × 4-4·5 mm, deeply 3-lobed, brownish-green; lateral lobes small, square or rhombic; middle lobe long, oblong, obtuse, decurved. Spur 2-2·5 mm, conical or oblong-conical, directed downwards.{\i  Open woods and mountain meadows. Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 21.        Comperia}       C. Koch
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By R. de Soó. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Tubers 2, ovoid. Perianth-segments all connivent into a galea. Labellum convex, papillose, 3-lobed, the lobes prolonged into filiform, somewhat spiral processes. Spur present. Rostellum 3-lobed, the middle lobe short, lamelliform. Viscidia in one simple bursicle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. comperiana} (Steven) Ascherson & Graebner,{\i  Syn. Mitteleur. Fl}.{\b  3}: 620 (1907) ({\i C. taurica} C. Koch). Stem 25-55 cm, erect, with 3-4 leaves and 2-3 leaf-like sheaths above. Leaves oblong to oblong-ovate. Spike cylindrical, lax or dense. Bracts linear to linear-lanceolate, equalling or somewhat exceeding the ovary. Galea brownish-purple. Outer perianth-segments 12-15 mm, elliptical; inner c. 10 mm, obliquely lanceolate, with 1-2 long teeth on each side. Labellum up to 4 cm, cuneate at base, convex, pale pink; lateral lobes 1-1·3 cm wide at base, lanceolate, with apical process 2·5-2·7 cm; middle lobe triangular-ovate, with 2 filiform processes up to 2·8 cm. Spur shorter than ovary, directed downwards, cylindrical. {\i Open woods. S.W. Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 22.       Neotinea}     Reichenb. fil.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Tubers ellipsoid, entire. Basal leaves 2-4. Perianth-segments more or less equal, connivent into a galea. Labellum scarcely longer than other perianth-segments, 3-lobed. Spur very short. Stigmas approximated at base, diverging above in the form of a V. Viscidia distinct, enclosed in a 2-lobed bursicle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. maculata} (Desf.) Stearn, {\i Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  2}: 79 (1974) ({\i N. intacta} (Link) Reichenb. fil.,{\i  Aceras densiflorum} (Brot.) Boiss.). Tubers c. 20 × 12 mm. Plant 8-25(-40) cm, glabrous, somewhat glaucous. Leaves 3-6, the basal 3-12 × 1-3 cm, oblong, mucronate, patent, the cauline smaller and erect, all usually with small, purplish-brown spots in longitudinal lines. Spike 2-6 cm, dense, sometimes secund. Flowers never opening fully and usually self-pollinated, dull pink or greenish-white. Perianth-segments 3-4 mm, acute to acuminate. Labellum horizontal; lateral lobes linear; middle lobe longer, oblong, often 2- or 3-lobed at apex. Spur 1·5-2 mm, broadly conical, obtuse. 2n = 40.{\i  Woods, scrub and stony grassland. Mediterranean region and Portugal; Ireland and Isle of Man.} Bl Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hb Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 23.     Traunsteinera}      Reichenb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By R. de Soó. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Tubers 2, ovoid, entire. Perianth-segments ovate to ovate-lanceolate, acuminate or sometimes with spathulate apex. Labellum patent, 3-lobed, glabrous. Spur short. Rostellum 3-lobed, the middle lobe erect, linear-cucullate. Viscidia in a somewhat rudimentary, 2-lobed bursicle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. globosa} (L.) Reichenb.,{\i  Fl. Saxon.} 87 (1842). Stem 15-65 cm, erect, curved, with 2-3 leaves and 2-3 pinkish bracts above. Leaves oblong-lanceolate or subobovate. Spike pyramidal-globose, becoming ellipsoid. Bracts lanceolate, 1- to 3-veined, as long as or longer than the ovary. Flowers pinkish-lilac; inner perianth-segments and labellum with purple spots. Outer perianth-segments 5-6 mm; inner slightly shorter. Labellum c. 4·5 × 3 mm, almost square, widened at the base, deeply 3-lobed to c. ½-way; lateral lobes ovate, obtuse or acute; middle lobe broadly oblong, the apex sometimes denticulate. Spur 1/3-1/2 as long as ovary, cylindric-conical, directed downwards. 2n = 42.{\i  Meadows, mainly in the mountains. From the Vosges and S. Poland southwards to N. Spain, N.C. Italy and S. Bulgaria.} ?Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 24.      Orchis}       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By R. de Soó. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Tubers 2-3, globose to ellipsoid, entire. Perianth-segments free, equal, or sometimes the inner smaller, all convergent into a galea or the outer patent and deflexed. Labellum porrect or slightly decurved, entire to 3-lobed, glabrous or papillose. Spur present. Bracts membranous. Rostellum 3-lobed, the middle lobe short, lamelliform. Viscidia in a 2-lobed bursicle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: R. von Soó,{\i  Bot. Arch.} ({\i Leipzig}) {\b 23}: 35-61 (1928); {\i Jahresb. Naturw. Ver. Wuppertal}{\b  25}: 37-48 (1972).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 At least the lateral outer perianth-segments patent or
\par
  deflexed the median sometimes convergent into a galea 
\par
  with the 2 inner perianth-segments
\par
2 Flowers at apex of spike opening first ............................................... {\b 2. boryi}
\par
2 Flowers at base of spike opening first
\par
3 Leaves linear or lanceolate, narrowed towards apex, patent ...... {\b 23. laxiflora}
\par
3 Leaves oblong to oblong-lanceolate or -ovate, rarely 
\par
  lanceolate, gradually narrowed towards base, appressed 
\par
  or in a basal rosette
\par
4 Spur filiform or linear-conical, attenuate towards apex
\par
5 Spur linear-conical, wider towards mouth; inner 
\par
  perianth-segments oblong-ovate, subobtuse ............................... {\b 21. anatolica}
\par
5 Spur filiform, not wider towards mouth; inner perianth-
\par
  segments ovate, obtuse ...................................................... {\b 22. quadripunctata}
\par
4 Spur cylindrical or saccate
\par
6 Two lateral outer perianth-segments erecto-patent or 
\par
  patent-deflexed; spur directed downwards; bracts 5 to 
\par
  7-veined
\par

\par
337}
\par