{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 2(-4), 1-2·5 cm, ovate-deltate, mucronate. Raceme 1·5-6 cm; flowers 4-12, shortly pedicellate; bracts minute, triangular. Perianth-segments 2-2·5 mm, oblong-elliptical, obtuse; outer green, the median somewhat cucullate, the lateral and inner narrower, directed forward, green outside, reddish inside. Labellum 3·5-4·5 mm, obcuneate, divided to about the middle into 2 diverging linear lobes, purplish; basal lobes linear-lanceolate. 2n = 38, 40.{\i  Damp woods} ({\i mainly coniferous}) {\i and moorland. N. & C. Europe, extending southwards to the Pyrenees, N. Appennini and S. Bulgaria.} Au Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 8.      Spiranthes}      L.C.M. Richard
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Roots fleshy, more or less tuberous. Spike-axis twisted, so that flowers are arranged in one or more spiral rows. Perianth-segments subequal, free or variously connate or connivent. Flowers fragrant, geniculate or arcuate, the ovary suberect, the perianth and column horizontal. Labellum about equalling the other perianth-segments, oblong,entire. Spur absent. Rostellum deeply 2-fid, with narrow, acute lobes, between which lies the single visicidium; bursicles absent. Anther largely hidden behind rostellum.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves ovate-elliptical, patent, in a basal rosette;
\par
  cauline leaves reduced to scales ...................................................... {\b 1. spiralis}
\par
1 Leaves linear-lanceolate to narrowly oblong, ± erect,
\par
  some of them cauline
\par
2 Flowers in one spiral row; bracts 6-7 mm; leaves obtuse ........... {\b 2. aestivalis}
\par
2 Flowers in 3 spiral rows; bracts 10-17 mm; leaves acute ... {\b 3. romanzoffiana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. spiralis} (L.) Chevall., {\i Fl. Gén. Env. Paris}{\b  2}: 330 (1827) ({\i S. autumnalis} L. C. M. Richard). Roots tuber-like, oblong-ellipsoid. Stem 6-20(-35) cm, glandular-pubescent, bearing 3-7 closely appressed, lanceolate scale-leaves. Foliage-leaves 2-3·5 cm, ovate-elliptical, acute, glabrous, glaucous, in a basal rosette, usually withered at anthesis, but next year's rosette appears during anthesis beside the flowering stem. Spike 3-10 cm, slender, with 6-20 flowers in one spiral row. Bracts 6-7 mm, acuminate. Perianth-segments 6-7 mm, oblong, white, the upper 3 connivent and forming with the labellum a tube enclosing the column, the outer lateral segments patent. Labellum 6-7 mm, with upwardly curved margins and undulate-crenulate apex, yellowish-green. Flowering in autumn or late summer. 2n = 30.{\i  Grassland. S., W. & C. Europe, extending northwards to E. Denmark.} All except Az Fa Fe Is No Rs (N, B, C, K, E) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Even among orchids this species is noteworthy for the irregularity of its flowering; in certain regions, especially in the northern part of its range, populations often do not flower for many seasons.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. aestivalis} (Poiret) L. C. M. Richard,{\i  Orchid. Eur. Annot.} 36 (1817). Roots cylindrical-conical or fusiform. Stem 12-30 (-40) cm, glandular-puberulent above. Leaves 5-12 cm × 4-9 mm, linear-lanceolate, obtuse, suberect, mostly basal but 1-2 on lower part of stem, passing into lanceolate scales above, present at anthesis. Spike 3-10 cm, slender, with 6-20 flowers in one spiral row. Bracts 6-9 mm, acuminate. Perianth-segments free, suberect, white, the outer 6-7 mm, lanceolate, the inner 5-6 mm, oblong. Labellum 6-7 mm, with upwardly-curved margins, deflexed at apex, white. Flowering in mid-summer.{\i  Wet meadows and marshes. S., W. & C. Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region. }Au Be †Br Co Cz Ga Ge ?Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju †Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A diminishing species, especially in the northern part of its range.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. sinensis} (Pers.) Ames, {\i Orchidaceae}{\b  2}: 53 (1908) ({\i S. amoena} (Bieb.) Sprengel, {\i S. australis} auct. ross., non (R. Br.) Lindley), which is found throughout temperate Asia, may perhaps occur just inside the limits of Europe in C. Ural. It resembles {\b 2} in most characters, but the perianth-segments are bright pink and the labellum has 2 callosities near its base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. romanzoffiana} Cham., {\i Linnaea}{\b  3}: 32 (1828). Roots cylindrical, relatively slender. Stem 12-25 cm, sparsely glandular-puberulent above. Leaves basal and cauline, linear-lanceolate to narrowly oblong, acute, suberect, the lower 7-12 cm × 5-13 mm, the upper cauline smaller but not reduced to scales, present during anthesis. Spike 3-6 × 2 cm, dense, with 12-35 flowers in 3 spiral rows. Bracts 10-17 mm, ovate, acuminate. Perianth c. 12 mm, white tinged with green or cream, all segments, including the labellum, connate in lower half. Labellum somewhat constricted below the sharply deflexed, crenulate apex. Flowering in mid- to late summer. 2n = 60.{\i  Damp, peaty ground and lakeshores. Ireland, W. Scotland, S.W. England.} Br Hb. ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 9.          Goodyera}       R.Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Spiranthes} but with stolons and without tubers; leaves conspicuously net-veined; spiral arrangement of flowers less marked or absent; labellum shorter than outer perianth-segments, the basal part ({\i hypochile}) strongly concave, the distal part ({\i epichile}) triangular, flat.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. repens} (L.) R. Br. in Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew}. ed. 2,{\b  5}: 198 (1813). Stolons branched, slender, overground; roots few and short. Plant 10-25 cm, glandular-pubescent, at least in inflorescence. Lower leaves 3-6, 1·5-3 × 1-2 cm, ovate, narrowed abruptly to a sheathing petiole, with 5 longitudinal and numerous transverse veins; upper leaves reduced to sheaths, sometimes with a small linear lamina, a transitional leaf with well-developed, narrowly oblong lamina often present. Spike 3-7 cm, slender, lax, secund, often with a slight spiral twist. Flowers white, fragrant. Perianth-segments 3-4 mm, ovate to lanceolate, obtuse, the 3 uppermost forming a galea. 2n = 30, 40. {\i Coniferous or mixed woods. Europe, southwards to the Pyrenees, the Alps and Bulgaria.} Au *Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 10.         Gennaria}        Parl.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.M. Moore. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Tuber oblong. Stem bearing 2 alternate leaves in upper half. Flowers in a dense spike. Perianth-segments free. Labellum 3-lobed. Spur short. Rostellum short. Stigmas shortly stipitate. Viscidia small; bursicles absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. diphylla} (Link) Parl.,{\i  Fl. Ital.}{\b  3}: 405 (1860) ({\i Orchis cordata} Willd.,{\i  O. diphylla} (Link) Samp.). Stem 15-30 cm. Lower leaf 40-70 × 25-70 mm, the upper much smaller, both elliptical- to triangular-ovate, cordate at base. Flowers many yellowish-green, shortly pedicellate, in a spike up to 10 cm. Perianth-segments convergent or slightly divergent, campanulate; outer oblong, obtuse, slightly concave; inner slightly larger rhombic, obtuse. Labellum ovate-oblong, green; lobes linear-lanceolate, obtuse, the middle somewhat larger. Spur saccate, obtuse, slightly dorsally compressed.{\i  Shady places. S. & C. Portugal, S.W. Spain; N. Sardegna.} Hs Lu Sa. ({\i N. Africa; Madeira, Islas Canarias.})
\par

\par
330}
\par