{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. D. sambucina} (L.) Soó,{\i  loc. cit. }(1962) ({\i Orchis sambucina} L.). Tubers oblong-cylindrical, subentire or shortly lobed. Stem 10-30 cm, usually with 4-5 distant leaves in lower half. Leaves without dark spots; lower obovate-oblanceolate to narrowly oblanceolate, more or less obtuse; upper lanceolate; uppermost often reaching the base of inflorescence. Raceme ovoid or shortly cylindrical, many-flowered. Bracts lanceolate, longer than ovary. Flowers pale yellow or purple, rarely bicoloured. Outer perianth-segments 7-10 mm, oblong, obtuse, the 2 lateral patent, the median convergent into a galea with the shorter, obliquely ovate inner perianth-segments; inner segments not enlarged towards the base. Labellum 7-8 × 7-8 mm, porrect, suborbicular, 3-lobed; lobes short, ovate-triangular, obtuse. Spur 8-15 mm, deflexed or horizontal. 2n = ?40, 42.{\i  Meadows, scrub and open woods. Much of Europe, but absent from many of the islands and most of the U.S.S.R.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Sa Si Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sambucina}: Raceme dense. Spur up to 15 mm, deflexed, conical-cylindrical, somewhat curved upwards, shorter than to about as long as ovary.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species except for parts of the south-west}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b insularis} (Sommier) Soó,{\i  loc. cit.} (1962): Raceme lax. Spur 8-10 mm, patent, cylindrical, straight, distinctly shorter than ovary. 2n = 60. •{\i  From Portugal to W.C. Italy}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. D. sulphurea} (Link) Franco,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 336 (1978) ({\i Orchis sulphurea} Link, {\i O. sambucina} Ten., non L.). Like {\b 2} but stem with a basal rosette of up to 10 leaves; leaves narrowly oblong; lateral inner perianth-segments enlarged towards base; labellum broadly obovate in outline, the lateral lobes oblong-ovate, the middle lobe oblong-rectangular or almost square to suborbicular; spur 12-25 mm, horizontal.{\i  S. Europe}. ?Al ?Bl Bu Cr Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Middle lobe of labellum longer than lateral lobes ......... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b sulphurea}
\par 1 Middle lobe of labellum shorter than lateral lobes
\par 2 Spur longer than ovary ...................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b pseudosambucina}
\par 2 Spur not longer than ovary ............................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b siciliensis}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sulphurea}: Middle lobe of labellum longer than the lateral, oblong-rectangular. Spur cylindrical, shorter than ovary. •{\i  N. Portugal, W. Spain}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pseudosambucina} (Ten.) Franco, {\i loc. cit. }(1978) ({\i Orchis mediterranea }subsp.{\i  pseudosambucina} (Ten.) Klinge,{\i  O. pseudosambucina }Ten.): Middle lobe of labellum shorter than the lateral, almost square to suborbicular. Spur cylindrical, distinctly longer than ovary. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b siciliensis} (Klinge) Franco,{\i  op. cit.} 367 (1978) ({\i Orchis mediterranea} subsp.{\i  siciliensis} Klinge): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but spur conical or saccate-cylindrical, rarely cylindrical, shorter than to as long as ovary. •{\i  Italy, Sicilia, Sardegna.}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b 4-10}). {\b D. incarnata} group. Stem usually hollow. Lower bracts usually as long as or longer than flowers, lanceolate. Lateral outer perianth-segments, suberect, the middle convergent into a galea with the inner segments.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lower leaves not more than 4 times as long as wide, ± 
\par  elliptical, usually widest at or below the middle 
\par 2 Stem not more than 20 cm; outer perianth-segments and
\par  labellum 6-7 mm ............................................................... {\b 5. pseudocordigera} 
\par 2 Stem (10-)20-60(-75) cm; outer perianth-segments 5-12 mm;
\par  labellum 5-12 mm
\par 3 Leaves 4-8, the uppermost often reaching base of inflorescence ... {\b 6. majalis}
\par 3 Leaves 2-5, the uppermost seldom reaching inflorescence ......... {\b 7. cordigera}
\par 1 Lower leaves more than 4 times as long as wide, usually 
\par  lanceolate, gradually attenuate from base
\par 4 Labellum 5-7·5(-9) mm; outer perianth-segments 5-6(-9) mm ... {\b 4. incarnata}
\par 4 Labellum 5·5-16 mm; outer perianth-segments (6-)7-13 mm
\par 5 Outer perianth-segments 7-8(-10) mm
\par 6 Flowers purple; labellum with deflexed margin .................... {\b 8. traunsteineri}
\par 6 Flowers pink; labellum flat .......................................................... {\b 9. russowii}
\par 5 Outer perianth-segments 8-13 mm
\par 7 Stem not more than 30 cm; leaves usually with dark spots ........ {\b 7. cordigera}
\par 7 Stem 30-110 cm; leaves without dark spots ..................................... {\b 10. elata}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. D. incarnata} (L.) Soó,{\i  Nom. Nov. Gen. Dactylorhiza} 3 (1962) ({\i Orchis incarnata} L.). Tubers deeply 3- to 5-fid, more or less elongated at apex. Stem up to 70 cm, erect, broadly fistular, with 4-5 distant leaves. Leaves lanceolate, gradually attenuate from the wide base, acute, sometimes cucullate at apex; uppermost often as long as or longer than the inflorescence. Raceme cylindrical, dense, many-flowered. Flowers red, pinkish, white or purple; labellum with spots, rarely yellowish-white. Outer perianth-segments 5-6(-9) mm, ovate-oblong, obtuse. Labellum 5-7·5(-9) × 5-9·5 mm, slightly recurved, minutely papillose, ovate-rhombic to orbicular, entire to 3-lobed, shallowly crenulate. Spur deflexed, conical to conical-cylindrical, attenuate, up to 1/2 as long as ovary. 2n = 40. {\i Marshes, fens and bogs. Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da ?Fa Fe Ga Ge ?Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers pinkish to lilac, rarely white .............................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b incarnata}
\par 1 Flowers red or purple
\par 2 Flowers deep crimson ...................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b coccinea}
\par 2 Flowers purple, often streaked with red
\par 3 Leaves erect, cucullate, usually without spots ................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b pulchella}
\par 3 Leaves erecto-patent, not cucullate, usually with dark
\par  spots on both surfaces ......................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b cruenta}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b incarnata}: Stems up to 70 cm. Leaves erect, often cucullate, usually without spots. Flowers pinkish to lilac, rarely white.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b coccinea} (Pugsley) Soó,{\i  op. cit.} 4 (1962): Stems up to 70 cm. Leaves erect, often cucullate, usually without spots. Flowers deep crimson. •{\i  Britain and Ireland}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b pulchella} (Druce) Soó, {\i loc. cit.} (1962): Stems up to 70 cm. Leaves erect, often cucullate, usually without spots. Flowers purple, often streaked with red. •{\i  Britain and Ireland}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b cruenta} (O. F. Mueller) P. D. Sell, {\i Watsonia}{\b  6}: 317 (1967) ({\i Dactylorhiza cruenta} O. F. Mueller): Stems 12-30 cm. Leaves erecto-patent or gradually arcuate-patent, not cucullate, usually with dark spots on both surfaces. Flowers purple, often streaked with red. 2n = 40. {\i N. & E. Europe; Alps}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Variants with brownish-purple spots on the leaves occur sporadically in N. & C. Europe and have been named subsp.{\b  haematodes} (Reichenb. fil.) Soó,{\i  Nom. Nov. Gen. Dactylorhiza} 4 (1962). Variants with 3-4 narrowly lanceolate leaves 1-1·5 cm, slender stem and few-flowered racemes have been named subsp.{\b  serotina }(Hausskn.) Soó & D. Moresby Moore,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 367 (1978), ({\i O. incarnata} var. {\i borealis} Neuman, var.{\i  dunensis} Druce, var.{\i  cambrica} Pugsley). They occur sporadically throughout W., N. & N.C. Europe. Variants with yellowish-white flowers have been named subsp.{\b  ochroleuca} (Boll) P. F. Hunt & Summerhayes,{\i  Watsonia}{\b  6}: 130 (1965); they occur sporadically throughout a large part of the range of the species.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. D. pseudocordigera} (Neuman) Soó,{\i  Nom. Nov. Gen. Dactylorhiza} 4 (1962). Like {\b 4}({\b c}) but stem not more than 20 cm; leaves erecto-patent, the lower elliptical, with dense, dark spots;
\par
\par 334}
\par