{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 11.        Herminium}         Guett.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Tubers globose. Cauline leaves present. Perianth-segments erecto-patent or somewhat convergent, but not forming a distinct galea. Labellum conspicuously 3-lobed, slightly longer than the other perianth-segments; spur absent. Viscidia distinct; bursicle very rudimentary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. monorchis} (L.) R. Br. in Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew}. ed. 2, {\b 5}: 191 (1813). Tuber solitary at anthesis, 2-4 others appearing later on slender, underground stolons. Plant 7-25 cm. Lower leaves 2-3(-4), 20-70 × 3-10 mm, elliptic-oblong to linear-lanceolate, the upper 1-2, linear-subulate, bract-like. Spike 1·5-9 cm, slender, sometimes secund, usually rather lax. Flowers yellowish-green, honey-scented. Outer perianth-segments 2·5-3 mm, ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, the inner c. 3·5 mm, oblong-lanceolate, often shallowly lobed near base. Labellum 3·5-4 mm; lobes oblong, the 2 lateral projecting at right angles or curved forwards, much shorter than the middle. 2n = 40. {\i Grassland. Much of Europe, but absent from the extreme north and most of the Mediterranean region and the south-west.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho †Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 12.      Neottianthe}        Schlechter
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Tubers usually ellipsoid. Basal leaves 2. Perianth-segments more or less equal, connivent into a galea. Labellum deeply 3-lobed, densely papillose. Spur conical, curved, shorter than ovary, directed downwards and forwards. Viscidia close together, above the stigma; bursicles absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. cucullata} (L.) Schlechter,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  16}: 292 (1919) ({\i Gymnadenia cucullata} (L.) L. C. M. Richard). Tubers ellipsoid to subglobose, sometimes emarginate or shortly 2-lobed. Plant 10-30 cm, glabrous. Basal leaves 5-7 × 1·5-3 cm, elliptical; cauline leaves 1-2, small and bract-like. Spike 3-8 cm, secund, rather lax. Flowers lilac-pink. Perianth-segments 6-8 × 1-1·5 mm, acuminate. Labellum 7-9 mm, somewhat deflexed; lateral lobes linear-setaceous; middle lobe longer, linear-oblong. Spur c. 5 mm, slightly dilated at apex.{\i  Damp woods and mountain meadows. U.S.S.R. and Poland, from} c. 57°{\i  N. in Latvia and C. Ural southwards to} 49° 30'{\i  N. in W. Ukraine.} Po Rs (B, C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 13.      Platanthera}         L.C.M. Richard
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stock usually with tubers. Leaves few, usually only the lowest 1-3 well developed, the upper reduced to sheaths or with a small, bract-like lamina. Flowers white or green, in a usually fairly dense spike. Outer lateral perianth-segments patent, the inner lateral shorter, connivent with the outer median to form a galea. Labellum linear-oblong to rhombic-lanceolate, entire. Spur more or less cylindrical. Stigma single, flat; rostellum inconspicuous. Viscidia distinct; bursicles absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spur 18-30 mm, longer than ovary
\par
2 Anther-lobes parallel, almost contiguous; spur acute ..................... {\b 1. bifolia}
\par
2 Anther-lobes convergent above, but widely separated 
\par
  below; spur somewhat dilated at apex ....................................... {\b 2. chlorantha}
\par
1 Spur 2-8 mm, shorter than ovary
\par
3 Stem with 1 well-developed leaf; spike with 3-6 flowers ............ {\b 5. obtusata}
\par
3 Stem with at least 2 well-developed leaves; spike with
\par
  numerous flowers
\par
4 Lowest 2 leaves much larger than the others ............................. {\b 3. micrantha}
\par
4 Lowest 2 leaves not contrasting markedly with the others, the 
\par
  second and third from the base being usually the largest ......... {\b 4. hyperborea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. bifolia} (L.) L. C. M. Richard, {\i Orchid. Eur. Annot.} 35 (1817) ({\i Orchis bifolia} L.). Tubers 2, more or less conical, attenuate at apex. Plant 25-50 cm. Foliage-leaves 2, 7-16 × 2·5-8 cm, basal, subopposite, oblanceolate-oblong to obovate or broadly elliptical. Cauline leaves 2-5; lamina usually 1-3 cm, occasionally larger but always much narrower than that of basal leaves. Spike up to 20 cm; flowers white, slightly tinged with green, fragrant. Perianth-segments of the galea 5-7 mm; outer lateral segments 8-10 mm. Labellum 8-12 mm, linear-oblong, pendent. Spur 25-30 mm, slender, subulate, more or less horizontal, much longer than ovary. Anther-cells parallel, almost contiguous. 2n = 42.{\i  Open woods, meadows and damp heaths. Almost throughout Europe, but rarer in the Mediterranean region. }All except Az Cr Is Rs (K) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. chlorantha} (Custer) Reichenb. in Moessler,{\i  Handb.} ed. 2,{\b  2}: 1565 (1828) ({\i Orchis montana} auct., vix F. W. Schmidt). Like {\b 1} but flowers more strongly tinged with green, less fragrant, and with slightly larger perianth-segments; spur 18-27 mm, slightly dilated at apex; anther-cells convergent above but widely separated below. 2n = 42.{\i  Woods, meadows and damp heaths. Much of Europe, but absent from parts of the north, east and south-west.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Lu Rs (N, E) Sa Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. micrantha} (Hochst.) Schlechter,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  16}: 378 (1920). Tubers 2, ovoid-ellipsoid. Plant 20-50 cm. Lowest 2 leaves 6-15(-17) × 2-6·5 cm, oblanceolate-oblong to elliptical, usually one distinctly above the other but rarely subopposite; above them 2-6 much smaller leaves passing into the bracts. Spike 8-13 cm; flowers green. Perianth-segments 2-4 mm. Labellum 2-4 mm, narrowly oblong to oblong-elliptical, horizontal. Spur 2·5-8 mm, obtuse, 1/3-4/5 as long as ovary.{\i  Mountain grassland. • Açores.} Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable, especially in length of spur; in most plants this is 2-3·5 mm, but in some it is 5-8 mm. The long-spurred variants have been distinguished as{\b  P. azorica} Schlechter,{\i  loc. cit.} (1920) ({\i Habenaria longibracteata} Hochst.), but as variation in other characters shows little correlation and as there is no clear geographical or ecological separation, they are best treated as a variety of {\b 3}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. hyperborea} (L.) Lindley,{\i  Gen. Sp. Orchid.} 287 (1835). Roots cord-like, or forming very slender, conical tubers. Plant 6-35 cm. Leaves 4-7, distributed evenly on the stem, the 2-3 lowest 3-13 × 0·6-2 cm, lanceolate to oblong or ovate-elliptical, obtuse, the others acute and diminishing in size upwards but not contrasting sharply with the lower. Spike (2-)3-9 cm; flowers numerous, greenish, fragrant. Perianth-segments 3-4 mm. Labellum 3-7 mm, broadly lanceolate, obtuse, horizontal. Spur 3·5-4·5 mm, obtuse, curved, shorter than ovary. 2n = 84.{\i  Meadows and moorland. Iceland}. Is. ({\i Arctic and subarctic America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. obtusata} (Pursh) Lindley, {\i op. cit.} 284 (1835). Roots cord-like, fleshy but scarcely tuberous. Plant 6-20 cm. Foliage leaf solitary, basal, 4-6 × 1·5-2 cm, elliptical, tapered to a sheathing base which is largely enclosed in a hyaline sheath representing a second basal leaf; a third leaf, small and bract-like, is present on upper part of stem. Spike short, rather dense; flowers 3-6, greenish-white. Perianth-segments 2-3 mm. Labellum 3-3·5 mm, rhombic-lanceolate, horizontal or somewhat deflexed. Spur 2·5-3 mm, curved, half as long as ovary. 2n = 126. {\i Calcareous}
\par

\par
331}
\par