{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 purple, with yellow margins and apex, not tessellated, occasionally yellowish-green throughout; nectaries 3 × 2 mm, ovate; style papillose. 2n = 24. {\i Vineyards and rocky places. • S. Greece} ({\i island of Idhra}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. F. pyrenaica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 304 (1753). Stem 15-30 cm. Leaves 7-10, alternate, the lowest 4·5-11 cm × 6-10 mm, obtuse, the rest narrower, usually acute. Perianth broadly campanulate, usually expanded at the mouth; segments dark purplish-brown and usually without fascia outside, greenish-yellow and tessellated with brown inside, the outer 25-35 × 7-10 mm, acute, the inner 10-15 mm wide, obtuse or apiculate. Nectaries 4-6 mm × 2-4 mm at base, triangular to ovate-lanceolate. Filaments 9 mm, papillose. Style 8-9 mm, 3-fid, the branches 2-4 mm, slender, smooth. Capsule not winged.{\i  Mountain meadows. • From S.C. France to N.W. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. F. lusitanica} Wikström,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Acad. Handl.}{\b  1821}: 352 (1821) (incl.{\i  F. hispanica} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i F. stenophylla} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  F. boissieri} Costa, {\i F. messanensis} sensu Willk., non Rafin.). Stem 10-50 cm. Leaves (5-)6-9(-11), alternate, the lowest 4·8-7·5(-15) cm × 1-9 mm, linear to lanceolate, the rest narrower. Flowers 1(-3). Perianth broadly campanulate, often expanded at the mouth; segments green to brown outside, usually with green fascia, yellowish inside, marked or tessellated with brown, the outer 20-40 × 7-10 mm, the inner 9-15 mm wide, usually acute. Nectaries 10-12 × 2-3 mm, linear-lanceolate to linear, greenish, 3-4 mm above the base of the perianth-segment. Filaments 8-10 mm. Style 8-11 mm, 3-fid, the branches 3-4 mm, slender, smooth. Capsule not winged. 2n = 24.{\i  Rocks, screes and open woods. • E., C. & S. Spain, C. & S. Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable in height, width of leaf and colour and markings of flower. Sometimes divided on these characters into various species or subspecies but the resulting taxa do not seem satisfactory and further study is required to decide whether subdivision is possible.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. F. ruthenica} Wikström,{\i  op. cit.} 353 (1821) ({\i F. minor} Ledeb.). Stem 20-50 cm. Leaves 6-12, linear, opposite or in whorls of 3, the uppermost often on an extension of the stem above the flowers, the lowest 6-9 cm × 3-5 mm, the uppermost with filiform, tendril-like apex. Flowers 1-5, in a lax raceme. Perianth broadly campanulate; segments acute, blackish outside, greenish-yellow inside, tessellated with purplish-brown, the outer c. 25 × 7 mm, the inner c. 10 mm wide. Nectaries 10-14 mm, linear, c. 4 mm above the base of the perianth-segment. Filaments c. 10 mm, papillose. Style c. 9 mm, 3-fid, the branches 2 mm, papillose. Capsule winged.{\i  S. & S.E. parts of U.S.S.R.} Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. F. orientalis} Adams in Weber fil. & Mohr,{\i  Beitr. Naturk.}{\b  1}: 50 (1805) ({\i F. tenella} Bieb., {\i F. montana} Hoppe). Stem 16-40 cm. Leaves (6-)8-10(-11), the lowest 4-13 cm × 3-6(-10) mm, linear, usually opposite or in a whorl of 3, the intermediate alternate, the uppermost 2·5-5(-11) cm, usually in a whorl of 3, the apex often curved or hooked, but not filiform or tendril-like. Perianth broadly campanulate; segments greenish, heavily tessellated inside and outside with purplish-brown, the outer 20-30(-35) × 6-10 mm, the inner 9-13 mm wide. Nectaries 10-15 × 2 mm, greenish, linear, 5 mm above the base of the perianth-segment. Filaments 8 mm, papillose. Capsule not winged. Style 8-10 mm, 3-fid, the branches 2-7 mm, papillose. 2n = 18+0-9B.{\i  S. & S.E. Europe, westwards to S.E. France.} Al Bu Ga Gr It Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. F. meleagroides} Patrin ex Schultes fil. in Schultes & Schultes fil. {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  7}: 395 (1829). Stem 25-60 cm. Leaves 3-6(-7), alternate, the lowest 7-16 cm, up to 7 mm wide, the rest shorter and narrower, the uppermost about as long as the pedicel. Flowers solitary. Perianth broadly campanulate; segments blackish outside, greenish inside, tessellated with purplish-brown, without fascia, the outer 20-25 × 7-9 mm, acute, the inner 10 mm wide, obtuse or apiculate. Nectaries 15 × 2 mm, 4 mm above the base of the perianth-segment. Filaments 10 mm, papillose. Style 7 mm, 3-fid, the branches 3-4 mm, papillose. Capsule not winged.{\i  Wet meadows and streamsides. S. part of U.S.S.R., from C. Ukraine eastwards; W.C. Bulgaria.} Bu Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. F. obliqua} Ker-Gawler,{\i  Bot. Mag. }{\b 22}: 857 (1805). Stem 10-20 cm. Leaves 8-11, glaucous, the lowest 4-13 cm × 10-20 mm, lanceolate, opposite or alternate, the rest narrower, alternate. Flowers 1-2(-4). Perianth conical-campanulate, usually somewhat narrowed at the mouth; segments 20-30 × 10-14 mm, blackish, glaucous outside, not tessellated, the inner and outer similar. Nectaries 4 mm, linear, green, at the base of the perianth-segment. Filaments 9 mm, papillose. Style 12 mm, 3-fid, the branches 2-3 mm, smooth. Capsule not winged. 2n = 24.{\i  Scrub. S. Greece} ({\i Attiki}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. F. tuntasia} Heldr. ex Halácsy,{\i  Consp. Fl. Graec.}{\b  3}: 222 (1904). Like {\b 17} but usually more robust; stem up to 35 cm; leaves up to 25; flowers 1-4(-6); style 10 mm, the branches 1-1·5 mm. •{\i  Kikladhes} ({\i Kithnos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. F. drenovskii} Degen & Stoj., {\i Bull. Inst. Roy. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Sofia}){\b  4}: 142 (1931). Stem 17-30 cm. Leaves 4-5(-9), alternate, the lowest 6-7(-14) cm × 4-6 mm, linear-lanceolate, the rest narrower. Flowers 1(-3). Perianth narrowly campanulate; segments dark purplish to reddish-brown, glaucous outside, yellowish-green inside, the outer 16-25 × 4-8 mm, acute, the inner 5-11 mm wide, acute or obtuse. Nectaries 2 × 1 mm, at the base of the perianth-segment, green. Filaments 8-9 mm, papillose. Style 8-10 mm, 3-fid, the branches 1 mm, papillose. Capsule not winged. • {\i N.E. Greece, S.W. Bulgaria.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. F. conica} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 1}({\b 7}): 105 (1846). Stems 7-25 cm. Leaves 5-7, shining green, the lowest 2·5-6 cm × 5-16 mm, broadly lanceolate, subopposite, the rest alternate, narrower. Flowers 1-2. Perianth conical-campanulate; segments yellow, not tessellated, narrowly elliptical to rhombic; the outer 12-20 × 5-7 mm, the inner 8 mm wide. Nectaries 1 mm, greenish-yellow, 1 mm above the base of the perianth-segment. Filaments 6-7 mm, sparsely papillose. Style 7-9 mm, 3-fid, the branches 2-4 mm, smooth. Capsule not winged.{\i  Scrub and cultivated ground. • S. Greece}({\i W. Peloponnisos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. F. euboeica} Rix, {\i Kew Bull.}{\b  30}: 158 (1975) ({\i F. sibthorpiana} auct. balcan., non (Sibth. & Sm.) Baker). Stem 3-10 cm, glabrous. Leaves 5-9, glaucous, the lowest 3-5 cm × 7-10 mm, lanceolate, subopposite or alternate, the rest alternate, narrower. Flowers 1-2. Perianth narrowly campanulate; segments yellow, not tessellated, narrowly ovate, acute or obtuse, the outer 13-23 × 3-6 mm, the inner 5-10 mm wide. Nectaries 2·5-4 × 1 mm, at the base of the perianth-segments, dark brown, lanceolate. Filaments 5-8 mm, sparsely papillose. Style 7-11 mm, 3-fid, the branches 1-4 mm, smooth or rarely papillose. Capsule not winged.{\i  Rocky limestone slopes. • E. Greece} ({\i Evvoia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. F. stribrnyi} Velen., {\i Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss. }{\b 1893}({\b 37}): 61 (1893). Stem 10-30(-80) cm. Leaves 10-14, the lowest 4-10 cm × 5-20 mm, alternate, the middle narrower, alternate, the upper in a whorl of 3. Flowers 1-3. Perianth narrowly campanulate; segments glaucous green with purple markings
\par

\par
33}
\par