{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 154 (1929) ({\i O. champagneuxii} Barn.): Tubers 3 (1 subsessile, 2 long-stipitate). Outer perianth-segments 6-8 mm. Labellum plicate. Spur clavate, wider towards apex, truncate or emarginate, shorter than to as long as ovary. •{\i  S.W. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. O. longicornu} Poiret, {\i Voy. Barb.}{\b  2}: 247 (1789). Tubers subglobose, shortly stipitate. Stem 10-30 cm, erect, with basal rosette of leaves, and with crowded sheaths above. Leaves oblong-lanceolate. Spike shortly oblong, rarely cylindrical, rather dense, the basal flowers opening first. Bracts lanceolate, with several veins, about as long as ovary. All perianth-segments convergent into a galea; outer c. 6 mm, oblong, white or pale pink; inner somewhat smaller, white. Labellum about as wide as long, broadly reniform, purplish-violet, minutely punctulate, shallowly 3-lobed; middle lobe broadly triangular, usually somewhat shorter than the lateral. Spur c. 16 mm, cylindrical, becoming clavate and wider towards the apex, patent or somewhat curved upwards, much longer than labellum. 2n = 36. {\i W. Mediterranean region.} Bl Co Ga It ?Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. O. coriophora} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 940 (1753). Tubers subglobose or ellipsoid. Stem 15-40 cm, erect, with 4-7 leaves below and sheaths above. Leaves linear to narrowly lanceolate. Spike oblong or cylindrical, dense. Bracts lanceolate, 1-veined, as long as or longer than ovary. All perianth-segments convergent into a galea; outer 5-10 mm, ovate-lanceolate or oblong, acute or acuminate, the inner somewhat longer; galea violet-brown. Labellum longer than wide, purplish-green, without spots, 3-lobed; lateral lobes sub-rhombic, entire, crenate or denticulate; middle lobe oblong, entire. Spur conical, directed downwards, slightly incurved towards the apex, ½ to twice as long as ovary. 2n = 36.{\i  S., C. & E. Europe, northwards to Belgium and Lithuania.} Al Au Be Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He †Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spur ½ as long as labellum ......................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b coriophora}
\par
1 Spur as long as or longer than labellum
\par
2 Labellum (6-)8-10 mm; flowers fragrant or inodorous .... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b fragrans}
\par
2 Labellum 5-6(-8) mm; flowers fetid ................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b martrinii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b coriophora}: Galea acute. Labellum 6-8 mm, the middle lobe scarcely longer than the lateral. Spur ½ as long as labellum. Flowers fetid.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except for parts of the Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b fragrans} (Pollini) Sudre, {\i Fl. Toulous.} 187 (1907): Galea acuminate. Labellum (6-)8-10 mm, the middle lobe distinctly longer than the lateral. Spur about as long as or longer than labellum. Flowers fragrant (rarely inodorous). 2n = 20, 38.{\i  S., S.C. & S.E. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b martrinii} (Timb.-Lagr.) Nyman,{\i  Consp}. 691 (1882) (incl. {\i O. coriophora} var. {\i carpetana} Willk.): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but labellum 5-6(-8) mm; spur about twice as long as labellum; flowers fetid.{\i  W.C. Spain and Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. O. sancta} L., {\i Syst. Nat}. ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1242 (1759). Like {\b 5} but stem with a rosette of leaves clasping the base, with sheaths above; leaves oblong-lanceolate; lower bracts 3- to 5-veined; flowers larger, pale lilac; perianth-segments 9-12 mm, long-acuminate; labellum with lateral lobes acutely dentate to sinuately serrate, the middle lobe entire or denticulate; spur sub-hamate-incurved, strongly narrowed towards the apex.{\i  Islands of Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. O. ustulata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 941 (1753). Tubers subglobose or ellipsoid. Stem 12-35 cm, erect, with 2-3 basal leaves, 1-3 leaves in the lower half and sheaths above. Leaves oblong. Spike ovoid, becoming cylindrical, dense. Bracts ovate-lanceolate, 1-veined, shorter than to about as long as ovary. All perianth-segments convergent into a galea; outer 3-3·5 mm, ovate, brownish-purple on outer surface; inner narrowly oblong, pink. Labellum 4-8 mm, longer than wide, white or pale pink with purple spots, 3-lobed; middle lobe dilated at apex, 2-lobed, rarely entire; lateral lobes oblong, obtuse. Spur cylindrical, directed downwards, ¼-½ as long as ovary. 2n = 42.{\i  From N. England and the Leningrad region southwards to N. Spain, S. Italy, Macedonia and C. Ukraine.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He †Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (?N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. O. tridentata} Scop.,{\i  Fl. Carn.} ed. 2,{\b  2}: 190 (1772). Tubers ellipsoid or ovoid. Stem 15-45 cm, erect, with 3-4 leaves at or above the base, and with sheaths above. Leaves oblong. Spike conical at first, becoming ovoid. Bracts lanceolate, acuminate, 1-veined, shorter than to about as long as ovary. Flowers pale violet-lilac. All perianth-segments convergent into a galea; outer ovate or ovate-oblong; inner oblong. Labellum longer than wide, with purple spots, 3-lobed; lateral lobes oblong, truncate, oblique and denticulate at apex; middle lobe twice as long as the lateral, cuneate-obovate, emarginate, with 2 obliquely square lobules, often with apiculum in sinus. Spur cylindrical, directed downwards, ½ as long as ovary. 2n = 42.{\i  C. & S. Europe}. Al Au Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tridentata}: Plant often robust. Spike dense. Outer perianth-segments 6-8(-10) mm, acute. Labellum 6-9 mm, the middle lobe entire at apex.{\i  Throughout much of the range of the species, but absent from the Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b commutata} (Tod.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 691 (1882): Plant often slender. Spike lax. Outer perianth-segments 8-10 (-12) mm, acuminate. Labellum 8-10 mm, the middle lobe sometimes denticulate at apex.{\i  S. & S.C. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. O. lactea} Poiret in Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  4}: 594 (1798). Like {\b 8} but stem 7-20 cm; flowers white or greenish-pink; labellum with squarish-oblong or linear lobes and orbicular-obovate middle lobe, denticulate at apex, usually not emarginate; spur sometimes longer than ovary. 2n = 42. {\i Mediterranean region and Balkan peninsula}. Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. O. italica} Poiret in Lam., {\i op. cit.} 600 (1798) ({\i O. longicruris} Link). Tubers ovoid or ellipsoid. Stem 20-40 cm, erect or slightly flexuous, with 5-8 leaves in basal rosette and with sheaths above. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, with undulate margin. Spike conical at first, becoming globose or ovoid. Bracts ovate 1-veined, 1/4-1/3 as long as ovary. Perianth-segments c. 10 mm ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, all convergent into a galea; galea pale pink-lilac with purple veins. Labellum 12-16 mm, longer than wide, pink, often with purple spots, 3-lobed; lateral lobes linear, acute; middle lobe divided into 2 acute, elongate-linear lobules, with short, narrowly linear laciniae between; all segments more or less flat; base of labellum with 2 triangular lamellae, scarcely papillose. Spur cylindrical, directed downwards, ½ as long as ovary. 2n = 42.{\i  Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} ?.Al Bl Cr Gr Hs It Ju Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. O. simia} Lam.,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  3}: 507 (1779). Tubers ovoid or ellipsoid. Stem 20-45 cm, erect or subflexuous, with 3-5 leaves near base or in lower half and with sheaths above. Leaves oblong-lanceolate or -ovate, flat. Spike ovoid or broadly cylindrical. Bracts ovate-lanceolate, usually ½ as long as ovary. Perianth-segments c. 10 mm, ovate-lanceolate or oblong acuminate, all convergent into a galea; galea pale greyish-pink. Labellum 14-16 mm, longer than wide, pinkish-purple with
\par

\par
339}
\par