{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 tuberances; speculum scutelliform, brown or violet-brown, with wide, whitish or yellowish margin.{\i  Greece, Kriti; S.E. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b oxyrrhynchos} (Tod.) Soó,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  24}: 26 (1927): Perianth-segments green, the inner 1/8-1/5 as long as the outer. Labellum with indistinct basal protuberances; speculum often reduced or H-shaped, brownish, with yellowish margin. •{\i  Sicilia, Sardegna}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b exaltata} (Ten.) E. Nelson,{\i  Gestaltwandel} 169 (1962),. Perianth-segments green, the inner 1/3-1/2(-2/3) as long as the outer. Labellum with indistinct basal protuberances, with a usually deflexed appendage; speculum reduced, often H-shaped or of lines or spots. •{\i  C. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A variant from S.E. Italy (Monte Gargano), with the outer perianth-segments white or pink, the inner red, and the labellum dark brown or brownish-purple with a minute appendage, has been named subsp.{\b  sundermannii} Soó, {\i Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  16}: 392 (1970). It has 2n = 36.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variants from S. Italy, with flowers 25-35 mm and inner perianth-segments ½-¾ as long as the outer, have been named subsp.{\b  apulica} O. & E. Danesch, {\i Orchidee}{\b  21}: 20 (1970).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. O. arachnitiformis} Gren. & Philippe, {\i Mém. Soc. Émul. Doubs} ser. 3, {\b 4}: 399 (1859). Plant 15-40 cm. Basal leaves ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, the cauline bract-like. Spike 2- to 9-flowered, lax. Perianth-segments usually pink, rarely purplish-violet, whitish or pale greenish; lateral outer perianth-segments c. 10 mm, oblong-ovate, obtuse, the median outer oblong-elliptical or -lanceolate; inner perianth-segments 6-7 mm, oblong-, triangular- or linear-lanceolate, more intensely coloured than the outer, glabrous, papillose or densely hairy. Labellum 8-10 mm, suborbicular, obovate or somewhat square, subentire, rarely indistinctly 3-lobed, velutinous, with broadly conical, short, inconspicuous basal protuberances, sometimes with a narrow, yellow, glabrous marginal zone, usually with a small appendage; speculum annular or square, usually H-shaped, blue or dark purplish, with whitish or yellow margin. Connective acute. 2n = 36, 38.{\i  W. Mediterranean region.} Ga Hs It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable; probably a hybrid between {\b 6} and {\b 16}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. O. tenthredinifera} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  4}: 67 (1805). Plant 10-45 cm. Basal leaves ovate to lanceolate, subobtuse or acute, the cauline similar, acute. Spike 3- to 8-flowered, lax. Perianth-segments purplish or purplish-violet, rarely whitish; outer 6-12 mm, broadly ovate, obtuse, glabrous, concave; inner usually 1/3 as long as the outer, broadly triangular, papillose-velutinous. Labellum (8-)11-14 × 11-14 mm, obovate, square or flabelliform, convex, entire, rarely oblong and emarginate or indistinctly 3-lobed, purplish-brown, velutinous, usually with a wide, yellow, densely hairy marginal zone, with a glabrous appendage, with short, inconspicuous basal protuberances; speculum reduced, often 2-fid, rarely scutelliform, composed of brown spots. Connective obtuse. 2n = 36.{\i  Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. O. apifera} Hudson,{\i  Fl. Angl.} 340 (1762). Plant 15-50 cm. Basal leaves lanceolate to ovate, obtuse, the cauline similar, acute. Spike 2- to 7(-11)-flowered, lax. Outer perianth-segments (8-)10-15 mm, oblong-ovate, patent or deflexed, purplish or purplish-violet, rarely whitish, green-striate; inner triangular to linear-lanceolate, green or purplish. Labellum 10-13 mm, broadly ovate, strongly convex, brownish- or blackish-purple, rarely yellowish-green or bicolorous, partly papillose, partly villous, with long, yellow, deflexed appendage, or appendage absent; lateral lobes triangular-ovate, deflexed, with externally hairy basal protuberances up to 3 mm; speculum scutelliform at the base, violet or reddish-brown, with a yellow margin, with clear yellow spots towards apex. Connective long-acuminate. 2n = 36. {\i S., W. & C. Europe, northwards to N. Ireland.} Al Au Be Bl Br Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b apifera}: Inner perianth-segments less than half as long as the outer, hairy. Labellum 3-lobed, with an appendage.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b jurana} Ruppert,{\i  Allgem. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  17}: 2 (1911): Inner perianth-segments almost 2/3 as long as the outer, glabrous or papillose. Labellum 3-lobed or indistinctly 5-lobed, with or without an appendage.{\i  Mainly in W.C. Europe; also locally in S. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. O. bombyliflora} Link in Schrader, {\i Jour. für die Bot.}{\b  1799}({\b 2}): 325 (1800) ({\i O. oestrifera} subsp.{\i  umbilicata} (Desf.) Hayek). Plant 7-25 cm. Basal leaves oblong-lanceolate, acute, patent, the cauline erect, slightly sheathing. Spike 1- to 5-flowered, lax. Outer perianth-segments 9-12 mm, ovate, obtuse, green, sometimes whitish, concave, the lateral patent or deflexed; inner c. 1/3 as long as the outer, triangular, purplish at base, greenish towards apex, velutinous. Labellum 8(-10) mm, deeply 3-lobed, the lobes gibbous, deflexed so that the labellum appears globose-inflated, brown or dark brown, partly papillose, partly glabrous, without an appendage; lateral lobes oblong, convex, villous, glabrous towards apex, with externally hairy basal protuberances; middle lobe transversely ovate or oblong; speculum scutelliform or 2-partite, bluish-violet, with paler margin. Connective obtuse. 2n = 36. {\i Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} ?Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 31.        Corallorhiza}      Chatel.   
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.M. Moore. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Brownish saprophytes with much-branched, fleshy, coralloid rhizome; roots absent. Stems with a few sheathing scales. Green leaves absent. Flowers pendent in a spike-like raceme. Perianth-segments more or less patent, free, the outer median and inner lateral somewhat convergent. Labellum entire or 3-lobed, the lateral lobes very small or absent. Spur very short or absent. Column long. Rostellum small. Viscidia 2, distinct; bursicles absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. trifida} Chatel., {\i Sp. Inaug. Corall.} 8 (1760) ({\i C. innata} R. Br.). Stems 7-30 cm, erect, glabrous, yellowish-green, with 2-4 scales up to half as long as stem. Spike lax, 2- to 12-flowered. Outer perianth-segments c. 5 mm, greenish, the lateral linear-lanceolate, with incurved margins, the median ovate-lanceolate; inner perianth-segments narrower, greenish or yellowish with reddish margins or spots. Labellum about as long as other perianth-segments, oblong, whitish with red lines or blotches, with 2 wide longitudinal ridges near the base. 2n = 42.{\i  Damp woods, rarely on moist coastal sands. Europe, southwards to the Pyrenees, S. Appennini, N.W. Greece and Krym, but only on mountains in the south.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He †Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 32.          Calypso}       Salisb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.M. Moore. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Pseudobulb solitary, bearing a single leaf. Flower solitary. Perianth-segments connate at base, patent. Labellum large, inflated, slipper-shaped. Spur absent. Column petaloid, ovate. Rostellum small, 3-dentate. Viscidia 2, distinct; bursicles absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 1. C. bulbosa} (L.) Oakes in Z. Thompson, {\i Hist. Vermont.}{\b  1}:
\par

\par
349}
\par