{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 the margin often with a narrow, glabrous yellowish zone; lateral lobes, if present, without basal protuberances, white- or yellowish-hairy; speculum small, semicircular, transversely linear, H-shaped, horseshoe-shaped or of a single line or spot, violet, with white margin. Connective shortly acuminate. •{\i  S. Greece, Karpathos.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. O. reinholdii} Spruner ex Fleischm., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  57}: 5, 74 (1908). Like {\b 11} but outer perianth-segments lilac, whitish, green or greenish-purple, the inner green, brown or lilac; labellum distinctly 3-lobed, brown or blackish-purple, with narrow, strongly deflexed lateral lobes; speculum of 2 thick, comma-shaped lines or of 2 separate or connected spots, white or pale violet; connective acute.{\i  Greece and N. Aegean region.} Gr. ({\i Anatolia, Syria}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. O. cretica} (Vierh.) E. Nelson,{\i  Gestaltwandel} 146 (1962). Plant 20-30 cm. Basal leaves oblong-lanceolate, acute. Spike 3- to 8-flowered. Perianth-segments green, purplish or brown; outer 8-10 mm, ovate to oblong; inner ½ as long as the outer, linear-lanceolate to triangular, velutinous. Labellum 11-14 mm, distinctly 3-lobed, blackish-purple, with strongly deflexed margins; lateral lobes elliptical, convex, with small basal protuberances, purplish- or blackish-hairy; middle lobe oblong to ovate, with small appendage; speculum of 2 sometimes interconnected lines and H-shaped or scutelliform, or of small spots, white, or bluish with white margin. Connective acute. •{\i  S. Greece and S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. O. carmeli} Fleischm. & Bornm., {\i Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 36}: 7 (1923). Plant 15-35 cm. Basal leaves linear-lanceolate. Spike (3-)5- to 8-flowered, rather dense. Outer perianth-segments 6-10 mm, ovate, green, rarely whitish, the median usually incurved; inner 1/3-1/2 as long as the outer, lanceolate or triangular, green, rarely whitish or purplish, hairy. Labellum 6-10 mm, ovate or oblong, widest towards the apex, distinctly 3-lobed, rarely subentire, with an appendage, strongly deflexed, brown or dark brown, papillose with glabrous marginal zone; lateral lobes patent or deflexed, elliptical, dark brownish-hairy, with basal protuberances c. 3 mm; speculum scutelliform, blue or dark brownish-violet, with yellow margin, often brown-velutinous with glabrous margin. Connective acute. {\i Greece, Turkey-in-Europe.} Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. O. scolopax} Cav., {\i Icon. Descr.}{\b  2}: 46 (1793). Plant 15 cm. Basal leaves lanceolate, acute. Spike 3- to 12-flowered. Perianth-segments pink or purplish-violet, rarely whitish or greenish; outer 8-10(-12) mm, oblong-ovate, glabrous, the median not incurved; inner 1/5-1/2 as long as the outer, lanceolate or triangular, hairy. Labellum suborbicular, ovate, or obovate, distinctly 3-lobed, rarely subentire, widest at or below the middle, strongly deflexed, brownish- or blackish-purple, velutinous, glabrous towards the margin, with an often 3-dentate appendage; lateral lobes ovate to triangular, deflexed, gibbous, dark brownish-hairy; speculum scutelliform, annular or H-shaped, large, violet or blue with yellow or whitish margin, the spots often somewhat dark brownish-velutinous with glabrous margin. Connective acute.{\i  S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa ?Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Labellum 13-15 mm ..................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b heldreichii}
\par
1 Labellum 8-12 mm
\par
2 Middle lobe of labellum wider than long, with wide
\par
  marginal zone .................................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b oestrifera}
\par
2 Middle lobe of labellum as long as or longer than wide
\par
3 Middle lobe of labellum with papillose, very narrow,
\par
  glabrous marginal zone; basal protuberances small, wide,
\par
  obtuse ................................................................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b scolopax}
\par
3 Middle lobe of labellum with wide, glabrous marginal zone; 
\par
  basal protuberances up to 10 mm, conical, acute ............... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b cornuta}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b scolopax}: Labellum 8-12 mm; lateral lobes with small, wide, obtuse basal protuberances; middle lobe suborbicular, ovate or obovate, as long as or longer than wide, with papillose, very narrow, glabrous marginal zone. 2n = 36 (38, 40).{\i  W. & C. Mediterranean region, Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b oestrifera} (Bieb.) Soó,{\i  Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung. }{\b 16}: 386 (1970): Labellum 8-12 mm; lateral lobes with small or medium basal protuberances; middle lobe ovate-rectangular, wider than long, with wide, glabrous marginal zone.{\i  Krym.} ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b cornuta} (Steven) Camus,{\i  Monogr. Orchid. Eur}. 270 (1908): Labellum 8-12 mm; lateral lobes with conical, acute, basal protuberances up to 10 mm; middle lobe suborbicular, ovate or obovate, as long as or longer than wide, with wide, glabrous marginal zone. 2n = 36.{\i  E.C. & S.E. Europe and C. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b heldreichii} (Schlechter) E. Nelson, {\i Gestaltwandel} 160 (1962) ({\i O. oestrifera }subsp.{\i  heldreichii} (Schlechter) Hayek): Labellum 13-15 mm; lateral lobes with basal protuberances up to 5 mm; middle lobe suborbicular to elliptic-ovate, as long as or longer than wide, with wide, glabrous marginal zone. {\i Greece and Aegean region}; ?{\i S.E. Italy}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. O. fuciflora} (F. W. Schmidt) Moench,{\i  Meth., Suppl. }311 (1802) ({\i Orchis fuciflora} F. W. Schmidt,{\i  Ophrys arachnites} (L.) Reichard). Plant 15-55 cm. Basal leaves ovate-oblong, obtuse, the cauline narrower, acute. Spike 2- to 6(-14)-flowered, lax. Perianth-segments pink, pale pinkish, whitish or green; outer 9-13 mm, ovate-oblong, obtuse, glabrous, the median concave; inner triangular, rarely linear-lanceolate, hairy. Labellum 9-13 (-16) mm ovate, suborbicular or transversely elliptical, entire, rarely 3-lobed, brown or dark brownish-purple, velutinous papillose in the centre, sometimes with a yellowish marginal zone, usually with basal protuberances up to 3 mm, with a wide, often 3-dentate, usually upcurved appendage; speculum variable, large. Connective acute. 2n = 36.{\i  S., W. & C. Europe, northwards to S. England and C. Czechoslovakia.} Al Au Be Bl Br Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Sa ?Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perianth-segments green; labellum with very indistinct
\par
  basal protuberances
\par
2 Inner perianth-segments 1/8-1/5 as long as the outer
  .................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b oxyrrhynchos}
\par
2 Inner perianth-segments at least 1/3 as long as the 
\par
  outer .................................................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b exaltata}
\par
1 Perianth-segments pink, pale purplish or whitish;
\par
  labellum with distinct basal protuberances
\par
3 Speculum scutelliform, brown or violet-brown, with wide
\par
  whitish or yellowish margin; inner perianth-segments
\par
  1/5 as long as the outer ....................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b candica}
\par
3 Speculum variable, violet or blue, with narrow yellow 
\par
  or greenish margin; inner perianth-segments usually
\par
  1/4-1/3 as long as the outer ............................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b fuciflora}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b fuciflora}: Perianth-segments pink, pale purplish or whitish, the inner usually 1/4-1/3 as long as the outer. Labellum with distinct basal protuberances; speculum violet or blue, with narrow, yellow or greenish margin. 2n = 36 (37, 38). {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b candica} E. Nelson ex Soó,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 368 (1978): Perianth-segments pink, pale purplish or whitish, the inner 1/5 as long as the outer. Labellum with distinct basal pro-
\par

\par
348}
\par