{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Labellum 8-15 mm, somewhat longer than wide, broadly ovate to obovate, 3-lobed; lateral lobes ovate or orbicular, obtuse, crenulate towards the apex; middle lobe almost square, truncate to 2-lobed, crenulate. Spur cylindrical, patent. 2n = 42. {\i Much of Europe, but absent from E. Fennoscandia and the E. half of U.S.S.R}. All except Az Cr Is Rs (N, E) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spur longer than ovary; lateral lobes of labellum 
\par
  deflexed ............................................................................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b olbiensis}
\par
1 Spur shorter than to about as long as ovary; lateral 
\par
  lobes of labellum not deflexed
\par
2 Perianth-segments aristate-acuminate; middle lobe of 
\par
  labellum up to twice as long as lateral lobes .................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b signifera}
\par
2 Perianth-segments obtuse to shortly acuminate; middle 
\par
  lobe of labellum not more than 1½ times as long as 
\par
  lateral lobes
\par
3 Perianth-segments erecto-patent, obtuse; labellum with
\par
  small protuberances ......................................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b hispanica}
\par
3 Perianth-segments deflexed; labellum without protuberances
\par
4 Perianth-segments obtuse, lilac, the outer with brownish-purple
\par
   veins; spur shorter than ovary; spike lax, few-flowered ({\b b}) subsp. {\b wanjkowii}
\par
4 Perianth-segments obtuse, acute or shortly acuminate,
\par
  usually purple; spur usually as long as ovary; spike 
\par
  dense, many-flowered ........................................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b mascula}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b mascula} (incl. subsp.{\i  occidentalis} O. Schwarz, var.{\i  obtusifolia} Koch): Spike dense, many-flowered. Perianth-segments usually purple, obtuse, acute or shortly acuminate. Lateral lobes of labellum not deflexed; middle lobe up to 1½ times as long as the lateral. Spur usually as long as ovary.{\i  Mainly W. & W.C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b wanjkowii} (Wulf) Soó in R. Keller, Schlechter & Soó,{\i  Monogr. Icon. Orchid. Eur.}{\b  2}: 170 (1932): Spike lax, few-flowered. Perianth-segments lilac, the outer with brownish-purple veins, obtuse. Lateral lobes of labellum not deflexed; middle lobe up to 1½ times as long as the lateral. Spur shorter than ovary. •{\i  Krym}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b signifera} (Vest) Soó,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  24}: 28 (1927): Spike dense, many-flowered. Perianth-segments purple, aristate-acuminate, the outer often deflexed at apex. Lateral lobes of labellum not deflexed; middle lobe up to twice as long as the lateral. Spur as long as ovary. 2n = 42.{\i  C., S. & E. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b olbiensis} (Reuter ex Grenier) Ascherson & Graebner,{\i  Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  3}: 703 (1907): Spike lax, few-flowered. Perianth-segments pale pink or reddish, obtuse. Lateral lobes of labellum deflexed; middle lobe up to 1½ times as long as the lateral. Spur longer than ovary.{\i  W. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b hispanica} (A. & C. Nieschalk) Soó,{\i  Jahresb. Naturw. Ver. Wuppertal}{\b  25}: 45 (1972): Spike lax, many-flowered. Perianth-segments obtuse, purple. Lateral lobes of labellum not deflexed; middle lobe slightly longer than the lateral. Spur shorter than to as long as ovary.{\i  C. Pyrenees and mountains of S.W. Spain.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. O. pallens} L.,{\i  Mantissa Alt.} 292 (1771). Tubers subglobose or ovoid, more or less stipitate. Stem 15-35 cm, erect, with leaves in lower half and sheaths above, naked in the uppermost part. Leaves oblong or oblong-obovate, gradually narrowed towards the base. Spike ovoid or oblong, dense. Bracts lanceolate, 1-veined, as long as or longer than ovary. Flowers pale yellow, with odour of {\i Sambucus nigra.} Outer perianth-segments 7-9 mm, ovate-oblong, obtuse, the 2 lateral deflexed, the median erect; inner perianth-segments obliquely oblong. Labellum 6-8 × 6-8 mm, suborbicular-rhombic, 3-lobed; lateral lobes orbicular, obtuse; middle lobe almost square, truncate or emarginate. Spur cylindrical, patent, slightly shorter than ovary. 2n = 40.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe, extending to the S.W. Alps and C. Appennini.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. O. provincialis} Balbis,{\i  Mém. Acad. Sci. }({\i Turin}) {\b 1805-1808}: 20 (1806). Tubers subglobose or ovoid. Stem 15-35 cm, erect, with 2-5 leaves at the base and sheaths above. Leaves lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate. Spike cylindrical. Bracts lanceolate, 1-to 3-veined, at least as long as ovary. Flowers pale yellow, or white with deep yellow labellum, with slight odour. Outer perianth-segments 9-11 mm, ovate-oblong, obtuse, the 2 lateral deflexed, the median erect; inner smaller, obliquely oblong. Labellum suborbicular, 3-lobed; lateral lobes rounded; middle lobe small, orbicular-truncate, scarcely longer than the lateral. Spur cylindrical, patent, as long as or longer than ovary. 2n = 42.{\i  S. Europe.} Al Bu Co Cr Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Rs (K) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b provincialis}: Leaves usually with dark spots. Spike dense, with 5-20 flowers. Labellum 8-12 × 8-12 mm.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pauciflora} (Ten.) Camus,{\i  Monogr. Orchid. Europ. }160 (1908): Leaves usually without spots. Spike lax, with 3-7 flowers. Labellum 13-15 × 13-15 mm.{\i  Balkan peninsula and E. & C. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. O. anatolica} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 5}): 56 (1844). Tubers subglobose or ovoid, sessile or shortly stipitate. Stem 15-40 cm, erect or slightly flexuous, with a basal rosette of 2-5 leaves and with sheaths above, naked in upper part. Leaves lanceolate or oblong, gradually narrowed towards the base. Spike ovoid, lax, few-flowered. Bracts lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, 1- to 3-veined, usually somewhat shorter than ovary. Flowers purple or pale pink. Outer perianth-segments 8-10 mm, oblong-ovate or -lanceolate, obtuse, the 2 lateral patent, the median oblong-lanceolate, directed downward or recurved; inner perianth-segments oblong-ovate, subobtuse. Labellum 10-14 (-17) × 10-14(-17) mm, obovate, 3-lobed; lateral lobes rhombic, truncate; middle lobe squarish, truncate or excised, longer than the lateral. Spur linear-conical, widened towards the mouth, longer than ovary.{\i  Islands of S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Kriti, with larger, greenish-violet flowers, an elongated labellum and the spur conspicuously curved upwards, have been named subsp. {\b sitiaca} Renz, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  30}: 100 (1932). Their status requires investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. O. quadripunctata} Cyr. ex Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  1}, {\i Prodr.} 53 (1811). Tubers subglobose or ovoid. Stem 10-30 cm, erect or slightly flexuous, with a basal rosette of 2-4 leaves and with sheaths above, naked in upper part. Leaves oblong-lanceolate or -linear. Spike ovoid or cylindrical, many-flowered. Bracts lanceolate, 1- to 3-veined, shorter than to as long as ovary. Flowers purple-violet or pinkish. Outer perianth-segments 3-5 mm, patent, ovate, obtuse, the median oblong to ovate, recurved; inner 2-5 mm, obliquely ovate, obtuse. Labellum orbicular or rhombic, white at the base, with purple spots, 3-lobed (rarely entire); lateral lobes 4-7 mm, convergent, cruciform or divergent, oblong, ovate or rhombic; middle lobe oblong or squarish, truncate. Spur filiform, not widened towards the mouth, about as long as ovary.{\i  Mediterranean region, from Sardegna eastwards.} Al Cr Gr It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. O. laxiflora} Lam.,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  3}: 504 (1779). Tubers subglobose or ellipsoid, subsessile or shortly stipitate. Stem 30-80 cm, erect or slightly flexuous, with 3-8 patent leaves. Leaves linear or lanceolate. Spike ovoid or cylindrical, lax. Bracts lanceolate, 3- to 7-veined, shorter to longer than ovary. Flowers purple. Outer perianth-segments 7-10 mm, oblong, obtuse, the 2 lateral deflexed, the median more or less erect; inner shorter, obliquely oblong. Labellum 6-12 × 8-12 mm, suborbicular, obovate or
\par

\par
341}
\par