{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 outside, especially at the apex, yellowish inside, not tessellated, the outer 20-28 × 4-6 mm, oblong, acute, the inner 7-10 mm wide, obovate-cuneate or obtuse. Nectaries 2 × 1 mm, at the base of the perianth-segment. Filaments 7-9 mm, papillose. Style 10 mm, smooth, undivided. Capsule broadly 6-winged. 2n = 24.{\i  Woods, scrub and grassy places. • S. Bulgaria, Turkey.} Bu ?Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. F. ehrhartii} Boiss. & Orph. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 4}): 105 (1859). Stem 6-20 cm. Leaves 6-10, glaucous, the lowest 2·5-7 cm × 10-15 mm, opposite, oblong-lanceolate, the rest narrower, alternate. Perianth narrowly campanulate; segments dark purplish-brown, with a yellow apex outside, greenish-yellow inside, not tessellated, the outer 14-23 × 4-6 mm, narrowly ovate or oblong, acute, the inner 7-11 mm wide, obovate-cuneate, or obtuse. Nectaries 2 × 1 mm, at the base of the perianth-segment. Filaments 4-6 mm, papillose. Style 5-9 mm, smooth, undivided. Capsule not winged.{\i  Rocky and bushy places. • Aegean region} ({\i Evvoia, N. Kikladhes}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 24.      Lilium}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.A. Matthews. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Bulbous perennials. Bulbs of overlapping scales, without a tunic. Leaves numerous, verticillate or scattered, usually decreasing in size up the stem. Flowers solitary or in a raceme, erect or nodding. Perianth-segments 6, free, petaloid, erect to strongly recurved, caducous. Nectary-furrows present. Anthers dorsifixed, versatile; filaments filiform, often slightly flattened. Style long; stigma 3-lobed. Fruit an obovoid capsule, more or less 6-angled. Seeds numerous, flat.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: H.J. Elwes,{\i  A Monograph of the Genus} Lilium. London. 1877-1880. A. Grove & A.D. Cotton,{\i  A Supplement to Elwes' Monograph of the Genus} Lilium. London. 1934-1940. H.B.D. Woodcock & W.T. Stearn,{\i  Lilies of the World.} London. 1950.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers with erect or patent, never strongly recurved 
\par
  perianth-segments
\par
2 Flowers orange to bright red .................................................... {\b 3. bulbiferum}
\par
2 Flowers white ............................................................................. {\b 2. candidum}
\par
1 Flowers with ± strongly recurved perianth-segments
\par
3 Flowers pink or purplish, rarely white;
   leaves usually verticillate ............................................................ {\b 1. martagon}
\par
3 Flowers yellow, orange or scarlet; leaves not verticillate
\par
4 Perianth-segments 8-12 cm
\par
5 Perianth-segments orange; stem-bulbils present ................... {\b 10. lancifolium}
\par
5 Perianth-segments yellow; stem-bulbils absent
\par
6 Perianth-segments unspotted; anthers red ............................. {\b 8. rhodopaeum}
\par
6 Perianth-segments spotted; anthers dark yellow ................. {\b 9. monadelphum}
\par
4 Perianth-segments 3-7 cm
\par
7 Leaves changing abruptly in aspect from patent below to
\par
  appressed above .................................................................. {\b 7. chalcedonicum}
\par
7 Leaves changing gradually in aspect up the stem
\par
8 Flowers bright red or orange
\par
9 Leaves pubescent on the veins beneath .................................. {\b 6. carniolicum}
\par
9 Leaves glabrous on the veins beneath
\par
10 Leaves up to 1 cm wide; flowers bright red ......................... {\b 5. pomponium}
\par
10 Leaves up to 2 cm wide; flowers orange-red ........................ {\b 4. pyrenaicum}
\par
8  Flowers yellow
\par
11 Leaves pubescent on the veins beneath, sometimes inter-
\par
   mittently so ............................................................................. {\b 6. carniolicum}
\par
11 Leaves glabrous on the veins beneath
\par
12 Perianth-segments c. 3 cm, unspotted .................................. {\b 6. carniolicum}
\par
12 Perianth-segments 5-6·5 cm, spotted .................................... {\b 4. pyrenaicum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. martagon} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }303 (1753). Stem 90-180 cm. Leaves up to 16 × 6·5 cm, usually in whorls, oblanceolate, 7- to 9-veined, glabrous or pubescent on the veins beneath. Flowers 5-10(-40), ebracteolate; pedicels recurved. Perianth-segments up to 3·5 cm, recurved, pink to dark purplish-red (rarely white), often spotted. Filaments pinkish; anthers orange-yellow or reddish-purple. 2n = 24+0-2B. {\i Woods and scrub. From N.E. France, Estonia and C. Ural southwards to C. Spain and C. Greece.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Tu [Be *Br Da Fe Ho No Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Variable, especially in colour of flowers and hairiness of stem and flowers, but the variants are worth no more than varietal status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. candidum} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }302 (1753). Stem 90-120(-180) cm. Leaves up to 19·5 × 2·5 cm, lanceolate, 3- to 5-veined, glabrous beneath. Flowers 5-6(-15), sometimes bracteolate; pedicels erect or patent. Perianth-segments c. 8 cm, slightly recurved near apex, white. Filaments white; anthers yellow. 2n = 24.{\i  Rocky slopes and scrub. W. & S. Greece; S. Jugoslavia} ({\i S. Makedonija}). {\i Cultivated for ornament and naturalized from gardens in the Mediterranean region.} Gr Ju [Al Co Ga It Sa Si]. ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. bulbiferum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 302 (1753). Stem 40-60(-150) cm; leaf-axils with or without bulbils. Leaves up to 7(-15) × 1·5 cm, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, 3- to 7(-9)-veined, more or less glabrous beneath, ciliate. Flowers 1-3, sometimes bracteolate; pedicels erect. Perianth-segments 5·5-8·5 cm, erect, orange or bright red, with black spots and papillose inside. Filaments orange-pink; anthers reddish-brown to orange. 2n = 24. •{\i  C. Europe, extending southwards to Spain, S. Italy and N.W. Jugoslavia.} Au Co Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po *Rm [?Fe No Rs (B, W) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Var. {\i croceum} (Chaix) Pers. (subsp. {\i croceum }(Chaix) Baker) differs from the typical variety in having orange flowers, and stem-bulbils usually absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. pyrenaicum} Gouan, {\i Obs. Bot.} 25 (1773). Stem 30-90 (-135) cm. Leaves up to 13 × 2 cm, ascending to patent, linear-lanceolate, 3(-15)-veined, glabrous beneath, minutely ciliate. Flowers 1-8(-12), bracteolate; pedicels recurved. Perianth-segments 5-6·5 cm, recurved, greenish-yellow or rarely orange-red, with dark purple lines and spots and purplish-black papillae inside. Filaments pale green; anthers reddish-brown. {\i Woods and mountain meadows. • S. France and N. Spain.} Ga Hs [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A variant with orange-red flowers (forma {\i rubrum }Stoker) occurs in N. Spain together with the typical plant.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. pomponium} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 302 (1753). Stem 30-75(-90) cm. Leaves up to 13 × 1 cm, patent below, gradually more appressed above, linear, 1- to 3-veined, glabrous beneath, ciliate. Flowers 1-6(-10), bracteolate; pedicels recurved. Perianth-segments 5-6·5 cm, recurved, bright red, with dark purple lines and spots and purplish papillae inside. Filaments pale green; anthers red.{\i  Rocky hillsides. • Maritime Alps and adjacent hill-country.} Ga ?Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. carniolicum} Bernh. ex Koch, {\i Syn. Fl. Germ.} 708 (1837). Stem 25-80(-90) cm. Leaves up to 7·5 × 2 cm, lanceolate, 3- to 9-veined, pubescent or not on the veins beneath, ciliate. Flowers 1-6, usually bracteolate; pedicels recurved. Perianth-segments
\par

\par
34}
\par