{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 2-lobed, wide in relation to labellum.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b melena} Renz,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  25}: 264 (1928): Labellum 9-12 mm, the lobes subequal or the middle lobe smaller, with marginal zone 1-2 mm wide with blackish-purple hairs, blackish-purple (except the marginal zone and speculum); speculum 2-lobed, wide in relation to labellum. •{\i  Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subspp. ({\b b}) and ({\b c}) are perhaps of hybrid origin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. O. fusca} Link in Schrader,{\i  Jour. für die Bot.}{\b  1799}({\b 2}): 324 (1800). Plant 10-40 cm. Basal leaves oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, mucronate, the cauline 1-2, lanceolate, acute. Spike 1- to 9-flowered, lax. Perianth-segments subglabrous or papillose; outer 9-11 mm, oblong or ovate, green, rarely pinkish; inner perianth-segments 6-8 mm, at least ½ as long as outer, linear to linear-oblong, green. Labellum 13-23 × 9-21 mm, with margins more or less deflexed, obovate, purplish or yellowish-brown, velutinous, 3-lobed with broadly rounded lobes, not globose-inflated; lateral lobes oblong-ovate, obtuse; middle lobe reniform, obcordate or ovate, usually emarginate; speculum 2-partite, blue, bluish-violet or brown, often with white or yellow margin, sometimes with white or pale yellow lines. Connective obtuse. 2n = c. 73.{\i  Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal; S.W. Romania.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lateral lobes of labellum almost as long as the middle;
\par
  inner perianth-segments as long as the outer ...................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b durieui}
\par
1 Lateral lobes of labellum very short; inner perianth-
\par
  segments 1/2-2/3 as long as the outer
\par
2 Labellum geniculately deflexed at base; speculum entire,
\par
  with white margin and with omega-shaped mark ......... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b omegaifera}
\par
2 Labellum horizontal or inclined downwards, incised at 
\par
  base; speculum usually divided into 2 parts without 
\par
  W-shaped mark
\par
3 Labellum not more than 15 × 12 mm, with narrow yellow 
\par
  margin; speculum greyish-blue or bluish-violet .................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b fusca}
\par
3 Labellum up to 25 × 21 mm, without yellow margin;
\par
  speculum shining blue ........................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b iricolor}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b durieui} (Reichenb. fil.) Soó, {\i Feddes Repert}.{\b  24}: 26 (1927): Flowers 1-2(4). Inner perianth-segments papillose. Labellum up to 30 mm, purplish-violet or dark red, long-villous-velutinous, more or less concave in the middle, curved upwards at the apex. Speculum shining, metallic blue.{\i  S. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b fusca}: Flowers 3-8. Inner perianth-segments subglabrous. Labellum 13-15 × 9-12 mm. Speculum greyish-blue or bluish-violet. 2n = 72(76). {\i Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b iricolor} (Desf.) O. Schwarz, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  36}: 77 (1934) ({\i O. fleischmannii} auct., non Hayek): Flowers 1-4. Inner perianth-segments often papillose. Labellum up to 25 × 21 mm. Speculum shining blue. 2n = 36.{\i  C. & E. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b omegaifera} (Fleischm.) E. Nelson, {\i Gestaltwandel} 209 (1962) ({\i O. omegaifera} Fleischm.,{\i  O. fleischmannii} Hayek): Flowers 2-6. Inner perianth-segments papillose. Labellum up to 20 mm, without yellow margin. Speculum red-brown to brownish-violet, with white or pale yellow margin, and with w-shaped mark.{\i  C. & E. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The distribution of subsp. ({\b c}) is uncertain because of confusion, perhaps resulting from introgressive hybridization, with subsp. ({\b b}) in the W. Mediterranean region.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. O. pallida} Rafin.,{\i  Caratt. }87 (1810). Like {\b 4} but inner perianth-segments white to pale greenish, papillose; labellum 7-9 mm, geniculately deflexed at base, the middle lobe reniform or ovate, sometimes emarginate or shallowly 3-lobed. {\i Sicilia.} ?Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. O. sphegodes} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict}. ed. 8, no. 8 (1768) ({\i O. aranifera} Hudson). Plant 10-45 cm. Basal leaves ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, usually mucronate. Spike 2- to 10-flowered, lax. Perianth-segments glabrous, rarely papillose; outer 6-10(-12) mm, oblong-ovate to -lanceolate, more or less obtuse, green, rarely purplish or whitish, the median usually narrower; inner perianth-segments 4-8 mm, at least ½ as long as the outer and usually narrower, oblong-triangular to -lanceolate, green, greenish-purple or brownish-red, 1- to 3-veined, usually with undulate margin. Labellum with margins deflexed or flattened, orbicular to ovate, velutinous, rarely with a small appendage, not globose-inflated; speculum usually H-shaped (the cross-line sometimes absent), rarely scutelliform, bluish-violet or blackish-purple. Connective acute. {\i W., C. & S. Europe, northwards to S. England and C. Germany and eastwards to Krym.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Labellum with velutinous speculum ................................. ({\b g}) subsp. {\b helenae}
\par
1 Labellum with glabrous speculum
\par
2 Labellum wider than long .............................................. ({\b f}) subsp. {\b aesculapii}
\par
2 Labellum at least as long as wide
\par
3 Labellum 8-15(-17) × 8-14(-17) mm, blackish-brown or
\par
  -purple, with large basal protuberances
\par
4 Inner perianth-segments wide, ± obtuse; labellum densely
\par
  long-villous-velutinous; speculum H-shaped or U-shaped,
\par
  rarely scutelliform, often extending to the protuberances .... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b atrata}
\par
4 Inner perianth-segments narrow, rather acute, labellum 
\par
  shortly velutinous; speculum H-shaped or with the cross-
\par
  line absent ...................................................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b mammosa}
\par
3 Labellum 5-12 × 5-12 mm, pale to dark brown, rarely
\par
  blackish-brown or yellowish, with or without basal protuberances
\par
5 Labellum (8-)10-12 × 8-12 mm .................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b sphegodes}
\par
5 Labellum 5-10 × 5-10 mm
\par
6 Flowers usually 6-10, rarely fewer; inner perianth-
\par
  segments 1-veined ............................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b litigiosa}
\par
6 Flowers usually 3-5, rarely more; inner perianth-
\par
  segments 3-veined ....................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b tommasinii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sphegodes}: Outer perianth-segments green. Labellum (8-)10-12 × 8-12 mm, with or without large basal protuberances, brown or dark brown, velutinous, entire, rarely indistinctly 3-lobed; speculum usually H-shaped, rarely with the cross line absent, glabrous. 2n = 36.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except parts of the south-east.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b litigiosa} (Camus) Becherer, {\i Beitr. Pflanzengeogr. Nordschweiz }46 (1925) ({\i O. litigiosa} Camus): Flowers usually 6-10, rarely fewer. Inner perianth-segments 1-veined. Labellum 5-8 × 5-8 mm, usually without basal protuberances, pale- or blackish-brown, rarely yellowish, papillose-velutinous, entire, rarely indistinctly 3-lobed; speculum irregularly H-shaped or scutelliform, glabrous. 2n = 36.{\i  S. & S.C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b tommasinii} (Vis.) Soó,{\i  Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung. }{\b 16}: 382 (1970) ({\i O. tommasinii} Vis.): Flowers usually 3-5, rarely more. Inner perianth-segments 3-veined. Labellum 6-10 × 6-10 mm, with basal protuberances, pale brown, papillose-subvillous; speculum U-shaped, scutelliform, glabrous. •{\i  Coasts of W. Jugoslavia and N.W. Greece}.
\par
 ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b atrata} (Lindley) E. Mayer, {\i Sezn. Prapr. Cvet. Slov.} 387 (1952) ({\i O. atrata }Lindley): Inner perianth-segments wide more or less obtuse. Labellum 8-12(-13) × 8-12(-13) mm, with large basal protuberances, blackish-brown or -purple, densely long-villous-velutinous, often emarginate; speculum H-shaped or U-shaped, rarely scutelliform, often extending to the protuber
\par

\par
346}
\par