{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 triangular-obovate, cuneate at the base; lateral lobes oblong or oblong-orbicular, deflexed after anthesis; middle lobe entire to shallowly 2-lobed. Spur cylindrical.{\i  W., C. & S. Europe, extending northwards to Gotland and eastwards to S. Russia}. Al Au Be Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, E) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Labellum subentire or indistinctly 3-lobed; leaves 
\par
  1·5-2·5 cm wide .................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b elegans}
\par
1 Labellum distinctly 3-lobed; leaves usually 1-2 cm wide
\par
2 Middle lobe of labellum usually shorter than the lateral;
\par
  spur widened at apex ........................................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b laxiflora}
\par
2 Middle lobe of labellum as long as or longer than the 
\par
  lateral; spur usually narrowed at apex or of uniform 
\par
  width ................................................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b palustris}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b laxiflora}: Labellum up to 7(-10) mm, distinctly 3-lobed; middle lobe usually shorter than the lateral. Spur widened at apex, 1/2-2/3 as long as ovary. 2n = 36.{\i  W. & S. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b palustris} (Jacq.) Bonnier & Layens,{\i  Fl. Fr.} 311 (1894) ({\i O. palustris} Jacq.): Labellum up to 10 mm, distinctly 3-lobed; middle lobe at least as long as the lateral. Spur narrowed at apex or of uniform width, rarely widened at apex, slightly to much shorter than ovary. 2n = 42. {\i Mainly in the northern and western parts of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b elegans} (Heuffel) Soó, {\i Notizbl. Bot. Gart. Berlin}{\b  9}: 910 (1926) ({\i O. pseudolaxiflora} Czerniakovska pro parte): Labellum up to 12 mm, subentire or indistinctly 3-lobed; middle lobe at least as long as the lateral. Spur narrowed at apex, shorter than to almost as long as ovary.{\i  E. & E.C. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 25.        Aceras}        R.Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.M. Moore. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Tubers 2, ovoid to subglobose, entire. Stem with numerous leaves. Flowers in a dense spike. Perianth-segments all connivent to form a semi-globose galea over the column. Labellum shaped like a man, with linear lateral lobes at base and a long middle lobe distally divided into two slender segments. Spur absent. Column very short. Rostellum minute. Viscidia 2, more or less globose, often coherent, in one simple bursicle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. anthropophorum} (L.) Aiton fil.,{\i  Epit. Hort. Kew.} 281 (1814). Stem 10-40(-60) cm, glabrous, with brownish, sheathing basal scales. Lower leaves 5-12 cm, oblong to oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, canaliculate, erect, later erecto-patent, the upper smaller or bract-like. Spike narrowly cylindrical, many-flowered; bracts membranous. Flowers greenish-yellow, often with reddish streaks and margins. Outer perianth-segments 6-7 mm, ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, the inner shorter and narrower. Labellum 12-15 mm, pendent, yellowish, often reddish-brown; lateral lobes c. ½ as long as the middle. 2n = 42.{\i  Grassland, rarely scrub; calcicole. Mediterranean region and W. Europe, northwards to C. England and the Netherlands.} Be Bl Br Co Cr Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Frequently hybridizes with species of {\i Orchis}, especially{\i  O. militaris, O. purpurea} and {\i O. simia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 26.            Himantoglossum}      Koch
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.M. Moore. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Tubers 2, ovoid to subglobose, entire. Stem with numerous leaves, clothed with brownish fibres at base. Flowers in a long spike. Bracts equalling or shorter than flowers. Outer perianth-segments connivent with inner lateral to form a galea. Labellum 3-lobed, much exceeding other perianth-segments, the middle lobe much exceeding the lateral and spirally twisted. Spur present. Column rather short. Rostellum prominent, beak-like. Viscidium solitary, hemispherical or ellipsoid, bearing 2 pollinia, bursicle simple.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: H. Sundermann,{\i  Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung. }{\b 19}: 367-374 (1973).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. hircinum} (L.) Sprengel,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  3}: 694 (1826) ({\i Loroglossum hircinum} (L.) L. C. M. Richard,{\i  Orchis hircina} (L. Crantz). Stem 20-90 cm, stout, glabrous, with indistinct purplish blotches. Lower leaves 4-6, 5-15 × 3-5 cm, elliptic-oblong obtuse, the upper smaller, acute, amplexicaul. Spike 10-30(-50 cm, cylindrical, rather lax. Flowers large, with a strong odour. Perianth-segments 7-10 mm, subequal, pale green, with purplish spots and streaks, the outer ovate, obtuse, the inner linear. Labellum 30-50 mm, whitish, with purple spots and papillose towards base, darker green and smooth distally; lateral lobes linear, acute, curled, often purplish; middle lobe c. 2 mm wide, lorate, somewhat undulate; spur obtuse, slightly curved downwards. 2n = ?24, 36.{\i  Grassland, scrub and open woods; usually calcicole. S., S.C. & W. Europe, northwards to C. England and the Netherlands.} Au Be Br Bu ?Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (K) ?Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Middle lobe of labellum deeply divided into 2 apical 
\par
  lobules c. 15 mm; galea ovoid ......................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b caprinum}
\par
1 Middle lobe of labellum shallowly emarginate or 2- to 4
\par
  dentate; galea subglobose
\par
2 Lateral lobes of labellum 5-10 mm; spur c. 4 mm, conical
\par
  ........................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b hircinum}
\par
2 Lateral lobes of labellum 12-20 mm; spur 7-12 mm, sub-
\par
  cylindrical ...................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b calcaratum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b hircinum}: Tubers ovoid to subglobose. Spike 15-to 80-flowered; bracts linear-lanceolate. Galea subglobose. Labellum distinctly papillose towards base; lateral lobes 5-10 mm, the middle truncate and shallowly emarginate or 2- to 4-dentate; spur c. 4 mm, conical.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except for parts of the south-east.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b calcaratum} (G. Beck) Soó,{\i  Bot. Arch.} ({\i Berlin}){\b  23}: 90 (1928): Like subsp. ({\i a}) but lateral lobes of labellum 12-20 mm; spur 7-12 mm, subcylindrical.{\i  S.E. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b caprinum} (Bieb.) Sundermann,{\i  Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  19}: 373 (1973): Like subsp. ({\i a}) but tubers ellipsoid; spike (9-)15- to 20(-24)-flowered, with linear bracts; galea ovoid; labellum minutely papillose at base, the middle lobe deeply divided into 2 apical lobules c. 15 mm. •{\i  Krym}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 27.               Barlia}        Parl.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.M. Moore. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Himantoglossum} but bracts exceeding flowers; outer perianth-segments erecto-patent, not connivent to form a galea; labellum not more than twice as long as other perianth-segments.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. robertiana} (Loisel.) W. Greuter, {\i Boissiera}{\b  13}: 192 (1967) ({\i Aceras longibracteatum} Reichenb. fil.,{\i  Loroglossum longibracteatum} Moris ex Ardoino, {\i Orchis longibracteata} Biv., non F. W. Schmidt). Tubers ovoid. Stem 25-50(-80) cm, stout, glabrous. Lower leaves 8-25 × 4-10 cm, ovate to oblong or elliptical, obtuse to subacute, mucronate, the upper smaller or bract-like. Spike 8-20 cm, ovoid, becoming cylindrical, dense, many-flowered. Flowers fragrant. Outer perianth-segments 20-25 mm, elliptical to ovate, concave, obtuse, purple; inner lateral connivent, slightly shorter than the outer, linear-lanceolate, obtuse, green with purplish spots. Labellum up to 20 mm, crenulate, pinkish-violet, greenish or white, with purple spots in centre; lateral lobes linear, falcate; middle lobe 1½-2 times as long as the lateral, divided to c. ½-way into 2 diverging, obtuse
\par

\par
342}
\par