{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 lobules, often with a small tooth in the sinus. Spur short, stout, conical. 2n = 36. {\i Grassland, open woodland and scrub. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 28.      Anacamptis}      L.C.M. Richard
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.M. Moore. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Tubers usually 2, ovoid or subglobose, entire. Stem with numerous leaves. Flowers in a dense spike. Outer lateral perianth-segments patent, the outer median connivent with the inner lateral to form a galea. Labellum deeply 3-lobed, with 2 longitudinal ridges at the base. Spur long, directed downwards. Column short. Rostellum small. Viscidium solitary, transversely elongate, bearing 2 pollinia; bursicle simple.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. pyramidalis} (L.) L. C. M. Richard,{\i  Orchid. Eur. Annot.} 33 (1817) ({\i Orchis pyramidalis} L.). Stem 20-60(-75) cm, slender, with 2-3 brownish, sheathing basal scales. Lower leaves 8-25 cm, linear- to oblong-lanceolate, acute, canaliculate, entire, the upper smaller, or bract-like. Spike 2-8 cm, conical to shortly cylindrical, many-flowered; bracts linear-lanceolate. Flowers purplish-red, rarely pink or white. Perianth-segments 4-6 mm, subequal, broadly lanceolate, the outer median elliptic-ovate, concave. Labellum 6-8(-9) mm, broadly cuneate, the lobes c. 4 mm, subequal, oblong, more or less entire. Spur 12-14 mm, filiform, acute. 2n = 36.{\i  Grassland and scrub; calcicole. W., C. & S. Europe, extending northwards to the Baltic islands and eastwards to C. Ukraine.} All except Az Fa Fe Is No Rs (N, E) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants with small leaves and short spikes, from mountainous regions of the E. Mediterranean region, have been named var. {\i brachystachys} (D'Urv.) Boiss.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 29.      Serapias}           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.M. Moore. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Tubers 2-5, ovoid to globose, entire. Leaves narrow, canaliculate, acute, entire, usually shiny. Flowers in a spike. Outer perianth-segments ovate-lanceolate, acute, partially connate, connivent with the linear-lanceolate, acuminate inner lateral to form a galea. Labellum large, constricted into basal hypochile, with two indistinct lateral lobes, and prominent, pendent epichile. Spur absent. Column long. Rostellum small. Viscidium solitary; bursicle simple.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: P. Christian, {\i Quart. Bull. Alp. Gard. Soc. }{\b 43}: 189-198 (1975). P. Gölz & H. R. Reinhard,{\i  Orchidee}{\b  28}: 108-116 (1977). E. Nelson,{\i  Monographie und Ikonographie der Orchidaceen-Gattungen} Serapias, Aceras, Loroglossum, Barlia. Chernez-Montreux. 1968.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  All species appear to hybridize readily with each other and with species of{\i  Anacamptis, Dactylorhiza, Ophrys} and{\i  Orchis}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Epichile of labellum usually cordate, at least as wide 
\par
  as hypochile
\par
2 Labellum with 2 divergent ridges at base; lateral lobes
\par
  of hypochile c. 1/3 as wide as epichile, bracts shorter
\par
  than flowers .................................................................................. {\b 1. cordigera}
\par
2 Labellum with 2 parallel ridges at base; lateral lobes 
\par
  of hypochile c. ½ as wide as epichile; bracts equalling
\par
  or exceeding flowers
\par
3 Epichile directed ± downwards ................................................ {\b 3. vomeracea}
\par
3 Epichile directed ± upwards or forwards ..................................... {\b 2. neglecta}
\par
1 Epichile of labellum narrowed towards base, narrower 
\par
  than hypochile
\par
4 Bracts much exceeding flowers; lateral lobes of labellum
\par
  reddish, black distally ................................................................ {\b 3. vomeracea}
\par
4 Bracts equalling or slightly exceeding flowers; lateral
\par
  lobes of labellum black or dark purple
\par
5 Labellum with solitary black ridge at base, violet to 
\par
  reddish tubers 2-5, 1 sessile, the others on stolons ........................... {\b 4. lingua}
\par
5 Labellum with 2 ridges at base, brownish-red; tubers 2
\par
  (-3), sessile .................................................................................. {\b 5. parviflora}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. cordigera} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1345 (1763). Tubers 2-3, 1 sessile, the other(s) on stolons, ovoid to globose. Stem 15-50 cm with purplish, usually spotted basal sheaths. Spike short, ovoid dense, 2- to 10-flowered; bracts shorter than flowers, purplish. Flowers 20-35 mm; outer perianth-segments subequal, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, free at apex, purple, rarely white; inner lateral about as long as the outer. Labellum twice as long as the other segments, with two deep purple to black divergent ridges at base; lateral lobes purplish-black, rarely pink or white, rounded partly hidden by galea; epichile as wide as hypochile, acuminate hairy, reddish-purple, with darker veins, rarely yellowish. 2n = 36.{\i  Open woodland and scrub, grassland and stream-margins. S. & W. Europe, northwards to N.W. France.} Al Au Az Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. azorica} Schlechter,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  19}: 44 (1923), described from Açores (San Miguel), is said to differ from {\b 1} in having the epichile distinctly wider than the hypochile and smaller flowers in a shorter spike. These characters are found in high altitude variants of {\b 1} in the Açores, plants at lower elevations having larger flowers; they do not merit formal recognition above varietal status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. neglecta} De Not.,{\i  Repert. Fl. Ligust.} 423 (1844). Tubers 2, sessile, ovoid to globose. Stem 10-30 cm, with green, unspotted basal sheaths. Spike short, dense, 2- to 8-flowered; bracts equalling or slightly exceeding flowers, green, often tinged with purple. Flowers 25-40 mm; outer perianth-segments ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, concave, free at apex, lilac; inner lateral slightly shorter than the outer. Labellum c. 3 times as long as the other segments, with two dark purple parallel ridges at base; lateral lobes rounded, red or purplish, partly hidden by galea; epichile as wide as hypochile, cordate, acuminate, hairy, pale to deep yellow, rarely orange.{\i  Damp grassland, on sandy soils usually coastal. C. Mediterranean region.} Co Ga Gr It Ju Sa ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. vomeracea} (Burm.) Briq.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Corse}{\b  1}: 378 (1910) ({\i S. longipetala} (Ten.) Pollini, {\i S. pseudocordigera} Moric.). Tubers 2, ovoid, sessile. Stem (5-)10-55 cm, with green, unspotted basal sheaths. Spike 2- to 10-flowered; bracts pale red with darker veins. Flowers 15-30 mm; perianth-segments subequal, pale red, with darker veins, the outer lanceolate, acuminate, free at apex, the inner ovate-lanceolate. Labellum 1½ times as long as the other segments, with 2 pale, slightly divergent ridges at base; lateral lobes rounded, sometimes erect, reddish black distally, partly hidden by galea; epichile triangular-lanceolate, acute, narrowed at base, narrower than hypochile, hairy reddish or brownish, rarely white. 2n = 36. {\i Woodland, scrub ana grassland. S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b vomeracea}: Stem up to 55 cm. Spike elongate, lax, 3- to 10-flowered. Bracts much exceeding flowers. Outer median perianth-segments directed upwards. Labellum with middle lobe 9-11 mm wide.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except for parts of the south-east}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b orientalis} W. Greuter,{\i  Florist. Rep. Cretan Area} 19 (1972): Stem not more than 25(-30) cm. Spike short, rather dense, (2-)3- to 4(-6)-flowered. Bracts equalling or slightly exceeding flowers. Outer median perianth-segments horizontal.
\par

\par
343}
\par