{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 ances, glabrous. 2n = 36.{\i  Mediterranean region, Portugal}; ?{\i Bulgaria}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b mammosa} (Desf.) Soó ex E. Nelson,{\i  Gestaltwandel} 184 (1962) ({\i O. taurica} (Aggeenko) Nevski): Inner perianth-segments narrow, rather acute. Labellum 10-15(-17) × 8-14(-17) mm, with large basal protuberances, blackish-brown or -purple, shortly velutinous, entire, rarely indistinctly 3-lobed; speculum H-shaped or with the cross-line absent, glabrous.{\i  S.E. Europe.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b aesculapii} (Renz) Soó,{\i  Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  16}: 383 (1970): Perianth-segments pale olive-green. Labellum 10-14 × 12-18 mm, entire, without basal protuberances, blackish-brown, shortly velutinous, with wide, glabrous yellowish margin; speculum H-shaped, glabrous.{\i  Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b g}) Subsp. {\b helenae} (Renz) Soó & D. Moresby Moore,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 367 (1978) ({\i O. helenae} Renz): Perianth-segments dark green. Labellum 11-13 × 16-19 mm, without basal protuberances, brown to reddish or violet, irregularly spotted, shortly velutinous; speculum indistinct, velutinous. •{\i  N.W. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variants of {\b 6} from Greece and Kriti with the labellum more or less 3-lobed, without or with only small basal protuberances, blackish-brown or purple and often with a white or yellowish margin, and speculum variously shaped, have been called subsp.{\b  parnassica} (Vierh.) Soó,{\i  Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  5}: 444 (1959) ({\i O. sphaciotica} Fleischm.); they are intermediate between {\b 6} and {\b 7} and are probably of hybrid origin. {\i O. doerfleri} Fleischm., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 74}: 185 (1925), is perhaps of similar origin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variants of subsp. ({\b a}) from France, Spain and Italy, with pinkish outer perianth-segments, the labellum up to 12 × 16 mm and a large speculum which often covers the labellum, have been named{\b  O. garganica} (E. Nelson) O. & E. Danesch,{\i  Pl. Syst. Evol.}{\b  124}: 94 (1975). Variants from S. Italy and Sicilia, with a dense 10- to 15-flowered spike, white to violet outer perianth-segments and the labellum up to 15 mm, have been named subsp.{\b  sicula} E. Nelson ex Soó,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 367 (1978).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. O. spruneri} Nyman, {\i Consp.} 698 (1882). Plant 10-30 cm. Basal leaves 3-6, oblong-lanceolate, acute. Spike 2- to 4-flowered, lax. Perianth-segments green or greenish-purple, rarely white, pink or purple; outer 8-10 mm, oblong-ovate to -lanceolate; inner 5-8 mm, at least ½ as long as the outer, lanceolate or oblong, subobtuse to acute, glabrous or hairy. Labellum 10-13(-15) × 10-13(-15) mm, orbicular, ovate or obovate, blackish-brown or -purple, 3-lobed, very rarely subentire; lateral lobes ovate, convex, deflexed, rarely almost patent; middle lobe much longer than the lateral, semi-orbicular, reniform or oblong, the margin usually strongly deflexed; speculum bluish-violet, with white margin. Connective acute. •{\i  Greece and Aegean region; Sicilia.} Cr Gr Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b spruneri}: Outer perianth-segments green or greenish-purple. Labellum with an appendage, without or with small basal protuberances; lateral lobes deflexed; speculum H-shaped, or the cross-line missing.{\i  Greece and Aegean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b panormitana} (Tod.) Soó, {\i Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung. }{\b 16}: 383 (1970): Outer perianth-segments white or pale pink. Labellum without an appendage, usually without basal protuberances; lateral lobes scarcely deflexed; speculum H-shaped.{\i  Sicilia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subsp. ({\b b}) is transitional to {\b 6}({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. O. ferrum-equinum} Desf.,{\i  Ann. Mus. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Paris}){\b  10}: 226 (1807). Plant 10-35 cm. Basal leaves lanceolate, acute, the cauline 1-2, similar or smaller. Spike 2- to 5-flowered, lax. Outer perianth-segments 8-10 mm, oblong-ovate to orbicular, purple, pink, green, greenish-purple or whitish; inner 6-8 mm, at least ½ as long as the outer, linear-lanceolate, purple or pink, glabrous. Labellum 10-12 × 8-12 mm, orbicular to obovate, velutinous, without basal protuberances, with an appendage, dark purple, rarely brown; speculum horseshoe-shaped, scutelliform, or of 2 parallel lines, in the anterior part of the labellum. Connective acute.{\i  Greece and Aegean region.} ?Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ferrum-equinum}: Outer perianth-segments purple or pink, rarely greenish. Labellum entire, rarely indistinctly 3-lobed.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b gottfriediana} (Renz) E. Nelson, {\i Gestaltwandel} 141 (1962) ({\i O. gottfriediana} Renz): Outer perianth-segments green, greenish-purple or whitish. Labellum 3-lobed, rarely indistinctly so. •{\i  N. W. Greece} ({\i Ionioi Nisoi}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp. ({\b b}) is transitional to {\b 7}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. O. bertolonii} Moretti,{\i  Pl. Ital.}{\b  6}: 9 (1823) (incl. {\i O. flavicans} Vis.). Plant 25-45 cm. Basal leaves lanceolate, acute. Spike 3- to 8-flowered. Outer perianth-segments 10-12 mm, broadly ovate or oblong-ovate, lilac or purple; inner 6-8 mm, at least ½ as long as the outer, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, purple or lilac, glabrous or papillose, with flat margin. Labellum 10-15 × 10-13 mm, orbicular- to oblong-ovate, entire, rarely indistinctly 3-lobed, curved upwards and more or less concave anteriorly, blackish-purple, villous-velutinous with a very narrow, glabrous marginal zone, without basal protuberances, with a conspicuous appendage, deeply emarginate at apex; speculum usually scutelliform, violet. Connective acute. 2n = 36. •{\i  W. & C. Mediterranean region.} Al ?Bl Co Ga Hs It Ju ?Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants of hybrid origin between{\b  9} and{\b  6}({\b d}) have been called {\i O. bertoloniiformis} O. & E. Danesch, {\i Orchidee}{\b  22}: 117 (1971); they differ from {\b 9} chiefly in being 15-25 cm high, in having both the inner and outer perianth-segments greenish and more or less undulate, and the labellum 10-12 × 9-11 mm, scarcely curved upwards and without or with an inconspicuous appendage. They have 2n = 36. Because of frequent confusion between this and {\b 9} the distribution given above refers to both these taxa.{\i  O. bertholoniiformis} is probably the more widespread, and {\b 9} is perhaps confined to the E. part of the range. {\b O. promontorii} O. & E. Danesch, {\i op. cit.} 258 (1971), described from S.E. Italy (Mte Gargano), is probably of hybrid origin between{\b  9} and {\i O. garganica} (vide {\b 6}). It has 2n = 36, 37, 38.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. O. lunulata} Parl.,{\i  Gior. Sci. Sic.}{\b  62}: 4 (1838). Plant up to 25 cm. Basal leaves 4-6, oblong-lanceolate. Spike 4- to 7-flowered, lax. Perianth-segments lilac, rarely whitish; outer 10-13 mm, ovate to oblong, obtuse, the lateral close to the labellum and deflexed-patent; inner 2/3 as long as or almost as long as the outer, linear-lanceolate. Labellum 10-12 mm, ovate, 3-lobed, the lateral lobes narrow, without or with small basal protuberances, strongly deflexed, the middle lobe with strongly deflexed margin, brown, rarely blackish-purple, with glabrous, greenish or yellow marginal zone, emarginate at apex, with small appendage; speculum crescentic, whitish or lilac to brown in the centre Connective acute. •{\i  Islands of C. Mediterranean region.} It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. O. argolica} Fleischm.,{\i  Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  69}: 295 (1919). Plant 15-35 cm. Basal leaves lanceolate, acute, the cauline similar, smaller. Spike (1-)4- to 6-flowered. Outer perianth-segments 8-12 mm, oblong to oblong-ovate, purple or lilac, rarely whitish or greenish, the median sometimes linear-lanceolate; inner at least ½ as long as the outer, lanceolate, ovate or triangular, purple or lilac, velutinous. Labellum 10-12 mm, entire and suborbicular to ovate, or 3-lobed, slightly convex or flat, reddish-brown or brown, papillose, with a small appendage,
\par

\par
347}
\par