{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 15 Inner perianth-segments 2/3 as long as the outer;
\par
   speculum crescentic, without a coloured margin ........................ {\b 10. lunulata}
\par
15 Inner perianth-segments usually up to ½ as long as the outer;
\par
    speculum not crescentic, with a whitish or yellowish margin
\par
16 Labellum entire or subentire
\par
17 Basal protuberances of the labellum up to 3 mm; appendage
\par
   of the labellum large, 3-dentate .................................................. {\b 16. fuciflora}
\par
17 Basal protuberances of the labellum short, inconspicuous;
\par
   appendage of the labellum small ..................................... {\b 17. arachnitiformis}
\par
16 Labellum 3-lobed
\par
18 Outer perianth-segments (8-)10-15 mm; appendage of 
\par
   labellum long or absent; margin of speculum yellow ................... {\b 19. apifera}
\par
18 Outer perianth-segments 8-10(-12) mm; appendage of 
\par
   labellum short
\par
19 Inner perianth-segments ½ as long as the outer;
\par
   margin of speculum white ............................................................. {\b 13. cretica}
\par
19 Inner perianth-segments 1/5-1/2 as long as the outer;
\par
   margin of speculum whitish or yellow ...................................... {\b 15. scolopax}
\par
8  Lateral lobes of labellum without basal protuberances;
\par
   speculum with or without a coloured margin 
\par
20 Labellum entire
\par
21 Outer perianth-segments green
\par
22 Speculum with whitish, greenish or yellow margin ................. {\b 16. fuciflora}
\par
22 Speculum without a coloured margin
\par
23 Labellum 5-15(-17) mm, without appendage; speculum 
\par
   usually H-shaped ....................................................................... {\b 6. sphegodes}
\par
23 Labellum 10-12 mm, with appendage; speculum horseshoe-
\par
   shaped, scutelliform or of 2 parallel lines ....................... {\b 8. ferrum-equinum}
\par
21 Outer perianth-segments pinkish or purplish
\par
24 Speculum without coloured margin
\par
25 Speculum horseshoe-shaped, scutelliform or of 2 paral-
\par
   lel lines; labellum not curved upwards anteriorly ........... {\b 8. ferrum-equinum}
\par
25 Speculum usually scutelliform; labellum ± curved 
\par
   upwards anteriorly ..................................................................... {\b 9. bertolonii}
\par
24 Speculum with whitish, greenish or yellow margin
\par
26 Inner perianth-segments at least ½ as long as the 
\par
   outer; labellum suborbicular to ovate ......................................... {\b 11. argolica}
\par
26 Inner perianth-segments 1/5-1/3 as long as the outer;
\par
   labellum ovate to transversely elliptical .................................... {\b 16. fuciflora}
\par
20 Labellum 3-lobed
\par
27 Inner perianth-segments at least 2/3 as long as the 
\par
    outer; speculum crescentic ......................................................... {\b 10. lunulata}
\par
27 Inner perianth-segments c. ½ as long as the outer;
\par
   speculum not crescentic
\par
28 Inner perianth-segments glabrous or papillose
\par
29 Speculum with white margin ...................................................... {\b 7. spruneri}
\par
29 Speculum without white margin
\par
30 Basal leaves obtuse; inner perianth-segments greenish 
\par
   or brownish-red; labellum usually without an appendage ........ {\b 6. sphegodes}
\par
30 Basal leaves acute; inner perianth-segments purple or 
\par
   pink; labellum with an appendage ................................... {\b 8. ferrum-equinum}
\par
28 Inner perianth-segments hairy
\par
31 Speculum of 2 thick, comma-shaped lines and 2 spots ......... {\b 12. reinholdii}
\par
31 Speculum H-shaped (the cross-line sometimes absent),
\par
   scutelliform or of 1 line or spot
\par
32 Outer perianth-segments purple or lilac; speculum with
\par
   white margin ............................................................................... {\b 11. argolica}
\par
32 Outer perianth-segments green or greenish-purple
\par
33 Speculum without white margin ............................................. {\b 6. sphegodes}
\par
33 Speculum with white margin ...................................................... {\b 7. spruneri}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. insectifera} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 948 (1753) ({\i O. muscifera} Hudson). Plant up to 60 cm. Basal leaves linear-lanceolate, erect, acute. Spike 3- to 14-flowered, lax. Outer perianth-segments 6-8 mm, oblong-ovate, green, glabrous, the lateral patent, the median suberect, more or less concave; inner perianth-segments 4-6 mm, linear, revolute, blackish-violet, velutinous. Labellum 9-10 × 6-7 mm, deflexed, blackish-violet or -purple, paler at apex, papillose, 3-lobed, not globose-inflated; lateral lobes patent, obtuse; middle lobe flat or concave, ovate, wider and longer than the lateral, deeply emarginate or 2-lobed, sometimes with a tooth in the sinus; speculum reniform or square, shiny, pale blue-violet. Connective obtuse. 2n = 36. •{\i  Much of Europe, but absent from the south-east and rare in the extreme south and much of the north.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. O. speculum} Link in Schrader,{\i  Jour. für die Bot.}{\b  1799}({\b 2}): 324 (1800). Basal leaves oblong, subobtuse, the cauline lanceolate, acute. Outer perianth-segments 6-8 mm, oblong-ovate, green or yellowish, often brown-striate, glabrous, the lateral patent, the median erect, cucullate; inner 1/4-1/3 as long as the outer, ovate to lanceolate, dark purple, rarely greenish, densely hairy. Labellum up to 13 × 15 mm, dark purple, villous with coloured hairs at margin, deeply 3-lobed, not globose-inflated; lateral lobes patent, obtuse, yellowish in the centre and with darker lines; middle lobe often slightly emarginate, with revolute margin, rarely convex; speculum large, shiny, blue, yellow at margin, sometimes 3-lobed. Connective obtuse. 2n = 36.{\i  Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} Bl Co ?Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b speculum}: Stem not more than 35 cm. Inflorescence 2- to 10-flowered. Inner perianth-segments dark purple. Middle lobe of labellum orbicular-triangular or suborbicular; speculum with wide, yellow margin, the marginal hairs brown or blackish-purple.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lusitanica} O. & A. Danesch, {\i Orchidee}{\b  20}: 21 (1969): Stem up to 50 cm. Inflorescence up to 15-flowered. Inner perianth-segments greenish. Middle lobe of labellum oblong; speculum with narrow, deep yellow margin, the marginal hairs dark yellow or brownish-red. •{\i  W.C. Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. O. lutea} (Gouan) Cav.,{\i  Icon. Descr.}{\b  2}: 46 (1793). Plant 7-30 cm. Basal leaves ovate, acute. Spike 2- to 7-flowered, lax. Perianth-segments subglabrous or papillose at margin; outer c. 10 mm, oblong-ovate, obtuse, green, the lateral sub-patent, the median incurved; inner perianth-segments 1/3-1/2 as long as the outer, linear-oblong, green or yellowish. Labellum 9-18 mm, suborbicular or oblong, with flat margin, dark brown or blackish-purple, with yellow or greenish marginal zone, papillose, 3-lobed, not globose-inflated; lateral lobes ovate, obtuse; middle lobe reniform, often incised; speculum entire or 2-lobed, grey or bluish-grey. Connective obtuse.{\i  Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Labellum 12-18 mm, the lobes subequal or the middle 
\par
  lobe larger, with marginal zone 2-3 mm wide ........................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b lutea}
\par
1 Labellum 9-12 mm, the lobes subequal or the middle lobe
\par
  smaller, with marginal zone 1-2 mm wide
\par
2 Marginal zone of labellum with blackish-purple hairs,
\par
  the rest of the labellum (except the speculum) blackish-
\par
  purple ................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b melena}
\par
2 Marginal zone of labellum glabrous, the rest of the 
\par
  labellum (except the speculum) dark brown .................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b murbeckii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b lutea}: Labellum 12-18 mm, the lobes subequal or the middle lobe larger, with glabrous marginal zone 2-3 mm wide, papillose (except the marginal zone and speculum); speculum 2-lobed, narrow in relation to labellum. 2n = 36. {\i C. & E. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b murbeckii} (Fleischm.) Soó, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  24}: 25 (1927): Labellum 9-12 mm, the lobes subequal or the middle lobe smaller, with glabrous marginal zone 1-2 mm wide, dark brown (except the marginal zone and speculum); speculum entire or
\par

\par
345}
\par