{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Labellum with middle lobe 11-23 mm wide.{\i  E. Mediterranean region.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from the E. Mediterranean region, here included in subsp. ({\b a}), have been distinguished as subsp. {\b laxiflora }(Soó) Gölz & Reinhard,{\i  Orchidee}{\b  28}: 114 (1977) ({\i S. parviflora} subsp.{\i  laxiflora} Soó, {\i S. columnae} (Ascherson & Graebner) Fleischm.,{\i  S. hellenica} Renz), on account of their shorter perianth-segments and labellum, narrower hypochile and often reflexed epichile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. lingua} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 950 (1753). Tubers 2-5, 1 sessile, the others on stolons, ovoid to subglobose. Stem 10-25(-60) cm, with green, unspotted basal sheaths. Spike elongate, 2- to 9-flowered; bracts equalling flowers, purple, rarely greenish. Flowers 15-25 mm; outer perianth-segments ovate-lanceolate, acute, concave, free at apex, violet or purple, rarely white, sometimes with greenish markings; inner lateral slightly shorter than the outer. Labellum about twice as long as the other segments, with solitary black ridge at base; lateral lobes rounded, dark purple, hidden by galea; epichile ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, narrowed at base, narrower than hypochile, sometimes directed forwards, violet to reddish, rarely yellow or white.{\i  Damp grassland, marshes and maritime sands. Mediterranean region and S.W. Europe.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. parviflora} Parl.,{\i  Gior. Sci. Sic.}{\b  59}: 66 (1837) ({\i S. occultata} Gay). Tubers 2(-3), sessile, ovoid. Stem 10-35 cm, with green, frequently spotted basal sheaths. Spike elongate, 3- to 10(-12)-flowered; bracts equalling or slightly exceeding flowers, red to reddish-green, usually with dark purple veins. Flowers 15-20 mm; perianth-segments subequal; outer linear-lanceolate, acute, free except at base, lilac; inner lateral ovate-lanceolate, greenish or reddish. Labellum about as long as the other segments, with 2 dark purple parallel ridges at base; lateral lobes rounded, sometimes erect, blackish, partly hidden by galea; epichile lanceolate, acute, narrowed at base, narrower than hypochile, brownish-red, rarely white. 2n = 36.{\i  Grassland and maritime sands. Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. olbia} Verguin, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  54}: 599 (1908) ({\i S. gregaria} Godfery), which occurs on maritime sands and lake-margins in S.B. France (Var), is probably a hybrid between {\b 4} and {\b 5}. It has 3-4 tubers, 1 sessile, the others on stolons, a short, 2- to 6-flowered, pale violet to purple, dark-veined spike, with bracts equalling or slightly exceeding the flowers. The outer perianth-segments are as in {\b 5} but are pale violet to purple, while the labellum is as in {\b 5} except that it is about twice as long as the other segments and has a hairy, dull red to purple epichile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 30.        Ophrys}         L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By R. de Soó. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Tubers 2(-3), globose or ovoid, entire. Leaves usually in a basal rosette, sometimes also present on stem. Perianth-segments more or less patent, unequal; outer oblong or ovate, obtuse; inner lateral smaller, often hairy. Labellum entire to 3-lobed, often convex and gibbous, sometimes with an apical appendage which is often deflexed, glabrous or velutinous, variably marked, with usually glabrous central area (speculum); spur absent. Rostellum minute. Viscidia in 2 simple bursicles.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Many species of {\i Ophrys} can cross to produce hybrids, which are often fertile, and most interspecific combinations have been reported, although generally not as often as might be expected from the frequency with which 2 or more species occur sympatrically. This has been attributed to the high fidelity to particular {\i Ophrys} species of the pollinating bees and wasps. Nevertheless, certain species, especially {\b 1-6} and {\b 15-20}, seem to hybridize more than others and there is clear evidence that some crosses ({\b 3} × {\b 4},{\b  6} × {\b 9}, {\b 15} × {\b 16}) can give rise to fertile hybrid swarms and even stabilized hybrid segregates, sometimes involving introgression, which are eco-geographically and reproductively differentiated from their parents.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: H. Baumann,{\i  Orchidee}{\b  26}: 132-140, 222-230 (1975). O. & E. Danesch, {\i Ophrys-Hybriden}. Bern. 1972. O. & E. Danesch, F. & K. Ehrendorfer, {\i Pl. Syst. Evol.}{\b  124}: 79-123 (1975). P. Gölz & H. Reinard,{\i  Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges.}{\b  85}: 31-56 (1975). E. Nelson, {\i Gestaltwandel und Artbildung, erötert am Beispiel der Orchidaceen Europas und der Mittelmeerländer mit einer Monographie und Ikonographie der Gattung }Ophrys. Chernex-Montreux. 1962. R. von Soó,{\i  Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  5}: 437-471 (1959); {\b 16}: 373-392 (1970); {\b 18}: 379-384 (1973). H. Sundermann,{\i  Jahresb. Naturw. Ver. Wuppertal}{\b  19}: 9-17, 63-70 (1964). W. Voth & F. Ehrendorfer, {\i Pl. Syst. Evol.}{\b  124}: 279-290 (1976).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Anther-connective obtuse
\par
2 Inner perianth-segments white, yellowish or green
\par
3 Labellum with flat margin, and a yellow, glabrous or
\par
  hairy marginal zone ............................................................................. {\b 3. lutea}
\par
3 Labellum with ± deflexed margin, and a velutinous, sometimes
\par
  yellow, marginal zone
\par
4 Inner perianth-segments green; labellum 13-23 mm ......................... {\b 4. fusca}
\par
4 Inner perianth-segments white to pale green; labellum 7-9 mm ..... {\b 5. pallida} 
\par
2 Inner perianth-segments purplish or blackish-violet,
\par
  at least at base
\par
5 Labellum deeply 3-lobed, the lateral lobes gibbous and
\par
  deflexed so that the labellum appears globose-inflated ....... {\b 20. bombyliflora}
\par
5 Labellum entire to deeply 3-lobed, the lateral lobes 
\par
  not gibbous or deflexed
\par
6 Outer perianth-segments purplish; labellum entire,
\par
  rarely slightly 3-lobed ....................................................... {\b 18. tenthredinifera}
\par
6 Outer perianth-segments green or yellowish; labellum
\par
  distinctly 3-lobed
\par
7 Inner perianth-segments linear, velutinous; middle lobe
\par
  of labellum deeply emarginate or 2-lobed; speculum 
\par
  small, pale bluish-violet ............................................................. {\b 1. insectifera}
\par
7 Inner perianth-segments ovate to lanceolate, hairy;
\par
  middle lobe of labellum entire or slightly emarginate;
\par
  speculum large, blue, with yellow margin .................................. {\b 2. speculum}
\par
1 Anther-connective acute or acuminate 
\par
8 Lateral lobes of labellum with basal protuberances;
\par
  speculum usually with a whitish or yellowish margin
\par
9 Outer perianth-segments green
\par
10 Labellum entire
\par
11 Speculum without a coloured margin; inner perianth-
\par
   segments at least ½ as long as the outer .................................. {\b 6. sphegodes}
\par
11 Speculum with a whitish, yellowish or greenish margin,
\par
   inner perianth-segments 1/5-1/3 as long as the outer ................. {\b 16. fuciflora}
\par
10 Labellum 3-lobed
\par
12 Lateral lobes of labellum glabrous
\par
13 Speculum without a marginal zone; labellum 5-15(-17) mm . {\b 6. sphegodes}
\par
13 Speculum with a white marginal zone;
\par
   labellum 10-13(-15) mm ............................................................... {\b 7. spruneri}
\par
12 Lateral lobes of labellum hairy
\par
14 Labellum blackish-purple; speculum H-shaped, scutelliform
\par
   or of small spots, white or bluish, with white margin ................... {\b 13. cretica}
\par
14 Labellum brown; speculum scutelliform, blue or dark
\par
   brownish-violet, with yellow margin ........................................... {\b 14. carmeli}
\par
9  Outer perianth-segments pink or purplish
\par

\par
344}
\par