{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 purple spots, 3-lobed; lateral lobes linear, obtuse; middle lobe divided into 2 narrowly linear, obtuse lobules, with short teeth between; all segments subfalcate; base of labellum without lamellae, minutely papillose. Spur cylindrical, directed downwards, ½ as long as ovary. 2n = 42.{\i  S. & W. Europe, northwards to S. England and S.W. Hungary.} ?Al Be Br Bu Cr Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. O. militaris} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 941 (1753). Tubers ovoid or ellipsoid. Stem 20-45 cm, erect, with 3-5 leaves near base and with sheaths above, naked in the uppermost part. Leaves oblong-lanceolate or -ovate, flat. Spike conical at first, becoming cylindrical. Bracts ovate-lanceolate, often violet, usually much shorter than ovary. Perianth-segments all convergent into a galea; outer 10-15 mm, ovate or ovate-lanceolate, acute, pink; inner linear; galea whitish- or greyish-pink, with purple veins inside. Labellum 12-15 mm, longer than wide, purple, white at the base, 3-lobed; lateral lobes linear, obtuse; middle lobe narrow, transversely oblong at the apex, 2-lobed, the lobules ovate or oblong, rarely linear, with short teeth between; all segments flat, very rarely arcuate or revolute. Spur narrowly cylindrica1, directed downwards, usually ½ as long as ovary. 2n = 42.{\i  From S. England and N.W. Russia southwards to N.C. Spain, C. Italy and Bulgaria.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. O. punctulata} Steven ex Lindley, {\i Gen. Sp. Orchid.} 273 (1835). Tubers ellipsoid. Stem 25-60 cm, erect, with 4-7 leaves in lower half, usually with sheaths above. Leaves oblong. Spike cylindrical, many-flowered. Bracts ovate, much shorter than ovary. Perianth-segments all convergent into a galea; outer 8-15 mm, oblong-ovate, more or less obtuse, pink; inner shorter, linear-oblong; galea yellowish-green. Labellum longer than wide, yellowish-green, often with purple spots, 3-lobed; lateral lobes oblong, truncate; middle lobe narrowed toward the base, widened and subreniform at the apex, 2-lobed, the lobules with short apiculum between. Spur broadly cylindrical, directed downwards.{\i  E. part of Balkan peninsula; Krym.} ?Bu Gr Rs (K) Tu. ({\i Caucasus, S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b punctulata}: Galea up to 8 mm. Labellum up to 10 mm; lateral lobes narrowly oblong; lobules of middle lobe broadly oblong. Spur c. 1/3 as long as ovary.{\i  Krym}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sepulchralis} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Soó,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  24}: 28 (1927) ({\i O. sepulchralis} Boiss. & Heldr.): Galea up to 15 mm. Labellum up to 15 mm; lateral lobes and lobules of middle lobe broadly oblong. Spur c. ½ as long as ovary.{\i  Balkan peninsula.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. O. purpurea} Hudson,{\i  Fl. Angl. }334 (1762). Tubers ellipsoid or subglobose. Stem 30-80 cm, erect, with 3-6 leaves in the lower half, and sheaths above, naked in the uppermost part. Leaves oblong or oblong-ovate. Spike cylindrical, many-flowered. Bracts ovate-lanceolate, usually much shorter than ovary. Perianth-segments all convergent into a galea; outer 12-14 mm, ovate, acute, brownish-purple on the outside; inner somewhat shorter, linear-lanceolate; galea brownish-purple, or pink and with dense purple spots. Labellum (8-)10-15 mm, longer than wide, white or pink with purple spots, 3-lobed, rarely indistinctly lobed or subentire; lateral lobes oblong-linear, truncate; middle lobe usually obcordate, sometimes triangular, often rather orbicular, 2-lobed, the lobules usually obovate-oblong, truncate, crenate-dentate, rarely rounded or acuminate, with a rather large tooth between. Spur shortly cylindrical, directed downwards, 1/3-1/2 as long as ovary. 2n = 40, 42.{\i  From Denmark southwards to N. Spain, Sardegna, N.Greece and Krym.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. O. saccata} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap. }{\b 1},{\i  Prodr.} 53 (1811) (?{\i O. collina} Solander ex A. Russell). Tubers ovoid. Stem 12-35 cm, erect, with basal rosette of 2-4 leaves and with dense sheaths above. Leaves oblong-ovate, usually with dark spots. Spike oblong or cylindrical, often few-flowered. Bracts ovate-lanceolate, 5- to 7-veined, the lower longer than ovary. Flowers brownish- or greenish-purple. Outer perianth-segments 10-12 mm, ovate-oblong, obtuse, the 2 lateral erecto-patent or patent-deflexed, often dark olive-green, the median curved foward; inner lanceolate-oblong. Labellum c. 10 mm, entire, ovate or orbicular, obtuse, more or less crenulate at apex. Spur saccate-conical, directed downwards, ½ as long as ovary. 2n = 36.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Al Bl Cr Ga Gr It Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. O. patens} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  2}: 318 (1799) ({\i O. brevicornis} Viv.). Tubers ovoid. Stem 25-70 cm, erect, with a basal rosette or cluster of 3-5 leaves and with sheaths above. Leaves oblong ovate to lanceolate. Spike long-cylindrical. Bracts linear-lanceolate, 5- to 7-veined, c. ½ as long to as long as ovary. Flowers purple. Outer perianth-segments 8-10 mm, oblong, obtuse, greenish towards the base, the 2 lateral patent-deflexed, the median curved forward or erecto-patent; inner lanceolate-oblong. Labellum 9-10 mm, ovate, spotted, 3-lobed; lateral lobes obliquely oblong, truncate; middle lobe broadly obcordate, emarginate, with 2 truncate, crenulate lobules; base of labellum with 2 inconspicuous ridges. Spur saccate, directed downwards, shorter than labellum, c. ½ as long as ovary.{\i  W. Mediterranean region.} Bl Hs It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. O. spitzelii} Sauter ex Koch,{\i  Syn. Fl. Germ.} 686 (1837). Tubers ovoid. Stem 20-40 cm, erect or slightly flexuous, with a basal rosette or cluster of 2-4 leaves and with sheaths above. Leaves oblong-ovate to ovate- or oblong-lanceolate. Spike ovoid or shortly cylindrical, dense. Bracts linear-lanceolate or lanceolate, 5- to 7-veined, slightly longer than or as long as ovary. Flowers purple. Outer perianth-segments 7-10 mm, oblong-ovate, obtuse, the 2 lateral patent-deflexed, the median convergent with the ovate-lanceolate inner perianth-segments into a galea. Labellum 8 × 10 mm, broadly ovate, spotted, deeply 3-lobed; lateral lobes ovate, obtuse; middle lobe widened, obovate, emarginate, crenulate; base of labellum with 2 conspicuous ridges. Spur longer than labellum, 1/3-2/3 as long as ovary.{\i  E. Alps, N. & C. Italy and Balkan peninsula; isolated stations in Sweden} ({\i Gotland}),{\i  E. Spain, S.E. France and Kriti.} Al Au Bu Cr Ga †Ge Gr Hs It Ju Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b spitzelii}: Leaves dull. Outer perianth-segments brownish inside, without spots, without a pale margin. Spur conic-cylindrical, more or less horizontal. 2n = 42. {\i Throughout the range of the species except Kriti.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b nitidifolia} (Teschner) Soó,{\i  Bot. Jour Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 368 (1978): ({\i O. patens} subsp.{\i  nitidifolia} Teschner): Leaves shining. Outer perianth-segments greenish inside, sometimes with red spots, pale pink at the margin. Spur slender but widened at base, curved or directed downwards. 2n = 40. •{\i  Kriti}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. O. mascula} (L.) L., {\i Fl. Suec}. ed. 2, 310 (1755). Tubers subglobose or ellipsoid. Stem 20-60 cm, erect, with 3-5 leaves in lower half and with sheaths above. Leaves oblong-oblanceolate to narrowly oblong, sometimes with purple spots. Spike ovoid or cylindrical. Bracts lanceolate, 1- to 3-veined, usually as long as ovary. Flowers purple to pink. Outer perianth-segments 6-8 mm, ovate or oblong-lanceolate, the 2 lateral deflexed, the median more or less erect; inner obliquely ovate-lanceolate.
\par

\par
340}
\par