{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 200 (1842). Pseudobulb ovoid. Stem 10-20 cm, slender, with few leaf-sheaths towards base. Leaf 3-5 cm, elliptic-oblong, shortly petiolate, distinctly veined. Flower in axil of a linear bract. Perianth-segments 1-2 cm, pinkish-purple, linear-lanceolate. Labellum 1-2 cm, whitish, with pinkish or yellowish spots or blotches.{\i  Marshes and wet coniferous woods. Fennoscandia and N. Russia, southwards to} 57° {\i N. and westwards to} 14° {\i E.} Fe Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 33.        Liparis}      L.C.M. Richard 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.M. Moore. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stock stout, with 2 ellipsoid pseudobulbs joined by a short horizontal stolon; parent pseudobulb enveloped in old leaf-bases, the daughter pseudobulb at base of the current year's stems. Leaves 2. Perianth-segments free, narrow, patent. Labellum usually pointing upwards, entire. Spur absent. Column long, slender. Anther caducous. Rostellum minute. Viscidia 2, small; bursicles absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. loeselii} (L.) L. C. M. Richard,{\i  Orchid. Eur. Annot.} 38 (1817) ({\i Malaxis loeselii} (L.) Swartz,{\i  Pseudorchis loeselii} (L.) S. F. Gray). Glabrous. Stem 6-20 cm, 3(-5)-angled above, with 2-3 basal scales enclosing developing daughter pseudobulb. Leaves subopposite, about half as long as stem, oblong-elliptical to ovate-lanceolate, acute. Flowers 3-8(-18), in a lax spike. Perianth-segments yellowish-green, the outer linear-lanceolate, the inner shorter and narrower. Labellum equalling outer perianth-segments, oblong-obovate, undulate or somewhat crenate. 2n = 32. {\i Bogs, fens and other wet places. From S. Wales and S. Fennoscandia southwards to S.W. France, S. Romania and S. Russia.} Au Be Br ?Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 34.      Microstylis}     (Nutt.) A.Eaton 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.M. Moore. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Liparis} but pseudobulbs borne one above the other, the youngest uppermost; leaf usually solitary; flowers twisted through 360° so that labellum points upwards; column short.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. monophyllos} (L.) Lindley,{\i  Gen. Sp. Orchid.} 19 (1830) ({\i Malaxis monophyllos} (L.) Swartz). Stem (8-)10-30 cm; basal pseudobulb surrounded by old leaf-sheaths. Leaf solitary, rarely 2, 3-6 cm, ovate to elliptical. Flowers numerous, in a rather lax, spike-like raceme 3-15 cm. Perianth-segments 2-2·7 mm, greenish; outer ovate to ovate-lanceolate, the lateral erect, the median pointed downwards; inner linear, directed downwards, slightly recurved. Labellum broadly lanceolate-ovate, acuminate, slightly incurved, thickened and densely tuberculate beneath towards apex, as long as other perianth-segments. {\i Sphagnum- bogs, wet meadows and scrub. N., C. & E. Europe, westwards to C. Norway and C. Switzerland, and southwards to N. Italy and S. Russia.} Au Cz Fe Ge He †Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 35.        Hammarbya}      O.Kuntze
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.M. Moore. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Liparis} but pseudobulbs borne one above the other, the youngest uppermost; leaves 2-5; flowers twisted through 360° so that labellum points upwards; column very short; anther persistent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. paludosa} (L.) O. Kuntze, {\i Revis. Gen. }{\b 2}: 665 (1891). Glabrous. Stem 3-12 cm, slender, 3- to 5-angled above. Leaves 0·5-1 cm, concave, broadly rounded at apex, sheathing at base, enclosing daughter pseudobulbs, usually with marginal bulbils towards apex, the lower 1-2 leaves often reduced to sheaths. Flowers numerous in a rather dense, later lax spike 1·5-5 cm. Perianth-segments greenish-yellow; outer 2·5-3 mm, ovate-lanceolate, the lateral erect, the median pointed downwards and rather larger; inner c. 1·5 mm, linear-lanceolate, patent, deflexed at apex. Labellum lanceolate, acute, erect, shorter than outer perianth-segments. 2n = 28.{\i  Acid bogs, usually in }Sphagnum. {\i N. & C. Europe; U.S.S.R. except the south-east.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho ?Hu Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par
350}
\par