{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 3-6·5 cm, recurved, red, orange or yellow, often with brownish-purple spots and papillose inside. Filaments yellowish or light green; anthers orange or orange-red. 2n = 24. {\i Mountain meadows and scrub. • S.E. Alps and Balkan peninsula, southwards to N.W. Greece; W. & C. Romania}. Al Au Bu Gr It Ju Rm.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  A very polymorphic species particularly in the Balkan peninsula, where constituent taxa of specific and infraspecific status have been recognized. The best-known segregates are: {\b L. albanicum} Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 385 (1846) ({\i L. carniolicum} subsp.{\i  albanicum} (Griseb.) Hayek), from Albania, N.W. Greece and S.W. Jugoslavia, a small plant up to 40 cm with yellow perianth-segments c. 3 cm, and with the leaves glabrous on the veins beneath;{\b  L. bosniacum} (G. Beck) G. Beck ex Fritsch,{\i  Mitt. Naturw. Ver. Steierm.}{\b  45}: 163 (1909), from C. & S.W. Jugoslavia, with leaves irregularly pubescent beneath and yellow, spotted flowers; and{\b  L. jankae} A. Kerner, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  27}: 402 (1877) ({\i L. carniolicum} subsp.{\i  jankae} (A.Kerner) Hayek), from E. Jugoslavia, Bulgaria and Romania, with leaves evenly pubescent on the veins beneath and perianth-segments yellow, spotted sometimes. Typical{\i  L. carniolicum} from the S.E. Alps and N.W. Jugoslavia has the perianth-segments 5-6·5 cm, light red or orange and with brownish-purple spots, and leaves densely pubescent on the veins beneath.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  The variation is not fully understood but at present it seems sensible to treat the components of the complex as varieties of L. carniolicum.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. L. chalcedonicum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 302 (1753). Stem 45-120 cm. Leaves lanceolate to obovate, 3- to 5-veined, pubescent on the veins beneath, ciliate; lower leaves up to 12 × 2 cm, patent, markedly distinct from the appressed upper leaves, which are not more than 4·5 × 1·5 cm. Flowers 1-7(-12), sometimes bracteolate; pedicels recurved. Perianth-segments 6·5-7 cm, recurved, orange-red, without spots, with papillae inside on lower half. Filaments pale yellow; anthers red. {\i Rocky mountain woods. • S. & W. Greece, S. Albania.} Al Gr.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Plants with shorter stems 45-60 cm, usually ebracteolate flowers and with less prominent leaf-cilia have been called {\b L. heldreichii} Freyn,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 63}: 28 (1880). It has a more north-westerly range and{\i  L. chalcedonicum} sensu stricto a more south-easterly range, but the area of overlap is large and the differences are not sufficient to warrant subspecific treatment.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. L. rhodopaeum} Delip.,{\i  Naucni Trud. Agron. Fak. Plovdiv}{\b  1}: 129 (1952). Stem 80-100 cm. Leaves up to 14 × 1·5 cm, linear to linear-oblong, pubescent on the veins beneath, ciliate. Flowers (1-)3-5, ebracteolate; pedicels recurved. Perianth-segments 8-12 cm, recurved, bright lemon-yellow, without spots. Anthers red.{\i  Mountain meadows and rocky slopes. • C. Rodopi.} Bu Gr.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. L. monadelphum} Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 267 (1808). Stem 100-140 cm. Leaves up to 12 × 2·5 cm, broadly lanceolate to oblanceolate, 10- to 12-veined, pubescent on the veins beneath, ciliate. Flowers (1-)5-30, ebracteolate; pedicels recurved. Perianth-segments 8-10 cm, recurved, pale yellow, spotted with purple inside and tinged with purplish-brown at the base outside. Anthers yellow. Stamens free or united into a tube around the ovary.{\i  Open woodland and scrub. Krym }({\i hills above Jalta}). Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus.})
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. L. lancifolium} Thunb., {\i Trans. Linn. Soc. London}{\b  2}: 333 (1794) ({\i L. tigrinum} Ker-Gawler). Stem 60-120(-150) cm; leaf-axils with bulbils. Leaves up to 19 × 1·7 cm, patent, linear-lanceolate, 5- to 7-veined, glabrous beneath, ciliate. Flowers 5-12, usually bracteolate; pedicels recurved. Perianth-segments c. 10 cm, recurved, bright orange, with purplish-black spots and small purplish papillae inside. Filaments reddish; anthers dark orange-red. {\i Cultivated for ornament, and naturalized in E. Austria.} [Au.] ({\i China, Japan}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 25.      Ornithogalum}          L.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C. Zahariadi. 
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Bulbous perennials. Bulbs usually ovoid, of free or concrescent, concentric scales, renewed each year or progressively over 2-4 years. Leaves basal. Flowers in a corymbiform or elongate raceme. Perianth-segments 6, free or scarcely connate at the base, petaloid. Stamens 6; filaments simple or 3-dentate; anthers dorsifixed, introrse. Fruit a loculicidal capsule; seeds numerous, globose to elongate-prismatic or flattened.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Many characters, especially of the flowers and bulbs, can only be seen properly on live material or on material preserved in fixative; dried material is often unsuitable for determination and cannot be adequately reconstituted by boiling or other techniques.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  The classification adopted here relies heavily on features of the bulbs and type of germination and departs, thereby, considerably from more traditional systems.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: J. G. Baker, {\i Jour. Linn. Soc. London }({\i Bot}.) {\b 13}: 257-285 (1873). C. Zahariadi,{\i  Rev. Biol.} ({\i Bucarest}){\b  7}: 5-41 (1962);{\i  Rev. Roum. Biol.} ({\i Bot.}){\b  10}: 272-291 (1965); {\i Bot. Zur.}{\b  62}: 1624-1639 (1977);{\i  Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  3}: 51-75 (1977). N.D. Agapova, {\i Bot. Zur. }{\b 51}: 210-220 (1966); {\b 59}: 406-414 (1974). J. Cullen & J. A. Ratter,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  27}: 293-339 (1967). F. Garbari & N. Tornadore,{\i  Atti Soc. Tosc. Sci. Nat.} ser. B,{\i  77}: 101-111 (1971).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Pedicels not more than 10 mm at anthesis and not more 
\par  than 15 mm in fruit; inflorescence usually narrowly spiciform
\par 2 Plant 35-100 cm; leaves 4-6; capsule 17-20 mm .................... {\b 9. reverchonii}
\par 2 Plant 15-40 cm; leaves 1-3; capsule 10-12 mm
\par 3 Leaf solitary; ovary obovoid-lanceolate, truncate at 
\par  apex; bulbs 8-12 mm in diameter ............................................. {\b 33. unifolium}
\par 3 Leaves 2-3(-4); ovary lanceolate-fusiform, attenuate at
\par  apex; bulbs 12-25 mm in diameter ......................................... {\b 34. concinnum} 
\par 1 Pedicels usually more than 10 mm at anthesis, usually 
\par  more than 15 mm in fruit; inflorescence racemose to
\par  corymbose, rarely spiciform
\par 4 At least the inner filaments tricuspidate
\par 5 All filaments with the longitudinal crest of the mid-
\par  vein not toothed at apex; ovary ovoid to subglobose,
\par  shorter than style ............................................................................ {\b 30. nutans}
\par 5 At least the inner filaments with the longitudinal crest
\par  of the mid-vein toothed at apex; ovary attenuate-ovoid,
\par  longer or shorter than style ................................................... {\b 31. boucheanum}
\par 4 Filaments entire
\par 6 Perianth 50-65 mm in diameter; ovary blackish-violet ............ {\b 32. arabicum}
\par 6 Perianth 20-45 mm in diameter; ovary glaucous, green or
\par  yellowish
\par 7 Raceme elongate-cylindrical, usually with 20-80 flowers;
\par  pedicels subequal, erect in fruit and appressed to axis
\par  of inflorescence
\par 8 Perianth hyaline or greenish-white, yellowish or greenish inside;
\par   margins of segments inrolled longitudinally after anthesis 
\par 9 Lower bracts ovate; ovary attenuate, conical at apex .............. {\b 3. visianicum}
\par 9 Lower bracts lanceolate; ovary truncate or rounded at apex
\par 10 Perianth hyaline or pale greenish-white .......................... {\b 2. sphaerocarpum}
\par
\par 35}
\par