{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 10 Perianth yellowish to greenish
\par
11 Ovary usually longer than wide, cylindrical to ovoid-
\par
   lanceolate; style 2·5-4 mm, equalling or scarcely 
\par
   longer than ovary; flowering May-June .................................. {\b 1. pyrenaicum}
\par
11 Ovary globose or subglobose; style (3-)3·5-4·5(-5) mm,
\par
   usually longer than ovary; flowering July-September ................. {\b 4. creticum}
\par
8  Perianth milky-white inside; margins of segments seldom
\par
   inrolled after anthesis
\par
12 Perianth-segments with a green stripe outside in the apical 
\par
   part only or without a stripe; flowers with disagreeable
\par
    odour ................................................................................... {\b 10. fischeranum}
\par
12 Perianth-segments with a green stripe almost throughout
\par
   their length outside; flowers odourless
\par
13 Anthers greenish; ovary attenuate-conical at apex;
\par
   capsule attenuate-apiculate at apex ................................... {\b 8. prasinantherum}
\par
13 Anthers yellow; ovary usually truncate at apex;
\par
   capsule not apiculate but sometimes mucronate at apex
\par
14 Ovary 2·1-2·5 mm; style usually shorter than ovary,
\par
   thickened and conical at base; green stripe on outside
\par
   of outer perianth-segments lanceolate ..................................... {\b 7. pyramidale}
\par
14 Ovary (2·5-)3·5-5 mm; style usually longer than ovary,
\par
   filiform throughout; green stripe on outside of outer 
\par
   perianth-segments narrowly ligulate
\par
15 Ovary ovoid-lanceolate; style more than 3·5 mm,
\par
   distinctly longer than ovary ..................................................... {\b 5. narbonense}
\par
15 Ovary cylindrical; style not more than 3·5 mm, shorter
\par
   than or scarcely longer than ovary .............................................. {\b 6. ponticum}
\par
7 Raceme usually short and corymbiform at anthesis
\par
  (rarely ± cylindrical), usually with 2-15(-25) flowers;
\par
  lower pedicels longer than upper, not appressed to axis
\par
  of inflorescence in fruit
\par
16 Leaves without a white stripe on upper surface, the 
\par
   margins often thin, of 2 layers of epidermal cells
\par
17 Capsule at maturity with ± winged angles, pendent;
\par
   base of pedicels becoming flaccid ...................................... {\b 11. oligophyllum}
\par
17 Capsule at maturity with obtuse or keeled angles,
\par
   erect, horizontal or deflexed; base of pedicels not 
\par
   becoming flaccid
\par
18 Leaves pubescent or ciliate (sometimes very shortly so)
\par
19 Leaves with slender, short cilia, glabrous on the 
\par
   surfaces; inflorescence raised above the soil surface;
\par
   pedicels patent or ascending at maturity .................................. {\b 23. comosum}
\par
19 Leaves pubescent at least on lower surface or only 
\par
   ciliate; inflorescence resting on the soil-surface;
\par
   pedicels deflexed at maturity ................................................. {\b 15. fimbriatum}
\par
18 Leaves glabrous, not ciliate but sometimes scabrid on
\par
   the margin
\par
20 Leaves green or scarcely glaucous, flat; capsule with
\par
   apical lobes equally spaced ..................................................... {\b 12. montanum}
\par
20 Leaves glaucous, sometimes twisted; capsule ± truncate
\par
   at apex, with apical lobes contiguous in pairs
\par
21 Leaves (8-)10-22 mm wide, with wide translucent margin;
\par
   seeds 3-3·5 mm ............................................................................ {\b 13. atticum}
\par
21 Leaves (2-)4-8(-10) mm wide, with narrow translucent 
\par
   margin; seeds 2·2-2·7 mm .........................................................  {\b 14. oreoides}
\par
16 Leaves with a white stripe on upper surface (often not
\par
   visible on dried material), with normal margins
\par
22 Leaves pubescent beneath .................................................. {\b 26. armeniacum}
\par
22 Leaves glabrous, sometimes ciliate
\par
23 Ovary narrowly cylindrical; young capsule with 3 obtuse angles
\par
24 Anthers without coloured cells at insertion of filament;
\par
   angles of ovary not thickened on the back, scarcely 
\par
   sulcate .................................................................................. {\b 19. amphibolum}
\par
24 Anthers with a group of reddish-brown cells at insertion
\par
   of filament; angles of ovary slightly thickened on the
\par
   back, sulcate in the upper  ¼ .................................................... {\b 17. costatum}
\par
23 Ovary usually elongate-cylindrical to obconical;
\par
   capsule (before maturity) with 6 ± definite, narrowly
\par
   winged or obtusely thickened angles
\par
25 Pedicels ascending in flower, arcuate-recurved in fruit
\par
   (especially the lower ones) so that the capsule rests 
\par
   on the soil ............................................................................... {\b 18. woronowii}
\par
25 Pedicels ascending to deflexed but not arcuate-recurved
\par
   in fruit
\par
26 Ovary and capsule with 3 distinct pairs of wings ............. {\b 20. wiedemannii}
\par
26 Ovary and capsule smooth or keeled but not winged
\par
27 Pedicels deflexed in fruit, sometimes appressed to 
\par
   axis of inflorescence, with a motor pulvinus at base;
\par
   aerial part of scape short or absent
\par
28 Bulb with concrescent scales, surrounded by numerous
\par
   bulbils which remain dormant for at least a year ..................... {\b 27. refractum}
\par
28 Bulb with free scales, without bulbils, or with a few
\par
   offsets which grow out in their first year
\par
29 Pedicels after anthesis (but while still green) flaccid
\par
   and sulcate at apex; ovary ovoid, less than 1 1/3 times
\par
   as long as wide, equalling or slightly longer than style ........... {\b 21. sibthorpii}
\par
29 Pedicels after anthesis (but while still green) rigid
\par
   and terete at apex; ovary lanceolate or linear-lanceolate,
\par
   more than 1 1/3 times as long as wide, as long as or 
\par
   shorter than style ...................................................................... {\b 22. exscapum}
\par
27 Pedicels ascending to ± patent in fruit, without a 
\par
   distinct motor pulvinus at the base; aerial part of 
\par
   scape usually long
\par
30 Capsule before dehiscence with 6 strongly thickened 
\par
   angles, separated by deep furrows; testa with linear
\par
   subepidermal cells; bulbs sprouting in spring ........................... {\b 29. exaratum}
\par
30 Capsule before dehiscence with 6 scarcely to strongly
\par
   thickened, keeled or rounded angles, separated by 
\par
   shallow furrows; testa with ovate to orbicular sub-
\par
   epidermal cells; bulbs sprouting in autumn
\par
31 Bulb surrounded by bulbils which remain dormant for at
\par
   least a year; fruiting pedicels patent or ± deflexed .................. {\b 28. divergens}
\par
31 Bulb without bulbils, or with offsets which grow out 
\par
   in their first year; fruiting pedicels ascending to 
\par
   patent, rarely deflexed 
\par
32 Offsets numerous, forming tufts of leaves around the
\par
   bulb; capsule usually with 6 equally spaced angles ............. {\b 24. umbellatum} 
\par
32 Offsets absent or few, not forming tufts of leaves 
\par
   around the bulb; capsule usually with 3 distinct pairs
\par
   of angles
\par
33 Bulb-scales free ....................................................................... {\b 16. collinum}
\par
33 Bulb-scales concrescent ................................................... {\b 25. orthophyllum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Beryllis} (Salisb.) Baker. Bulb progressively renewed over 2-3 years, of free scales, the outer sometimes tunicate. Leaves without a white stripe. Inflorescence many-flowered, elongate-cylindrical. Pedicels patent in flower, more or less erect and appressed to axis of inflorescence in fruit. Filaments entire. Ovary and capsule with 3 obtuse angles. Germination epigeal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. pyrenaicum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 306 (1753). Plant 30-80(-100) cm. Leaves (4-)5-8, often withered at anthesis. Bracts shorter than pedicels. Flowers faintly fragrant. Perianth-segments pale yellowish inside, greenish outside and with a darker green stripe on the back, the outer 11-13 × 2·5-3 mm, flat at first, becoming inrolled at the margins. Anthers pale yellow. Ovary 2·4-3 mm, ovoid-lanceolate or shortly cylindrical, truncate at apex. Style
\par

\par
36}
\par