{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 2·5-3·3 mm, slightly longer to slightly shorter than ovary. Flowering May-June. 2n = 16, 18. {\i Meadows and scrub. S., W. & S.C. Europe, northwards to S. England.} Au Be Br Bu Co Ga ?Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. O. sphaerocarpum} A. Kerner,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  28}: 15 (1878). Like {\b 1} but perianth-segments hyaline or pale greenish-white; ovary subglobose to ovoid; style equalling or slightly longer than ovary. 2n = 16.{\i  Meadows and scrub. S. & S.C. Europe.} Al Au ?Bu Co Cz Ga Gr Hu It Ju Rm Sa Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. O. visianicum} Tommasini, {\i Mem. Ist. Veneto}{\b  20}: 176 (1876). Like {\b 1} but perianth-segments greenish-yellow; ovary ovoid, attenuate-conical at apex.{\i  Maritime rocks. • Adriatic island of Palagruza.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. O. creticum} Zahar., {\i Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  3}: 52 (1977). Like {\b 1} but perianth-segments pale greenish; ovary globose or subglobose; style (3-)3·5-4·5(-5) mm, usually longer than ovary; flowering July-September. {\i Dry rocky ground. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. O. narbonense} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl.}{\b  2}: 15 (1756) ({\i O. pyramidale} subsp.{\i  narbonense} (L.) Ascherson & Graebner; incl. {\i O. arcuatum} Velen., non Steven). Plant (20-)30-50(-80) cm. Leaves 4-6 (-7), 8-16 mm wide, persistent until after anthesis. Bracts shorter or longer than pedicels. Flowers scentless. Perianth-segments 12-16 mm, lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, patent, remaining flat, milky-white, with a ribbon-shaped green stripe on the back throughout their length. Anthers yellow. Ovary 3·5-5 mm, ovoid, truncate at apex. Style (3·7-)4·2-5·5 mm, as long as or longer than ovary, filiform throughout. Flowering May-July. 2n = 54.{\i  Grassland, roadsides and disturbed ground. S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu ?Rm Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. O. ponticum} Zahar.,{\i  Rev. Roum. Biol.} ({\i Bot.}){\b  10}: 290 (1965). Like {\b 5} but up to 80(-100) cm; leaves 4-7(-8); perianth often infundibuliform; segments broadly lanceolate to ovate-elliptical; anthers sometimes tinged with reddish-brown; ovary cylindrical, style (1·9-)2-3·5 mm, shorter or scarcely longer than ovary. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry hillsides and cultivated ground. Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. O. pyramidale} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 307 (1753). Plant 30-100(-120) cm. Leaves 4-7, 6-15 mm wide, persistent usually until anthesis. Bracts shorter than pedicels. Perianth-segments 11-15 mm, patent, obovate-lanceolate to narrowly elliptical, milky-white, with a lanceolate green stripe on the back. Anthers yellow. Ovary 2·1-2·5 mm, subglobose to ellipsoid, truncate at apex. Style 1·4-1·7 mm, shorter than ovary, conical at base. Capsule attenuate or truncate, sometimes mucronate at apex. Flowering June-August. 2n = 24. • {\i C. Europe, extending to C. Jugoslavia and E. Romania.} Au Cz Ge Hu ?It Ju Rm [Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Records for the Mediterranean region are errors for {\b 5}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. O. prasinantherum} Zahar., {\i Ann. Mus. Goulandris }{\b 3}: 57 (1977). Plant 40-90 cm. Leaves (4-)5-6(-8), (3-)4-10 mm wide, persistent usually until anthesis. Bracts shorter than or exceeding pedicels. Perianth-segments 11-16 mm, patent, ovate-lanceolate. Anthers greenish. Ovary 3-5 mm, ovoid-lanceolate, attenuate-conical at apex and passing gradually into the style. Style (3·5)5-6·5 mm, as long as or longer than ovary, conical at base. Capsule ovoid-lanceolate, attenuate-apiculate at apex. Flowering June.{\i  Dry, stony ground. • S. Greece }({\i Peloponnisos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. O. reverchonii} Lange in Willk., {\i Ill. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  2}: 117 (1891). Plant 35-100 cm. Leaves 4-6, c. 15 mm wide. Pedicels 1-10 mm at anthesis, not more than 15 mm in fruit. Bracts greatly exceeding pedicels. Flowers 30-40 mm in diameter. Perianth campanulate or with patent segments; segments 15-20 mm, oblong-ovate, remaining flat, greenish, becoming white at anthesis, and sometime, with a green stripe on the back throughout their length. Anthers yellowish-white. Ovary c. 5 mm, oblong, rounded at apex. Style c. 4 mm, shorter than the ovary. Capsule 17-20 mm, attenuate at apex. Flowering April-July.{\i  Limestone rocks. S.W. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The relationships of this seldom-collected species are unclear and some authors consider it to be better placed in Subgen.{\i  Cathissa}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. O. fischeranum} Krasch. in Komarov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  4}: 392 (1935). Plant 30-70 cm. Leaves 4-6(-7), 2-6(-10) mm wide. Pedicels (15-)23-35 mm. Bracts shorter than or rarely exceeding pedicels. Flowers with a disagreeable odour. Perianth-segments 10·5-15 mm, patent, linear-oblong, remaining flat, with or without a green stripe on the back only in the apical 1/2-1/3. Ovary 2·2-4·5 mm, ovoid-oblong to subglobose, attenuate at apex. Anthers greenish. Style 3-4·5 mm, as long as or longer than ovary, thickened at base. Capsule 8-10 mm, ovoid to ellipsoid, attenuate at apex. Flowering May-July. 2n = 22, 24. {\i Steppes. S. part of U.S.S.R}. Rs (W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Leptotesta} Zahar. Bulb completely renewed each year, with 2-3(-4) free scales, the outer tunicate. Leaves 2-4, without a white stripe. Inflorescence a short raceme. Pedicels ascending in flower, deflexed in fruit. Filaments entire. Ovary and capsule with 6 winged angles. Germination hypogeal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. O. oligophyllum} E.D. Clarke, {\i Travels} {\b 2}({\b 3}): 555 (1816). Plant 9-24 cm. Leaves 2-3(-4), 5-20 mm wide. Bracts usually exceeding pedicels which become flaccid at base in fruit. Flowers (3-)5-10(-20), odourless, the lower shorter than the pedicels; segments 11-15(-19) mm, oblong to lanceolate, white, with green stripe on the back. Ovary 3·5-5·5 mm, depressed at apex. Style (1·5-)2-2·2 mm. Capsule 10-15 mm, depressed at apex, with wings 1·5-3·5 mm wide. Flowering March-June. 2n = 24.{\i  Rocky hillsides and mountain grassland. Balkan peninsula.} ?Al Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Oreogalum }Zahar. Bulb completely renewed each year, with concrescent scales, the outer sometimes free and tunicate. Leaves without a white stripe. Inflorescence a spreading to narrowly cylindrical raceme. Pedicels ascending in flower, patent or ascending in fruit. Filaments entire. Ovary and capsule with 6 obtuse to almost winged angles. Germination hypogeal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. O. montanum} Cyr. in Ten., {\i Fl. Nap.}{\b  1}: 176 (1811). Plant (7-)9-20(-30) cm. Leaves 3-6(-8), (6-)8-20(-30) mm wide, flat, green or slightly glaucous, glabrous, not ciliate. Bracts usually shorter than pedicels. Perianth-segments 10-25 mm, patent, oblong to lanceolate, white, with a green stripe on the back. Ovary (3-)4-6(-7) mm, more or less cylindrical, rounded or depressed at apex; style 2-3(-4) mm, equalling or shorter than ovary. Capsule ovoid, obovoid or cylindrical, with apical lobes equally spaced. Flowering April-May. 2n = 12, 14, 18, 20+3B.{\i  Rocky ground and mountain pastures. Balkan peninsula; C. & S. Italy and Sicilia}. Bu Gr It Ju Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable, but no useful division into infraspecific taxa can yet be made in Europe.
\par

\par
37}
\par