{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Anosmium} Zahar. Like Subgen. {\i Oreogalum} but bulbscales all free; leaves very glaucous, twisted when young. Capsule not winged; germination epigeal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. O. atticum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Orph., {\i Fl. Graec. Exsicc.} no. 975 (1854). Plant 12-30 cm. Leaves (2-)4-6(-8), (8-)10-20 mm wide, flat or sometimes undulate or twisted, glaucous, glabrous, smooth or scabrid on margin; translucent margin wide. Bracts equalling or exceeding pedicels. Perianth-segments 18-30 mm, patent, oblong-lanceolate, white, with a green stripe on the back. Anthers yellow. Ovary 5-7 mm, elongate- to obovoid-cylindrical. Style (2-)2·2-3·5(-4) mm. Capsule ellipsoid to cylindrical, longer than style, with apical lobes contiguous in pairs. Seeds 3-3·5 mm. Flowering May-June.{\i  Rocky ground. • S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. O. oreoides} Zahar.,{\i  Rev. Biol.} ({\i Bucarest}){\b  7}: 20 (1962). Like {\b 13} but leaves (2-)4-8(-10) mm wide, smooth on margin; translucent margin narrow, formed of 3-4 rows of epidermal cells; bracts sometimes shorter than pedicels; perianth-segments 13-20 mm; ovary 3-5 mm; style equalling or shorter than ovary; capsule oblong to ovoid; seeds 2·2-3 mm. Flowering May. 2n = 18.{\i  Dry places. • From N.E. Bulgaria to S.W. Ukraine.} Bu Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Hypogaeum} Zahar. Like Subgen. {\i Oreogalum} but bulb-scales all free; leaves sometimes with a white stripe; pedicels ascending in flower, ascending to deflexed in fruit; ovary and capsule with 3 or 6 angles; germination hypogeal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. O. fimbriatum} Willd.,{\i  Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin Neue Schr.}{\b  3}: 420 (1801). Plant 10-20 cm. Leaves 2-6, 2-15 mm wide, flat or concave, without a white stripe on upper surface, more or less pubescent beneath. Inflorescence sessile on the soil; fruiting pedicels deflexed. Perianth-segments 12-19 mm, patent, lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, white, with green stripe on the back. Anthers yellow. Ovary 3-8 mm, cylindrical, with 6 prominent almost winged angles. Style 2·5-3 mm. Capsule ovoid to ellipsoid, depressed at apex, with 6 narrowly winged angles. Flowering March-May. 2n = 12+0-3B.{\i  Dry places. S.E. Europe.} Bu Gr Rm Rs (W, K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable, especially in the hairiness of leaves, scape and pedicels.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. O. collinum} Guss.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horto Boccad.} (1825) ({\i O. gussonei} Ten., {\i O. tenuifolium} Guss., non F. Delaroche). Plant 7-20(-40) cm. Leaves 4-15, 1·5-8(-15) mm wide, canaliculate, with a white stripe on upper surface, glabrous, sometimes ciliate. Inflorescence sessile on the soil or aerial part of scape up to 4 cm; fruiting pedicels ascending to patent. Perianth-segments 12-17 mm, patent, oblong or lanceolate to linear, white, with green stripe on back, not decurrent. Anthers pale yellowish or reddish at point of attachment. Ovary 3·5-6 mm, elongate-cylindrical, with 6 angles. Style 2-3 mm. Capsule ovoid, with 6 narrowly winged angles. Flowering April-May.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Al ?Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  This species and {\b 25} are often treated as closely related or even conspecific but are distinguished by the structure of the bulbscales and type of germination. Much further study is required to elucidate their circumscription, relationships and chromosome variation. The chromosome numbers of these taxa are far from clear: different numbers have been reported within and between the two species but the precise identity of the material studied is not always certain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. O. costatum} Zahar., {\i Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  3}: 63 (1977). Like {\b 16} but plant 12-30 cm; leaves 6-10(-15), 1-1·5(-3) mm wide; inflorescence always raised above the soil; perianth-segments 12-15(-22) mm; ovary with 3 rounded-obtuse angles; capsule cylindrical, the 3 angles rounded but becoming sulcate in the upper ¼. {\i Dry places. • S. Greece} ({\i N.E. Peloponnisos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. O. woronowii} Krasch. in Komarov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  4}: 743 (1935). Plant 10-25 cm. Leaves 4-8, glabrous, 1·5-5(-7) mm wide, with a white stripe. Inflorescence not or only slightly raised above surface of soil; fruiting pedicels arcuate-recurved so that the lower capsules are resting on the soil. Bracts shorter than pedicels. Perianth-segments 12·5-16 mm, patent, oblong or obovate to narrowly lanceolate, white, with pale green stripe on back. Anthers pale yellow. Ovary 2·8-5·5 mm, elongate-cylindrical to broadly ovoid, more or less depressed at apex, with 6 obtuse, not winged angles. Style (1·5-)2-2·6 mm, thickened at base. Capsule 7-13 mm, obovoid, depressed at apex, the 6 angles obtuse. Flowering April. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry grassland and scrub. Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Amphibolum} Zahar. Bulb completely renewed each year, of free, fleshy scales, the outer sometimes tunicate. Leaves with a white stripe on upper surface, canaliculate. Inflorescence a more or less elongate raceme. Pedicels ascending in flower and fruit. Filaments entire. Ovary ? and capsule with 3 rounded angles. Germination epigeal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. O. amphibolum} Zahar., {\i Rev. Biol.} ({\i Bucarest}) {\b 7}: 20 (1962). Plant 10-30 cm. Leaves 4-13, 0·6-1·5(-3) mm wide, glabrous. Pedicels without a motor pulvinus at the base. Bracts shorter than pedicels. Perianth-segments 10-19 mm, narrowly lanceolate, white, with green stripe on back. Anthers pale yellow. Ovary 3-6 mm, narrowly cylindrical. Style 4-6 mm, equalling or longer than ovary. Capsule 10-15 mm, narrowly cylindrical, not depressed at apex. Flowering April-May. 2n = 18.{\i  Dry places. • From Bulgaria to S. Moldavia.} Bu Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Amphigalum} Zahar. Bulb completely renewed each year, of free scales. Leaves with a white stripe on upper surface, canaliculate. Inflorescence with 3-20(-30) flowers, more or less corymbiform. Pedicels ascending in flower, patent to deflexed in fruit. Filaments entire. Ovary and capsule with 6 wings. Germination epigeal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. O. wiedemannii} Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  5}: 221 (1882). Plant 12-25 cm. Leaves (4-)5-7, 3-4·5 mm wide, glabrous. Inflorescence usually raised above surface of soil. Pedicels patent or more or less deflexed in fruit, without a motor pulvinus. Bracts longer or shorter than pedicels. Perianth-segments 12-16 mm, patent, ovate-elliptical to lanceolate, white, with green stripe on back. Anthers whitish. Ovary 3-4·5 mm, obovoid-cylindrical, truncate or depressed at apex, with 6 translucent wings. Style 2-2·5 mm, shorter than ovary. Capsule ovoid or obovoid, deeply depressed at apex, with wings 2-3 mm wide. Flowering March-April.{\i  Dry grassland. Turkey-in-Europe, N.E. Greece.} Gr Tu. ({\i N. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. O. sibthorpii} W. Greuter,{\i  Boissiera}{\b  13}: 160 (1967) ({\i O. nanum} Sibth. & Sm., non Thunb.). Plant 5-15(-20) cm. Leaves (3-)5-9(-11), (1-)1·5-4·5(-7) mm wide, glaucous, glabrous, longer than inflorescence. Inflorescence corymbiform, sessile on surface of soil. Pedicels after anthesis (but while still green) swollen into a motor pulvinus at the base, flaccid and sulcate at the apex, deflexed in fruit. Bracts longer or shorter than pedicels. Flowers (2)4-7(15). Perianth-segments 12·5-26 mm, ovate-elliptical, white, with pale green stripe on back. Anthers yellow or slightly greenish. Ovary 4-6(-7·5) mm, ovoid, with 6 promi-
\par

\par
38}
\par