{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 nent angles, depressed at apex. Style (2·5-)4-5·5 mm. Capsule 9-15 mm, obovoid to cylindrical, the six angles keeled, the septal fissures reaching the base. Flowering February-March. 2n = 14, 18, 24, 28. {\i Dry hillsides. Balkan peninsula and Aegean region, S.E. Romania.} Bu Cr Gr Ju Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. O. exscapum} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  1}: 175 (1811). Like {\b 21} but pedicels after anthesis (but while still green) rigid and terete at apex; bracts longer or shorter than pedicels; perianth-segments not more than 15 mm; style c. 5 mm, as long as or longer than ovary; capsule ovoid, the septal fissures not reaching the base; flowering March-April. 2n = 18.{\i  Pastures. Mediterranean region}. Al Co Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Ornithogalum}. Bulb completely renewed each year by one series of concrescent, fleshy scales. Leaves with or without a white stripe, canaliculate or flat. Inflorescence more or less corymbiform, elongating in fruit. Pedicels ascending in flower, ascending to deflexed in fruit. Perianth-segments patent, appressed to capsule after anthesis. Filaments usually entire. Ovary and capsule with 6 more or less obtuse angles. Germination epigeal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. O. comosum} L., {\i Cent. Pl.}{\b  2}: 15 (1756). Plant 15-30(-40) cm. Bulb without bulbils, without or with a few offsets. Leaves (3-)4-6(-9), (1·5-)3·5-6(-9) mm wide, glaucous, flat or concave, without a white stripe, glabrous, ciliate. Scape glabrous. Pedicels ascending in fruit. Bracts lanceolate, shorter or longer than pedicels. Flowers (4-)8-30(-60). Perianth-segments 10-20 mm, white, with narrow green stripe on back. Filaments entire; anthers pale yellow. Ovary cylindrical to obconical, longer or shorter than style, with 6 rounded angles. Capsule cylindrical to obovoid; angles rounded, equal, separated by shallow furrows. Flowering April-June. 2n = 14, 18.{\i  Dry grassland. S. & S.C. Europe, from Austria and Italy eastwards.} Au Bu †Cz Gr Hu It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. O. umbellatum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }307 (1753). Plant (15-)20-30 (-40) cm. Bulb surrounded by tufts of leaves arising from offsets, without dormant bulbils. Leaves (4-)6-9, 2-5(-8) mm wide, canaliculate to flat, with a white stripe on upper surface, glabrous, not ciliate. Scape glabrous. Pedicels patent in fruit. Bracts shorter than or equalling pedicels. Flowers (4-)8-20. Perianth-segments 15-22 mm, lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, white, with wide green stripe on back. Filaments entire; anthers yellow. Ovary ovoid to subcylindrical, longer than style. Capsule oblong-ovoid to obovoid; angles equally spaced, more rarely in pairs, rounded and thickened, separated by shallow furrows. Flowering April-May. 2n = 18-20, 27, 28, 35, 36, 42, 44, 45, 54, 72, 90, 108.{\i  S. & S.C. Europe; doubtfully native further north, but widely naturalized. }Al Au Be Bl *Br Bu Co *Ga *Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu *Po Rm Rs (W, ?C) Sa Si Tu [Cz Da Fe Hb No Rs (B) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable, especially in shape of bulb, width of leaves and length of pedicels.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b O}. × {\b wildtii} Podp., {\i Ziva} ser. 2,{\b  23}: 246 (1913) ({\b 31} ×{\b  25}), which is recorded from S. Czechoslovakia and W. Hungary, differs in its inner filaments being shortly 3-fid at apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. O. orthophyllum} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  4}, {\i Syll. App.}{\b  3}: 4 (1830) ({\i O. kochii} Parl., {\i O. tenuifolium} auct. eur. medit., non Guss., nec F. Delaroche, {\i O. gussonei} auct. eur. medit., non Ten.). Like {\b 24} but without or with a few offsets; leaves sometimes up to 15, sometimes only 1 mm wide; pedicels ascending, patent or rarely somewhat deflexed in fruit; bracts shorter or sometimes longer than pedicels; flowers sometimes up to 25; perianth segments 11-20(-25) mm, ovate, obovate or lanceolate; ovary obconical to cylindrical; capsule obovoid to subcylindrical, the angles contiguous in pairs, rounded and scarcely thickened, sometimes prominent or winged; flowering March-June. 2n = 14+0-3B, 18, 19, 20, 27-29, 36.{\i  S. & C. Europe.} ?Al Au Bu Cz ?Ga *Ge ?Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu *Po Rm Rs (W, ?K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ovary and capsule with the angles neither thickened nor
\par
  keeled; furrows between angles shallow or absent . ({\b a}) subsp. {\b psammophilum}
\par
1 Ovary and capsule with thickened and keeled or ± winged
\par
  angles; furrows between angles conspicuous
\par
2 Ovary and capsule with ± winged angles; gynophore about
\par
  as long as capsule ............................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b orbelicum}
\par
2 Ovary and capsule with keeled angles; gynophore (if 
\par
  present) shorter than capsule
\par
3 Bracts somewhat shorter to longer than pedicels ............. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b baeticum}
\par
3 Bracts not more than ½ as long as pedicels
\par
4 Leaves 5-15 mm wide, flat, as long as or slightly longer
\par
  than the inflorescence ................................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b orthophyllum}
\par
4 Leaves (3-)4-8(-11) mm wide, usually canaliculate,
\par
  longer than the inflorescence
\par
5 Green stripe on back of perianth-segments decurrent on
\par
  pedicel; spur greenish; leaves spongy .......................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b acuminatum}
\par
5 Green stripe on back of perianth-segments not decurrent;
\par
  spur whitish; leaves firm ......................................................... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b kochii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b psammophilum} (Zahar.) Zahar., {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 356 (1978) ({\i O. psammophilum} Zahar.) : Leaves linear, canaliculate, longer than inflorescence; bracts usually shorter than the ascending pedicels; green stripe on back of perianth-segments not decurrent; capsule flattened between the 3 angles.{\i  E. Romania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b orbelicum} (Velen.) Zahar.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i O. orbelicum} Velen.): Leaves linear, canaliculate, as long as or longer than inflorescence; bracts 1/3-1/2 as long as the patent pedicels; green stripe on back of perianth-segments not decurrent; capsule with winged angles separated by deep furrows. •{\i  Mountains of Bulgaria}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b baeticum} (Boiss.) Zahar., {\i loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i O. baeticum} Boiss., {\i O. umbellatum} var.{\i  longebracteatum} Willk.): Leaves flat or slightly keeled, longer than inflorescence; bracts shorter or longer than the erect or patent pedicels; green stripe on back of perianth-segments not decurrent; capsule with 6 obtuse angles separated by deep furrows. 2n = 18, 27.{\i  Portugal and Spain.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b orthophyllum}: Leaves flat, as long as or longer than inflorescence; bracts less than half as long as the erect or patent pedicels; broad green stripe on back of perianth-segments not decurrent; capsule with 6 angles separated by deep furrows. •{\i  C. & S. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b acuminatum} (Schur) Zahar.,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 357 (1978) ({\i O.acuminatum} Schur): Leaves usually canaliculate, usually longer than inflorescence; bracts usually shorter than the erect or patent pedicels; green stripe on back of perianth-segments decurrent on pedicel; capsule with 6 angles separated by deep furrows.{\i  S. Carpathians}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b kochii} (Parl.) Zahar., {\i loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i O. tenuifolium }var.{\i  kochii} (Parl.) Hayek): Leaves usually canaliculate, longer than inflorescence; bracts shorter than the erect or patent pedicels; green stripe on back of perianth-segments not decurrent; capsule with 6 obtuse angles separated by deep furrows.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. O. armeniacum} Baker, {\i Gard. Chron.} ser. 2, {\b 11}: 748 (1879) ({\i O. macedonicum} Velen.). Plant 6-12(-15) cm. Bulb without offsets. Leaves 5-12, 1-2 mm wide, flat or canaliculate, pubescent
\par

\par
39}
\par