{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3 Leaves linear, ribbon-like; dioecious; flowers small,
\par
  with minute, vestigial petals; stamens 2-3; styles 3 .................. {\b 9. Vallisneria}
\par
3 Leaves linear-lanceolate to orbicular-reniform; flowers
\par
  hermaphrodite or unisexual, with conspicuous petals;
\par
  stamens 6-12; styles 6-9
\par
4 Plant rooted, without stolons; flowers hermaphrodite;
\par
  spathes tubular ................................................................................. {\b 3. Ottelia}
\par
4 Plant floating at anthesis, stoloniferous; flowers unisexual;
\par
  spathes of 1 or 2 free bracts
\par
5 Leaves floating, petiolate, orbicular-reniform, entire;
\par
  female flowers pedicellate, the ovary exserted from the
\par
  spathe ...................................................................................... {\b 1. Hydrocharis}
\par
5 Leaves raised above the water at anthesis, sessile,
\par
  linear-lanceolate, spinose-serrate; female flowers 
\par
  sessile, included in the spathe ...................................................... {\b 2. Stratiotes}
\par
2 Stems elongated, leafy; leaves sessile, linear; spathes
\par
  sessile in the leaf-axils
\par
6 Leaves spirally arranged
\par
7 Leaves patent-recurved, densely crowded towards the ends
\par
  of the branches; dioecious .................................................... {\b 7. Lagarosiphon}
\par
7 Leaves not recurved; flowers hermaphrodite ................................... {\b 8. Blyxa}
\par
6 Leaves verticillate or the lowest opposite
\par
8 Male spathes 2- to 4-flowered; petals much longer and
\par
  wider than the sepals ........................................................................ {\b 4. Egeria}
\par
8 Male spathes 1-flowered; petals subequalling or narrower
\par
  than the sepals
\par
9 Leaves in whorls of 3-8, with fringed nodal scales;
\par
  stamens 3; styles simple ................................................................ {\b 6. Hydrilla}
\par
9 Leaves in whorls of 3(-4), with inconspicuous, unfringed 
\par
  nodal scales; stamens 9; styles 2-lobed ........................................... {\b 5. Elodea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.      Hydrocharis}          L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stems short, stoloniferous. Leaves basal, petiolate. Flowers unisexual, insect-pollinated above the water-surface. Spathes 1- or 2-valved; male spathes pedunculate, 1- to 4-flowered; female spathes sessile, 1-flowered. Petals much longer and wider than the sepals. Stamens 9-12, the outer ones usually staminodal. Ovary long-pedicellate, exserted from the spathe; styles 6, 2-fid, free.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. morsus-ranae} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 1036 (1753). Plant floating (or rarely on mud). Leaves orbicular-reniform, cordate at the base, entire. Petals c. 10 mm, broadly obovate, white, with a yellow spot at the base. 2n = 28.{\i  Slow-flowing rivers, ditches and pools. Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.       Stratiotes}         L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dioecious; stems short, stoloniferous. Leaves basal, sessile, linear-lanceolate, tapered to the apex, spinose-serrate, brittle. Flowers insect-pollinated above the water-surface. Spathes 2-valved, shortly pedunculate, the male with several bracteolate flowers, the female 1-flowered. Petals much longer and wider than the sepals. Stamens 12, surrounded by staminodes. Ovary sessile within the spathe; styles 6, 2-fid, free.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. aloides} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 535 (1753). Plant submerged but rising to float on the water-surface at anthesis. Leaves up to 50 × 2 cm. Petals 15-25 mm, obovate-orbicular, white. 2n = 24.{\i  Much of Europe, but rare in most of the south and west.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ge Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E)Su Tu [Ga Hb He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.       Ottelia}       Pers.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stems short. Leaves basal, petiolate. Flowers usually hermaphrodite, insect-pollinated above the water-surface. Spathes tubular, pedunculate, usually 1-flowered. Petals much longer and wider than the sepals. Stamens 6-20. Ovary sessile within the spathe; styles 3-15, 2-fid, free.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. alismoides} (L.) Pers., {\i Syn. Pl.}{\b  1}: 400 (1805). Leaves varying greatly in size, up to 20 cm wide, submerged or partly emersed, broadly ovate to lanceolate, subcordate to cuneate at the base, 7- to 11-veined. Spathes with 5-10 longitudinal wings. Petals 20-30 mm, obovate, white, with a yellow spot at the base. Stamens 6-9. Styles 6-9. 2n = 22.{\i  Naturalized in rice-fields in N. Italy.} [It.] ({\i S.E. Asia, N.E. Africa, Australasia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.      Egeria}      Planchon
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dioecious; stems elongated. Leaves submerged, verticillate, sessile, linear. Flowers insect-pollinated above the water-surface. Spathes tubular, axillary, sessile, the male 2- to 4-flowered, the female 1-flowered. Petals much longer and wider than the sepals. Male flowers long-pedicellate; stamens 9(-10). Ovary sessile within the spathe, attenuated into a long filiform beak; styles 3, 2(-3)-fid, free.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: H. St John, {\i Darwiniana }{\b 12}: 293-307 (1961).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. densa} Planchon, {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3, {\b 11}: 80 (1849). Leaves up to 40 × 5 mm, in whorls of 3-5, more or less densely crowded, minutely denticulate. Sepals 3-4 mm. Petals 8-11 mm, obovate to suborbicular, white.{\i  Cultivated in aquaria, and locally naturalized in N.W. & C. Europe.} [?Au Br Ga Ge He Ho It.] ({\i South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.      Elodea}        Michx
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dioecious or with hermaphrodite flowers; stems elongated. Leaves submerged, verticillate or sometimes opposite, sessile, usually linear, with 2 minute, entire nodal scales. Flowers pollinated at the water-surface. Spathes tubular, axillary, sessile, 1-flowered. Petals subequalling the sepals. Stamens usually 9. Ovary sessile within the spathe, attenuated into a long, filiform beak; styles 3, usually 2-lobed, free.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: H. St John, {\i Darwiniana }{\b 12}: 639-652 (1963); {\i Rhodora}{\b  67}: 1-35, 155-180 (1965).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Sepals of female flowers 1-1·8 mm; male flowers breaking
\par
  free and rising to the water-surface; leaves less than
\par
  2 mm wide ...................................................................................... {\b 3. nuttallii}
\par
1 Sepals of female flowers 2-3·5 mm; male flowers not 
\par
  breaking free; leaves usually at least 2 mm wide
\par
2 Leaves usually c. 10 × 2 mm, oblong-linear, rounded at 
\par
  the apex; sepals of female flowers 2-2·7 mm ............................ {\b 1. canadensis}
\par
2 Leaves up to 25 × 2·5 mm, gradually tapered to the acute
\par
  apex; sepals of female flowers 3-3·5 mm ....................................... {\b 2. ernstiae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ELODEA. Dioecious. Male flowers remaining attached, raised to the water-surface on long, filiform pedicels.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. canadensis} Michx,{\i  Fl. Bor. Amer.}{\b  1}: 20 (1803). Leaves up to 17 × 4 mm but usually c. 10 × 2 mm, in whorls of 3 or the lowest opposite, usually oblong-linear, rounded at the apex, minutely denticulate, more or less crowded. Sepals of female flowers 2-2·7 mm; petals white or pale purple. 2n = 24, 48.
\par

\par
4}
\par