{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 beneath, ciliate, with a white stripe on lower surface. Scape pubescent. Pedicels patent or slightly deflexed in fruit. Bracts shorter or longer than pedicels. Flowers (3-)6-9(-15). Perianth-segments (15-)20-22 mm, white, with green stripe on back. Filaments entire; anthers yellow. Ovary narrowly oblong to ovoid, longer than style. Capsule obovoid to cylindrical; angles contiguous in pairs, rounded and scarcely thickened. Flowering February-March.{\i  Dry places. Macedonia.} Gr Ju. ({\i Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. O. refractum} Kit. ex Schlecht. in Willd., {\i Enum. Pl. Horti Berol., Suppl.} 18 (1814). Plant 5-8(-12) cm. Bulb surrounded by numerous bulbils which remain dormant for at least a year. Leaves (4-)5-8(-11), (1-)2-4(-8) mm wide, with a white stripe on upper surface, glabrous, not ciliate. Scape glabrous, the aerial part 0·5-1 cm. Pedicels deflexed or refracted in fruit, with a pulvinus at the base. Bracts shorter or longer than pedicels. Flowers 2-18. Perianth-segments 15-24 mm, white, with a narrow green stripe on back. Filaments entire. Ovary oblong, as long as or longer than style. Capsule cylindrical to ovoid; angles contiguous in pairs, obtuse, prominent, separated by shallow furrows. Seeds with ovate to orbicular epidermal cells. Flowering March April. 2n = 54, 56, 72.{\i  Stony or cultivated ground. S.E. & S.C. Europe}. Bu Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, K) ?Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. O. divergens} Boreau, {\i Not. Pl. Fr.} 15 (1887) ({\i O. umbellatum} var.{\i  divergens} (Boreau) G. Beck). Like {\b 27} but aerial part of scape 5-11 cm; pedicels patent or more or less deflexed in fruit, without a pulvinus; bracts shorter than pedicels; flowers (3-)4-6 (-13); perianth-segments with a wide green stripe on back; ovary cylindrical to obovoid. Flowering March-April. 2n = 18, 42, 54.{\i  Dry pastures and waste places. S. Europe, extending northwards to S.E. Czechoslovakia and to} 49° {\i N. in France.} Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. O. exaratum} Zahar.,{\i  Ann. Mus Goulandris}{\b  3}: 67 (1977). Plant 10-25 cm. Bulb without dormant bulbils. Leaves 3-8, 2-5 (-7) mm wide, with a white stripe on upper surface, glabrous, not ciliate. Scape glabrous, the aerial part 1-11 cm. Pedicels ascending or patent in fruit, without pulvinus. Bracts shorter or longer than pedicels. Flowers 3-14. Perianth-segments 17-23 mm, patent, white, with a wide green stripe on back. Filaments entire. Ovary broadly obovoid to ellipsoid, longer than style. Capsule cylindrical, with prominent angles separated by deep furrows. Seeds with linear epidermal cells. Flowering March-April. Abies-{\i woods. E. Greece} ({\i C. Evvoia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Myogalum} (Link) Baker. Bulb progressively renewed over 3-4 years, of free scales, the outer tunicate at the base. Leaves with a white stripe on upper surface, flat or concave. Inflorescence a more or less unilateral raceme. Pedicels recurved in fruit. Perianth more or less widely campanulate. At least the inner 3 filaments tricuspidate at apex. Ovary and capsule with 6 equidistant, rounded-obtuse angles. Germination epigeal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. O. nutans} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 308 (1753). Plant (15-)20-60 cm. Bulb with numerous offsets. Leaves 4-6, (6-)10-15 mm wide, glabrous, not ciliate. Scape glabrous. Bracts exceeding pedicels. Flowers 3-12. Perianth-segments 15·5-31 mm, white, with wide green stripe on back. All filaments with crest of mid-vein not toothed at apex. Ovary ovoid to subglobose, shorter than the slender style. Capsule broadly ovoid. Flowering March-May. 2n = 45.{\i  S.E. part of Balkan peninsula; cultivated elsewhere for ornament and widely naturalized.} Bu Gr Tu [Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It *Ju No Po Rm Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. O. boucheanum} Ascherson,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  16}: 192 (1866) ({\i O. nutans }subsp. {\i boucheanum} (Ascherson) Hayek). Like {\b 30} but leaves 3-4(-6), (3·5-)5-25 mm wide; bracts sometimes shorter than pedicels; flowers 5-20; at least the inner filaments with the longitudinal crest of the mid-vein toothed at apex; ovary narrowly ovoid, often longer than the stout style; capsule narrowly to broadly ovoid. 2n = 28.{\i  Grassland and roadsides. From Czechoslovakia to Bulgaria and Krym; naturalized elsewhere in C. Europe.} *Au Bu Cz Hu *It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K) [Ge He Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Caruelia }(Parl.) Baker. Bulb progressively renewed over 3-4 years, of 7-8 free scales, the outer tunicate. Leaves without a white stripe, flat or concave. Inflorescence corymbiform. Pedicels ascending in fruit. Perianth shallowly campanulate. Filaments entire. Ovary with angles. Capsule with 3 obtuse angles.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. O. arabicum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 307 (1753). Plant 30-80 cm. Bulb with numerous offsets. Leaves (5-)7-8, 10-30 mm wide, glabrous, not ciliate. Bracts shorter than pedicels. Lower pedicels 80-100 mm, rarely less. Flowers 6-25. Perianth-segments 15-32 mm, white or cream, without green stripe on back. Ovary obovoid to subglobose, blackish-violet. Capsule cylindrical. Flowering March-May.{\i  Rocky ground. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Bl Co Gr Hs It Ju *Lu Sa Si [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen.{\b  Cathissa }(Salisb.) Baker. Bulb with free scales, the outer tunicate. Leaves without a white stripe, flat to canaliculate. Inflorescence narrowly spiciform. Pedicels erect in fruit, shorter than capsule. Perianth more or less campanulate. Filaments entire. Ovary and capsule with 3 obtuse angles.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. O. unifolium} (L.) Ker-Gawler,{\i  Bot. Mag.}{\b 24}: t. 935 (1806). Bulb 8-12 mm in diameter. Plant 2-10(-25) cm. Leaf solitary (very rarely 2-3) 5-15 cm × 2-6·5 mm wide, glabrous, narrowed at the apex into a long cylindrical appendage. Pedicels 1·5-3 mm. Bracts 8-10 mm, greatly exceeding pedicels. Flowers 3-5(-8). Perianth-segments 10-16 mm, white, without green stripe on back. Ovary obovoid-lanceolate, obtusely truncate at apex; style longer than ovary. Capsule oblong-ovoid. Flowering February-March. 2n = 34.{\i  Open woods and pastures. W. half of Iberian peninsula.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. O. concinnum} (Salisb.) Coutinho,{\i  Fl. Port. }134 (1913). Like {\b 33} but plant 12-30( 40) cm; leaves 2-3(-4), 4-10 mm wide; pedicels up to 5(-8) mm; flowers 6-15(-20); ovary narrowly ovoid-fusiform, attenuate at the apex; style shorter than ovary. Flowering March-July. 2n = 36. •{\i  Portugal.} ?Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 26.      Urginea}         Steinh.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J. McNeill. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Bulbous perennials. Bulb perennial, ovoid to globose, composed of numerous free scales. Inflorescence a many-flowered raceme; each flower subtended by a bract and often a smaller bracteole. Perianth-segments free, with a dark mid-vein. Filaments slender or dilated at the base, inserted at base of perianth. Capsule triquetrous. Seeds numerous, flattened, winged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem 50-150 cm; bulb 5-15 cm in diameter;
\par
  leaves 30-100 mm wide ............................................................... {\b 3. maritima} 
\par
1 Stem 10-50 cm; bulb 2-3·5 cm in diameter; leaves less 
\par
  than 10 mm wide
\par
2 Stem 20-50 cm; leaves 3-10 mm wide, linear, undulate-
\par
  sinuate; style longer than stamens ................................................ {\b 1. undulata}
\par
2 Stem 10-35 cm; leaves not more than 2 mm wide, filiform,
\par
  entire; style about equalling stamens ................................................ {\b 2. fugax}
\par

\par
40}
\par