{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. U. undulata} (Desf.) Steinh.,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 2, {\b 1}: 330 (1834). Bulb 2-3·5 cm in diameter. Stem 20-50 cm. Leaves 8-15 cm × 3-10 mm, linear-oblong, undulate-sinuate, appearing after the flowers. Inflorescence a rather lax 8- to 30-flowered raceme; bracts about half as long as the pedicels, with a deflexed appendage at the base; pedicels 10-12 mm. Perianth-segments 10-12 mm, linear to spathulate, dull pink to greyish- or greenish-purple, with a reddish mid-vein. Anthers 1·7-2·5 mm. Style longer than the stamens. 2n = 20, 60.{\i  Rocky ground. E. Spain, Sardegna, S. Corse.} Co Hs Sa. ({\i N. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. U. fugax} (Moris) Steinh., {\i op. cit.} 328 (1834). Like {\b 1} but stems 10-35 cm; leaves up to 40 cm × 2 mm, linear-filiform, entire; inflorescence 5- to 10-flowered; bracts c. 1 mm, ovate; perianth segments pale pink, with a red mid-vein; anthers 1·2-1·7 mm; style about equalling the stamens. 2n = 20+1B,4B.{\i  Dry hillsides. C. Mediterranean region.} Co It Sa. ({\i N. Africa to Cyprus and Syria}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. U. maritima} (L.) Balcer,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 13}: 221 (1873) ({\i U. scilla} Steinh., {\i U. anthericoides} (Poiret) Steinh.). Bulb 5-15 cm in diameter. Stem 50-150 cm. Leaves 30-100 cm × 30-100 mm, long-lanceolate, entire, appearing before the flowers. Inflorescence a long, dense raceme with more than 50 flowers; bracts subulate, often caducous, shorter than the pedicels; pedicels 10-30 mm, more or less erect. Perianth-segments 6-8 mm, oblong, whitish, with a green or purple mid-vein. Anthers c. 2·5 mm. Style equalling the stamens. 2n = 20, 30, 40, 60, 64.{\i  Maritime sands and dry, rocky ground. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 27.       Scilla}       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J. McNeill. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Bulbous perennials. Bulb perennial, ovoid to globose, composed of numerous free scales, progressively renewed each year. Flowers solitary or in a raceme or corymb. Bracts 0 or 1 subtending each flower; bracteoles absent. Perianth-segments free, usually blue or purple, rarely white. Filaments free, usually slender, inserted at base of perianth. Capsule subglobose, 3-lobed. Seeds 1-10 in each loculus, globose to ellipsoid, unwinged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Many species, including several from S.W. Asia, are cultivated for ornament.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: R. D. Meikle, {\i Lily Year Book}{\b  25}: 122-130 (1961). E. V. Mordak,{\i  Bot. Zur. }{\b 56}: 1444-1456 (1971). F. Speta,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  119}: 6-18 (1971);{\i  Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  2}: 59-67 (1974);{\i  Linzer Biol. Beitr.}{\b  8}: 293-322 (1976).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bracts more than 4 mm, linear-lanceolate, linear or subulate
\par
2 Bracts 4-7 mm, the lower less than half as long as the
\par
  pedicels; leaf solitary, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate ........... {\b 9. monophyllos}
\par
2 Bracts more than 7 mm, about as long as or longer than the 
\par
  pedicels; leaves 2-12, linear, linear-oblong or oblanceolate
\par
3 Leaves linear-oblong to oblanceolate, (8-)10-35(-60) mm
\par
  wide; bulb 25-80 mm in diameter
\par
4 Bracts 50-80 mm; filaments c. 2 mm wide, lanceolate-
\par
  elliptical; inflorescence corymbose, subhemispherical;
\par
  leaves usually shortly ciliate ..................................................... {\b 13. peruviana}
\par
4 Bracts 10-25 mm; filaments 1-1·3 mm wide, lanceolate
\par
  inflorescence racemose, cylindrical to conical; leaves not ciliate
\par
5 Leaves 6-10, 15-30 cm; inflorescence 5- to 15-flowered;
\par
  perianth-segments 9-11 mm ............................................ {\b 12. lilio-hyacinthus}
\par
5 Leaves 3-6, 30-40 cm; inflorescence 30- to 40-flowered;
\par
  perianth-segments 6-7 mm  .......................................................... {\b 14. beirana}
\par
3 Leaves linear, 2-15 mm wide; bulb 10-25 mm in diameter
\par
6 Bulb 18-25 mm in diameter; lower pedicels 15-50 mm ............. {\b 7. ramburei}
\par
6 Bulb 10-20 mm in diameter; lower pedicels 5-12 mm
\par
7 Leaves about as long as scape; perianth-segments subacute ............ {\b 6. verna}
\par
7 Leaves usually longer than scape; perianth-segments obtuse ....... {\b 8. odorata}
\par
1 Bracts absent or not more than 2(-3) mm, ovate to triangular
\par
8 Flowers appearing in late summer or autumn, before the
\par
  leaves; bracts absent
\par
9 Leaves linear, canaliculate or ± filiform, 1-2(-4) mm 
\par
  wide, glabrous, gradually narrowed to the apex ...................... {\b 15. autumnalis}
\par
9 Leaves linear-lanceolate, flat, 5-25 mm wide, papillose hispid
\par
   at the margin, rounded and sometimes mucronate at the apex {\b 16. obtusifolia}
\par
8 Flowers appearing in the spring or early summer, with or
\par
  after the leaves; bracts usually present
\par
10 Stems 30-80 cm, with more than 40 flowers; leaves 8-12 {\b 11. hyacinthoides}
\par
10 Stems 5-30 cm, with 1-35 flowers; leaves (1-)2-7
\par
11 Perianth-segments 3-5 mm; leaves not more than 8 mm
\par
   wide; racemes 15- to 35-flowered ............................................ {\b 10. litardierei}
\par
11 Perianth-segments 5-15 mm; leaves usually more than 8 mm
\par
   wide, always so if racemes with more than 12 flowers
\par
12 Perianth-segments 12-15 mm; flowers nodding; pedicels
\par
   curved, equalling or shorter than the penanth ............................... {\b 3. siberica}
\par
12 Perianth-segments 5-12 mm; flowers ± erect; pedicels 
\par
   erect to ascending, at least the lower longer than the perianth
\par
13 Leaves appearing before the flowers, longer than the 
\par
   inflorescence at anthesis; perianth-segments 9-12 mm ................. {\b 4. amoena}
\par
13 Leaves appearing with the flowers, scarcely as long as
\par
   the inflorescence at anthesis; perianth-segments 5-10 mm
\par
14 Inflorescence 1- to 5(-10)-flowered; leaves 2(-5), sheathing
\par
    the scape to about halfway; bracts usually absent ......................... {\b 1. bifolia}
\par
14 Inflorescence 7- to 15(-20)-flowered; leaves 3-7, not 
\par
   or scarcely sheathing the scape; bracts always present
\par
15 Penanth-segments 6-7 mm; bracts 1 mm, ± truncate at base . {\b 2. messeniaca}
\par
15 Perianth-segments 9-10 mm; bracts 2-3 mm, auriculate at
\par
   base ............................................................................................. {\b 5. bithynica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Scilla}. Roots annual, simple. Flowering in spring with or after the leaves. Inflorescence 1- to 15-flowered. Seeds globose, carunculate. Germination epigeal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. bifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 309 (1753) (incl.{\i  S. nivalis} Boiss.). Bulb 10-20(-30) mm in diameter, pinkish under the dry outer scales. Stems (2-)5-20 cm, terete. Leaves 2(-5), broadly linear, 3-12 mm wide, appearing with the flowers and sheathing the scape to about halfway. Inflorescence 1- to 5(-10)-flowered, subsecund; bracts usually absent, occasionally minute; lower pedicels 10-30 mm, the upper much shorter. Flowers erect; perianth-segments 5-10 mm, bright blue to pale lilac, occasionally white at the base. Seeds 2-3 mm, with smooth testa. 2n = 18, 36, 54.{\i  Meadows and woods. C. & S. Europe, northwards to Belgium and N. Ukraine.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K) Sa Si Tu [Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Speta ({\i Linzer Biol. Beitr.}{\b  8}: 293-322 (1976)) distinguishes{\b  S. nivalis} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 5}): 63 (1844) (2n = 18), by its narrower, deeply canaliculate leaves and violet flowers and reports it as occurring in Europe only in Greece; he has described a hexaploid variant as {\b S. pneumonanthe} Speta, {\i Linzer Biol. Beitr.}{\b  8}: 316 (1976) (2n = 54). Dwarf mountain plants from other
\par

\par
41}
\par