{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 parts of Europe, often called {\i S. nivalis}, have been shown to be only phenotypic modifications. Speta ({\i Naturk. Jahrb. Stadt Linz}{\b  1973}: 9-54 (1974)) calls similar plants from W. Europe {\b S. bifolia} subsp. {\b bifolia} and in C. Europe recognizes two other subspecies: subsp.{\b  danubialis} Speta, {\i op. cit.} 16 (1974), with perianth-segments c. 8 mm and 2n = 18, and subsp.{\b  drunensis} Speta, {\i op. cit.} 17 (1974), with perianth-segments 9-10 mm and 2n = 36. He also distinguishes{\b  S. vindobonensis} Speta,{\i  loc. cit.} (1974), with perianth-segments c. 6 mm, darker blue with a white base, smaller lighter coloured seeds and larger chromosomes; it has 2n = 18. The status of these variants from C. Europe and their relationship to the variation throughout the range of the species is not clear.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. messeniaca} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 1}({\b 7}): 110 (1846). Like {\b 1} but stems angled; leaves 5-7, 12-20 mm wide, scarcely sheathing the scape; inflorescence 7- to 15(-20)-flowered; bracts c. 1 mm, oblong, truncate, sometimes 2-fid; pedicels 4-8 mm; perianth-segments 6-7 mm, pale blue.{\i  Rocky grassland. • S. Greece} ({\i Peloponnisos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Albania, said to differ in having elongate bulbs and perianth-segments 5 mm, have been distinguished as {\b S. albanica} Turrill,{\i  Kew Bull. }{\b 1932}: 197 (1932). Bulb-shape is generally a plastic character in the genus and the status of this variant is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. siberica} Haw. in Andrews,{\i  Bot. Reposit.}{\b  6}: t. 365 (1804). Bulb 15-20 mm in diameter, ovoid, whitish under the dark purple outer scales. Stems 10-20(-30) cm, angled. Leaves 2-4, broadly linear, 10-20 mm wide, appearing with the flowers, sheathing the scape to about 1/3. Inflorescence 1- to 2(-5)-flowered; bracts 1-1·5 mm, ovate, truncate or 2-fid; pedicels equalling or shorter than the perianth. Flowers drooping; perianth-segments 12-15 mm, deep blue. Capsule globose. Seeds 2 mm, ovate; caruncle cylindrical, peg-like. {\i Woods and scrub. U.S.S.R., northwards to} c. 55°{\i  N. in C. Russia; widely cultivated for ornament and naturalized elsewhere.} Rs (C, W, K, E) [Au Bu Cz Ho Ju Rm]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. amoena} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 309 (1753). Like {\b 3} but leaves 3-7, appearing before the flowers, fully developed at anthesis, longer than the scape, obtuse; inflorescence (2-)3- to 6-flowered; lower pedicels longer than the perianth; flowers erect; perianth-segments 9-12 mm, bright blue; caruncle raphe-like, scarcely developed.{\i  Widely cultivated for ornament and sometimes naturalized.} [Bu Cz Ga Ju Rm.] ({\i Origin unknown.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. bithynica} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 7}): 111 (1846). Like {\b 3} but bulb; sometimes purplish under the dark brown to grey-brown outer scales; leaves narrowly linear, 4-13 mm wide; inflorescence 7- to 10(-15)-flowered; pedicels suberect, the lower longer than the perianth; bracts 2-3 mm, elongate-triangular, cordate-biauriculate at base; perianth-segments 9-10 mm, pale purplish-blue; caruncle raphe-like, scarcely developed.{\i  E. Bulgaria.} Bu ?Rm. ({\i N.W. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Petranthe} (Salisb.) Chouard. Roots perennial, branched. Flowering in summer after the leaves have developed. Inflorescence 1- to c. 150-flowered. Seeds not carunculate. Germination hypogeal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. verna} Hudson,{\i  Fl. Angl.} ed. 2, {\b 1}: 142 (1778). Bulb 10-15 mm in diameter, ovoid. Stems 5-15(-25) cm. Leaves 2-7, 3-20 cm × 2-5 mm, narrowly linear, obtuse, shorter than to about as long as the scape. Inflorescence a dense 2- to 12-flowered corymbose cluster; bracts linear-subulate, scarious, longer than the pedicels; lower pedicels 5-12 mm. Flowers scentless. Perianth-segments 5-8 mm, violet-blue, subacute. Filaments lanceolate. Capsule 4-6 mm, subglobose, trigonous. Seeds ovoid, black. 2n = 20. •{\i  W. Europe, from N. Portugal to the Faeröer.} Br Fa Ga Hb Hs Lu No.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from Portugal referred to this species differ in having most leaves longer than the scape, lax and racemose inflorescences and linear filaments.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. ramburei} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 86 (1838). Like {\b 6} but bulb 18-25 mm in diameter; stems 10-50 cm; leaves 3-10 mm wide, linear-oblong, acute, usually longer than the scape; inflorescence an elongating 6- to 30-flowered raceme; bracts shorter than the pedicels; lower pedicels 15-50 mm; perianth-segments up to 10 mm. 2n = 20.{\i  Sandy places. Portugal, S.Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sometimes regarded as a subspecies or variety of {\b 6}, but its status and that of {\b 8} require further study.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants occurring as disjunct populations in S.W. Portugal are taller, with longer leaves and bracts less than half as long as the pedicels.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. odorata} Link in Schrader, {\i Jour. für die Bot.}{\b  1799}({\b 2}): 319 (1800). Like {\b 6} but bulb (10-)15-20 mm in diameter; leaves acute, usually longer than the scape; inflorescence a short, 4- to 10-flowered raceme; lower bracts as long as or longer than pedicels; flowers scented; perianth-segments obtuse. {\i Sandy places. • S. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. monophyllos} Link, {\i loc. cit.} (1800). Bulb 10-20 mm in diameter. Stems 5-30 cm. Leaf solitary, 10-30 mm wide, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, sheathing the scape. Inflorescence a 4-to 12-flowered raceme, becoming rather lax; bracts 4-7 mm, linear-lanceolate, long-acuminate; pedicels ascending, the lower 10-15 mm. Perianth-segments 6-8 mm, deep blue. Capsule 6-8 mm, ovoid. Seeds ovoid, black. 2n = 20, 40.{\i  Heaths, pinewoods and sandy ground. Portugal, W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. litardierei} Breistr.,{\i  Bull. Mens. Soc. Linn. Lyon}{\b  23}: 129 (1954) ({\i S. pratensis} Waldst. & Kit., non Bergeret). Bulb c. 15 mm in diameter. Stems 20-30 cm. Leaves 3-6, 4-8 mm wide, linear, about as long as the scape. Inflorescence a dense 15- to 35-flowered raceme: bracts c. 10 mm, ovate; pedicels 8-10 mm. Perianth-segments 3-5 mm, blue. 2n = 28. •{\i  Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. hyacinthoides} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 12, {\b 2}: 243 (1767). Bulb up to 50 mm in diameter, ovoid; outer scales glabrous, tightly investing the bulb. Stems 30-80 cm, robust. Leaves 8-12, 30-40 cm × 20-30 mm, linear-oblong, gradually narrowed at the base and apex, acute, shortly ciliate. Inflorescence 15-40 cm, racemose, subcylindrical, 40- to 150-flowered; bracts c. 1·5 mm, broadly ovate, often toothed; pedicels 15-30 mm, patent to ascending. Perianth-segments 5-7 mm, blue-violet. Filaments c. 0·8 mm wide at base, narrowly triangular to subulate. Capsule subglobose, subobtuse. 2n = 20.{\i  Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. lilio-hyacinthus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 308 (1753). Like {\b 11} but bulb scales all loosely imbricate; stems 15-40 cm; leaves 6-10, 15-30 cm × 10-25 mm, rather abruptly narrowed at the apex, the margin glabrous; inflorescence 5-10 cm, 5- to 15-flowered; bracts 10-25 mm, subulate; pedicels ascending; perianth-segments 9-11 mm, bright blue; filaments c. 1·2 mm wide, lanceolate.{\i  Woods and damp grassland. • C. & S. France, N. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par
42}
\par