{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. S. peruviana} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 309 (1753). Like {\b 11} but bulb up to 80 mm in diameter, with outer scales lanate; stems up to 50 cm; leaves 40-60 cm × 10-40(-60) mm; inflorescence 5-20 cm, densely corymbose, subhemispherical, (5-)20- to 100-flowered; bracts 50-80 mm, subulate; perianth-segments 5-14 mm; filaments c. 2 mm wide, lanceolate-elliptical; capsule ovoid, acuminate. 2n = 16.{\i  W. Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} ?Co Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  An extremely variable species within which many infraspecific taxa have been recognized both in Europe and North Africa. The Italian populations have also frequently been segregated as four separate species, for which treatment there is some supporting karyological evidence (E. Maugini,{\i  Caryologia}{\b  5}: 167-177 (1953); {\b 8}: 370-378 (1956)):{\b  S. cupanii} Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 416 (1827), a more slender variant from Sicilia with 7 to 15(-20)-flowered corymbs, pedicels only 30-60 mm, much shorter than the bracts, perianth-segments up to 10 mm, and 2n = 14;{\b  S. sicula} Tineo ex Guss., {\i Fl. Sic. Syn.}{\b  2}: 813 (1845), from Calabria, Sicilia and Malta, with pedicels 40-60 mm, equalling the bracts, sparsely ciliate leaves, and perianth-segments whitish or violet;{\b  S. hughii} Tineo ex Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Prodr., Suppl.} 162 (1832), endemic to Marettimo (Isole Egadi), with glabrous leaves 40-60 mm wide, deep violet perianth-segments and 2n = 16; and{\b  S. elongata} Parl.,{\i  Nuovi Gen. Sp. Monocot.} 24 (1854), a robust plant from Sicilia, Sardegna and perhaps Corse with densely ciliate leaves, ciliate bracts, pedicels 50-100 mm and perianth-segments 10-14 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. S. beirana} Samp.,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2, {\b 7}: 125 (1931). Bulb c. 25 mm in diameter, ovoid. Stems 30-40 cm. Leaves 3-6, 30-40 cm × 8-15 mm, linear-oblong, gradually narrowed at base and apex, acute, glabrous, the cauline exceeding the stem. Inflorescence 8-15 cm, racemose, 30 to 40-flowered; bracts 15-18 mm, subulate, entire; pedicels 18-25 mm, ascending to semi-patent. Perianth-segments 6-7 mm, bluish-violet. Filaments 1-1·2 mm wide, lanceolate. •{\i  N.E. Portugal} ({\i Beira Alta}). Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Prospero }(Salisb.) Chouard. Roots perennial, branched. Flowering in late summer or autumn before the leaves. Inflorescence 5- to 60-flowered; bracts absent. Germination epigeal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. S. autumnalis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 309 (1753). Bulb 15-30 mm in diameter, ovoid. Stems 5-20 cm, minutely scabrid towards the base, up to twice as long as the mature leaves. Leaves 5-10 (absent or very short at anthesis), 4-15 cm × 1-2 mm, usually erect (occasionally up to 4 mm wide and more or less procumbent), narrowly linear and canaliculate or subfiliform, glabrous. Inflorescence an elongating 6- to 20-flowered raceme; pedicels 8-15 mm, ascending. Perianth-segments 3-5 mm, pinkish-blue to lilac. Seeds 2 × 1 mm, ellipsoid, black, finely rugulose. 2n = 14, 28, 42.{\i  Dry, grassy, places. S. & W. Europe, northwards to S. England and Hungary.} Al Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. S. obtusifolia} Poiret,{\i  Voy. Barb.}{\b  2}: 149 (1789). Like {\b 15} but stems 10-30 cm, 3-4 times as long as the leaves; leaves 2-5, 3-4 cm × 5-10 (-25) mm, patent to recurved, linear-lanceolate, flat, papillose-hispid at the margin.{\i  Dry grassland and scrub. N.E. Spain and islands of W. Mediterranean region.} Bl Co Hs Sa si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The European plants belong to the endemic subsp. intermedia (Guss.) McNeill,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 357 (1978); subsp.{\i  obtusifolia,} from Morocco and Algeria, is more robust, with leaves 8-20 cm × 10-25 mm and 20- to 60-flowered racemes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 28.    Hyacinthoides}         Medicus
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Endymion} Dumort.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Scilla} but bulb-scales coalescent, completely renewed each year; bracts 2. Perianth campanulate or the segments patent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: P. Chouard. {\i Types de Développement de l'Appareil végétatif chez les Scillées.} Thèse. Paris. 1930.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perianth-segments 5-7 mm, patent; filaments inserted at
\par
  base of perianth; leaves 4-8(-14) mm wide ....................................... {\b 3. italica}
\par
1 Perianth ± campanulate, the segments 14-20 mm; filaments
\par
  inserted above base or at middle of perianth; leaves 7-35 mm wide
\par
2 Racemes unilateral, nodding towards apex; flowers 
\par
  scented; anthers cream-coloured .............................................. {\b 1. non-scripta}
\par
2 Racemes not or only slightly unilateral, erect, flowers
\par
  not scented; anthers blue ............................................................. {\b 2. hispanica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. non-scripta} (L.) Chouard ex Rothm., {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  53}: 14 (1944) ({\i Scilla non-scripta} (L.) Hoffmanns. & Link,{\i  Endymion nutans }Dumort.; incl.{\i  E. cernuus} (L.) Willk.). Leaves 3-6, 20-50 cm × 7-15(-25) mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, as long as or slightly shorter than scape. Raceme 4- to 16-flowered, unilateral, nodding towards apex. Perianth cylindrical-campanulate, the segments 14-20 mm, violet-blue, rarely pink or white, recurved at apex. Stamens unequal, the outer inserted at middle of perianth; anthers cream-coloured. 2n = 16, 24.{\i  Woods, scrub and heaths. • W. Europe, northwards to N. Scotland; locally naturalized from gardens in C. Europe.} Be Br Ga Hb Ho Hs Lu [*Ge It Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. hispanica} (Miller) Rothm., {\i loc. cit.} (1944) ({\i Scilla hispanica} Miller, {\i Endymion patulus} Dumort.,{\i  E. campanulatus }Willk.). Leaves 4-8, 20-50 cm × 10-35 mm, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, as long as or slightly shorter than scape. Racemes 4-to 16-flowered, more or less lax, not or only slightly unilateral, erect. Perianth campanulate, the segments semi-patent, blue, not recurved at apex. Stamens all equal, inserted at middle of perianth; anthers blue. 2n = 16, 24. {\i Shady places and cultivated ground. W. half of Iberian peninsula; naturalized from gardens elsewhere in S. & W. Europe.} Hs Lu [Br Ga Hb It Ju].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Hybrids between {\b 1} and {\b 2} are frequent, not only in those parts of the Iberian peninsula where they are sympatric, but also in England, Holland, and perhaps elsewhere in N.W. Europe, where {\b 2} is only cultivated or naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. italica} (L.) Rothm.,{\i  op. cit. }15 (1944) ({\i Scilla italica} L.). Leaves 2-6, 10-25 cm × 3-6(-12) mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, shorter to longer than scape. Racemes 6- to 30-flowered, dense. Perianth-segments 5-7 mm, patent, bluish-violet (rarely white). Stamens inserted at base of perianth; anthers blue.  2n = 16. {\i  Woods and rocky places. S.E. France, N.W. Italy; S.W. Portugal.} Ga ?Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from S.W. Portugal with smaller stature (not more than 10 cm), few-flowered racemes and yellow anthers, have sometimes been recognized as a separate species,{\b  H. vicentina }(Hoffmanns. & Link) Rothm.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1944) ({\i Scilla vicentina} Hoffmanns. & Link), but are probably not more than varietally distinct.
\par

\par
43}
\par