{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b Scilla reverchonii} Degen & Hervier,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  5}: 7 (1906) ({\i Endymion reverchonii} (Degen & Hervier) Breistr.), from S.E. Spain (Sierra de Cazorla), appears to belong in this genus and is like {\b 3} but with leaves more or less equalling the scape, lax-flowered raceme and deep blue perianth with erect segments. It has seldom been collected and requires further study. It has 2n = 16.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 29.    Chionodoxa}           Boiss.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By I.B.K. Richardson. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, bulbous, scapose perennials. Flowers solitary or few in a raceme, erect. Perianth rotate, the 6 segments shortly connate at the base to form an urceolate tube. Stamens inserted at the base of the tube, the anthers about as long as the filaments, yellow, dorsifixed. Fruit a globose, loculicidal capsule with few seeds.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Several species from W. Anatolia are widely cultivated in gardens, and some are perhaps becoming locally naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Perianth 9-12 mm, whitish, sometimes lilac at apex; tube
\par
 2-3 × 2-3 mm ....................................................................................... {\b 1. nana} 
\par
Perianth (12-)14-19 mm, blue; tube 3·5-5 × c. 2 mm ........................ {\b 2. cretica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 1. C. nana} (Schultes & Schultes fil.) Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 13}): 24 (1853). Bulb ovoid. Stem usually 5-10 cm. Leaves 2, as long as stem, 3-5 mm wide, linear, obtuse. Flowers usually solitary; perianth 9-12 mm, whitish, sometimes lilac at apex; tube 2-3 × 2-3 mm; segments elliptic-oblong, obtuse. Filaments c. 2 mm; anthers 3-4 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Snow-patches,} 1700-2300 {\i m; calcicole. • Mountains of Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. cretica} Boiss. & Heldr., {\i loc. cit.} (1853). Bulb ovoid. Stem usually 8-18 cm. Leaves 2, as long as stem, 4-10 mm wide, linear-lanceolate, somewhat cucullate at apex. Flowers 1-3(-5); perianth (12-)14-19 mm, blue; tube 3·5-5 × 2-3 mm, segments oblong-spathulate, obtuse or emarginate. Filaments c. 3 mm; anthers c. 4 mm.{\i  Scrub,} 1300-1700{\i  m. • Mountains of Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 30.     Hyacinthus}      L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood & A. Regueiro. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, bulbous perennials. Bulb large, with a membranous tunic of free scales. Leaves several, all basal. Inflorescence a raceme with few to many blue, pink, purplish or white, fragrant flowers; bracts minute. Perianth tubular, inflated at the base, not constricted at the mouth, divided to about the middle into 6 patent, lanceolate lobes. Stamens 6, inserted below the perianth-lobes, in 1 row; anthers included. Fruit a globose, loculicidal capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. orientalis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 316 (1753). Scape up to 30(-50) cm. Leaves 4-6(-12), 15-35 × 1-2 cm, linear to linear-lanceolate, flat, suberect. Raceme lax or dense, with 5-15 flowers usually nodding at anthesis; pedicels 4-8 mm. Perianth 10-25 mm, the lobes subequal, oblong to ovate, patent or slightly recurved. Anthers dark blue.{\i  Widely cultivated for ornament and naturalized in the Mediterranean region.} [Ga Gr It Ju Sa Si.] ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 31.         Brimeura}     Salisb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, bulbous perennials. Bulb small; tunics coalescent, the outer evanescent. Leaves all basal, narrowly linear. Flowers 1-12 in a very lax raceme, blue, lilac-pink or white. Bracts narrowly lanceolate, at least as long as the pedicels. Perianth campanulate or tubular-campanulate, the segments united at the base. Stamens 6, inserted in middle of perianth; anthers blue. Fruit a trigonous, loculicidal capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: F. Garbari,{\i  Atti Soc. Tosc. Sci. Nat.} ser. B,{\b  77}: 12-36 (1970).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Flowers 6-12, blue to violet; perianth tubular-campanulate,
\par
  the segments patent to recurved .............................................. {\b 1. amethystina} 
\par
Flowers 1-6(-8), lilac, lilac-pink or white; perianth 
\par
  tube campanulate, the segments patent ........................................ {\b 2. fastigiata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. amethystina} (L.) Chouard,{\i  Compt.-Rend. Acad. Sci.} ({\i Paris}){\b  191}: 1147 (1930) ({\i Hyacinthus amethystinus} L.). Scapes 10-30 cm. Leaves several, erect, usually exceeding the scapes. Racemes 6- to 12-flowered, unilateral. Perianth 10-11 mm, 6-7 mm in diameter, tubular-campanulate, the segments shorter than the tube, patent to recurved, blue to violet.{\i  Mountain grassland; somewhat calcicole. • Pyrenees and mountains of N.E. Spain; N.W. Jugoslavia.} Ga Hs Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. fastigiata} (Viv.) Chouard, {\i Bull. Mus. Nat. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Paris}) ser. 2,{\b  3}: 177(1931) ({\i Hyacinthus fastigiatus} (Viv.) Bertol.). Scapes c. 5 cm. Leaves several, erect, usually exceeding the scapes. Racemes 1- to 6(-8)-flowered, subcorymbose with the lower pedicels longer than the upper. Perianth 8-9 mm, 10-13 mm in diameter, campanulate, the segments longer than the tube, stellate-patent, lilac, lilac-pink or white. 2n = 28. •{\i  Islands of W. Mediterranean region; S. Greece} ({\i Taïyetos}). Co Bl Gr Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 32.    Strangweia}      Bertol.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood & A. Regueiro. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 More or less glabrous, bulbous perennials. Bulbs small, ovoid, with free scales. Leaves all basal, linear-lanceolate. Inflorescence a short, dense, raceme; flowers deep purplish-blue, subsessile; bracts lanceolate, with a deflexed, cylindrical spur. Perianth campanulate, divided to about 2/3 into 6 erecto-patent, lanceolate segments. Stamens 6, attached at or about the middle of the tube, in 1 row; anthers included; filaments winged for their whole length, with 2 or 3 teeth at the apex. Fruit a globose, loculicidal capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. spicata} (Sibth. & Sm.) Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  5}: 309 (1882) ({\i Hyacinthus spicatus} Sibth. & Sm.). Scape up to 15 cm. Leaves 4-8, slightly ciliate, longer than the scape. Bracts lanceolate, deflexed. Flowers 5-10, erect. Perianth 7-10 mm. Anthers dark blue. 2n = 8.{\i  Rocky hillsides. • S. & W. Greece. }Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 33.    Bellevalia}      Lapeyr.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, bulbous, scapose perennials. Bulbs with a membranous tunic. Leaves several, all basal. Inflorescence a raceme, with numerous white or blue to violet flowers which become brownish, greenish or yellowish after anthesis. Bracts usually small, membranous. Perianth tubular, campanulate or infundibuliform, deeply divided into 6 more or less patent lobes. Stamens 6, inserted at the base of the perianth-lobes; anthers held next to the perianth-segments, blue. Fruit a triquetrous capsule with 3 prominent ribs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: N. Feinbrun,{\i  Palest. Jour. Bot.} ({\i Jerusalem}) {\b 1}: 336-409 (1940).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Racemes conical at anthesis 
\par
2 Pedicels nodding at anthesis; racemes 30- to 50-flowered;
\par
  perianth-lobes greenish ..................................................................... {\b 5. ciliata}
\par

\par
44}
\par