{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 2 Pedicels erecto-patent at anthesis; racemes 40- to 80-
\par
  flowered; perianth-lobes yellowish-white ................................... {\b 6. sarmatica}
\par
1 Racemes cylindrical or oblong at anthesis
\par
3 Leaves procumbent; perianth bluish-violet or dark green
\par
  at anthesis, the lobes whitish, with green veins ................................. {\b 2. dubia} 
\par
3 Leaves erect or recurved; perianth without this combination
\par
  of colours
\par
4 Perianth 8-16 mm
\par
5 Racemes oblong; perianth 8-18 mm, turbinate .............................. {\b 7. romana}
\par
5 Racemes cylindrical; perianth 9-16 mm,campanulate ................. {\b 1. trifoliata}
\par
4 Perianth 5-7 mm
\par
6 Outer leaves 3-12 mm wide; flowers dark blue or violet,
\par
  later dingy yellow
\par
7 Outer leaves 3-12 mm wide; leaf-margin smooth; flowers
\par
  dark blue ......................................................................................... {\b 4. hackelii}
\par
7 Outer leaves 10-20 mm wide; leaf-margin scabrid; flowers
\par
  dark violet, later dingy yellow ......................................................... {\b 5. lipskyi}
\par
6 Outer leaves 10-20 mm wide; flowers reddish-grey or white
\par
8 Flowers reddish-grey; pedicels 5-8 mm ..................................... {\b 3. webbiana}
\par
8 Flowers white; pedicels 1-1·5 mm ................................... {\b 9. brevipedicellata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. trifoliata} (Ten.) Kunth,{\i  Enum. Pl.}{\b  4}: 308 (1843). Scape 25-40(-60) cm. Leaves 2-4(-6), erect, about as long as the scape, lanceolate, often finely ciliate. Racemes cylindrical, 10-to 40-flowered; pedicels 4-8 mm. Perianth 8-16 mm, tubular-campanulate, violet at anthesis, later brownish, the lobes ¼-½ as long as tube, ovate to oblong, obtuse, greenish. Fruiting raceme cylindrical; pedicels patent or slightly deflexed.{\i  Grassy places and cultivated ground. C. & E. Mediterranean region.} ?Cr Gr It Tu [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. dubia} (Guss.) Reichenb.,{\i  Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 105 (1830). Scape up to 40 cm. Leaves 2-5, procumbent, longer than scape, lingulate. Racemes cylindrical, 10- to 30-flowered; pedicels 5-8 mm. Perianth 5·5-8 mm, campanulate, bluish-violet or dark green at anthesis, later brownish, the lobes whitish, with green veins, c. ½ as long as tube, ovate. Fruiting raceme cylindrical; pedicels erecto-patent or horizontal. 2n = 8.{\i  Grassy places and cultivated ground. C. & E. Mediterranean region. }?Cr Gr It Ju si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from the Balkan peninsula, described by Freyn,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  68}: 95 (1885), as '{\i B. boissieri} spec. vel subspec. nova', but apparently with no valid name, tend to be smaller than elsewhere in the range with somewhat narrower leaves and smaller flowers. They overlap in all characters with {\b 2} and are sometimes regarded as a subspecies of it. They have 2n = 8.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. B. webbiana} Parl.,{\i  Nuovi Gen. Sp. Monocot.} 19 (1854). Scapes 25-60 cm. Leaves 3-4, usually longer than scape, lingulate. Racemes cylindrical, 20- to 50-flowered, the upper flowers sterile; pedicels 5-8 mm. Perianth 5-7 mm, tubular, reddish-grey at anthesis, later darkish, the lobes ½ as long as tube, ovate. Fruiting raceme cylindrical; pedicels horizontal. 2n = 16.{\i  Waste places and wood-margins. • N. & C. Italy.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. B. hackelii} Freyn, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  27}: 289 (1877) ({\i Hyacinthus dubius} auct. lusit., non Guss.). Scape up to 35 cm. Leaves 2-5, suberect or recurved, 15-40 cm × 3-6(-8) mm, equalling or slightly exceeding the scape, linear-lingulate in the proximal 2/3 but filiform-caudate in the distal 1/3. Raceme cylindrical, 15- to 30-flowered; pedicels 4-12 mm. Perianth 5-7 mm, campanulate, dark blue at anthesis, the lobes with a whitish margin, c. ½ as long as tube, spathulate-obtuse; anthers violet. Fruiting raceme cylindrical; pedicels patent or recurved-nodding. Capsule 6-7 × 8-10 mm, obovoid-globose, truncate.{\i  Dry, open habitats. S. Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. B. lipskyi} (Miscz.) Wulf,{\i  Fl. Kryma}{\b  1}({\b 3}): 56 (1930). Scapes 15-30 cm. Leaves 2-3(-4), usually longer than scape, lingulate, recurved, scabrous-denticulate at the margins and often on the veins. Raceme cylindrical, c. 30-flowered; pedicels 4-6 mm. Perianth 5-7 mm, tubular-campanulate, dark violet at anthesis, later dingy yellow, the lobes 1/3-1/2 as long as tube, obtuse. Fruiting raceme cylindrical; pedicels horizontal.{\i  Cultivated ground and dry hillsides. • Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. B. ciliata} (Cyr.) Nees, {\i Gen. Pl. Fl. Germ.}{\b  4}: t. 8 (1833-1837). Scapes (20-)30-50 cm. Leaves 3-5, shorter than scape, lanceolate, the margins long-ciliate. Racemes conical, 30- to 50-flowered; lower pedicels 30-35 mm, recurved. Perianth (8-)9-11 mm, campanulate, lilac at anthesis, the lobes 1/2-1/3 as long as tube, greenish, ovate. Fruiting raceme broadly conical; pedicels horizontal, rigid.{\i  Cultivated ground. Aegean region; S.E. Italy.} Gr It Tu [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. B. sarmatica} (Pallas ex Georgi) Woronow,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. URSS}{\b  26}: 619 (1927). Scapes 25-50 cm. Leaves 3-7, shorter than scape, lingulate, the margins thickened and ciliate. Racemes ovate-oblong, 40- to 80-flowered; lower pedicels 30-80 mm, erecto-patent. Perianth 7-9 mm, campanulate, dingy-violet at anthesis, later greyish-brown, the lobes 1/3 as long as tube, yellowish-white, ovate-lanceolate. Fruiting raceme broadly conical; pedicels horizontal.{\i  Dry hillsides and steppes. S. part of U.S.S.R., E. Romania.} ?Bu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. B. romana} (L.) Reichenb., {\i Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 105 (1830). Scapes 15-30(-40) cm. Leaves 3-6, longer than scape, linear. Racemes oblong, 20- to 30-flowered; pedicels 8-20 mm. Perianth 8-10 mm, turbinate, whitish at anthesis, sometimes tinged with blue at the base, later dingy brownish, the lobes equalling or longer than tube, linear-oblong. Fruiting raceme cylindrical; pedicels erecto-patent. 2n = 8.{\i  Meadows and cultivated ground. C. & E. Mediterranean region; S.W. France.} Al Co Ga Gr It Ju si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. B. brevipedicellata} Turrill, {\i Kew Bull.}{\b  1940}: 264 (1940). Scapes 6-17·5 cm. Leaves 2-3, about as long as scape, linear-lanceolate. Racemes cylindrical, 9- to 25-flowered; pedicels 1-1·5 mm. Perianth 7 mm, tubular, white; lobes 1/3-1/2 as long as tube, pink with green stripe, broadly ovate. Fruiting raceme cylindrical; pedicels erecto-patent. •{\i  Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 34.         Hyacinethella}     Schur
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, bulbous perennials. Bulb small, with free scales. Leaves (1-)2(-3), all basal, linear-lanceolate, with raised veins. Inflorescence a more or less lax raceme, with 3-20(-30) blue or rarely white flowers; bracts minute. Perianth tubular-campanulate or infundibuliform, with 6 erect or patent lobes, persistent in fruit. Stamens 6, attached below the perianth-lobes, subbiseriate. Fruit a depressed-globose, loculicidal capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: N. Feinbrun,{\i  Bull. Res. Counc. Israel}{\b  10D}: 323-347 (1961).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perianth 8-10 mm, infundibuliform; pedicels erect ................... {\b 3. pallasiana}
\par
1 Perianth 4-5 mm, tubular-campanulate; pedicels patent 
\par
  to erecto-patent
\par
2 Leaves erect, with prominently raised veins; perianth-lobes
\par
  c. 1/3 as long as tube ................................................................. {\b 1. leucophaea}
\par

\par
45}
\par