{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 2 Leaves patent or recurved, with only slightly raised 
\par
  veins; perianth-lobes slightly shorter than tube .......................... {\b 2. dalmatica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. leucophaea} (C. Koch) Schur, {\i Österr. Bot. Wochenbl.}{\b  6}: 228 (1856). Scape up to 25 cm. Leaves 2(-3), linear-lanceolate, erect, flat, with prominently raised veins. Raceme 10- to 20 (-30)-flowered, lax; pedicels erecto-patent. Perianth 4-5 mm, tubular-campanulate, pale blue, rarely white, often becoming green after anthesis; lobes ovate-elliptical, obtuse, c. 1/3 as long as tube. Filaments inserted in upper part of tube.{\i  Dry grassland and rocky slopes. S.E. Europe, extending to C. Romania, and northwards to} 54°{\i  N. in S.C. Russia.} Bu Gr Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable in leaf-width and flower-size. Plants from Greece with deep blue flowers 4·5-6 mm have been described as{\b  H. atchleyi} (A. K. Jackson & Turrill) Feinbrun,{\i  Bull. Res. Counc. Israel }{\b 10D}: 339 (1961), but further material is needed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. dalmatica} (Baker) Chouard,{\i  Bull. Mus. Nat. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Paris}) ser. 2, {\b 3}: 178 (1931). Scape up to 10 cm. Leaves 2-3, linear-lanceolate, patent or recurved, canaliculate, with only slightly raised veins. Racemes 3- to 20-flowered, lax; pedicels patent. Perianth 4-5 mm, tubular-campanulate, pale blue; lobes slightly shorter than tube. Filaments inserted at base of perianth-lobes.{\i  Grassy and rocky places. • W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. pallasiana} (Steven) Losinsk in Komarov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  4}: 408 (1935). Scape up to 15 cm. Leaves 2, linear, erect, flat, with raised veins. Racemes 3- to 6-flowered, compact; pedicels erect, very short. Perianth 8-10 mm, infundibuliform, blue with darker veins; lobes c. 1/3 as long as tube. Filaments inserted at middle of tube.{\i  Steppes. S. Ukraine, just extending into S.E. Russia.} Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 35.       Dipcadi}         Medicus
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, bulbous perennials. Bulb ovoid, with a tunic of papery scales Leaves all basal, linear to lanceolate. Inflorescence an erect, lax raceme; flowers 3-20, brownish-yellow to orange-red or greenish. Bracts lanceolate, acuminate, slightly longer than the pedicels. Perianth tubular-campanulate; segments joined at the base. Stamens 6, shorter than the perianth. Fruit a subglobose, trigonous or 3-lobed, loculicidal capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. serotinum} (L.) Medicus,{\i  Acta Acad. Theod.-Palat.}{\b  6}: 431 (1790) ({\i Uropetalum serotinum} (L.) Ker-Gawler). Scapes 10-40 cm. Leaves few, suberect or spreading, usually shorter than the scapes. Racemes secund. Perianth 12-15 mm; segments linear-oblong, obtuse, the outer recurved from the point of union, the inner erect, connivent. 2n = 8+0-6B, 16, 32.{\i  Rocky or sandy places. S.W. Europe.} Bl Ga Hs †It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  D. fulvum} (Cav.) Webb & Berth.,{\i  Phyt. Canar.}{\b  3}: 340 (1848), from Morocco and Islas Canarias, has been recorded from several localities in Spain. It is a more robust plant up to 1 m, with longer bulbs and wider leaves, flowering in the autumn (not the spring), but its status is very uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 36.        Muscari}      Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.H. Davis & D.C. Stuart. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, bulbous perennials. Leaves (1-)2-7, all basal. Flowers in terminal racemes or spikes, the apical flowers often sterile and differing in colour from the lower fertile flowers. Perianth globose to oblong-urceolate or -campanulate, usually constricted below the separation of the teeth, blue or brownish or yellow; teeth 6, short, often of different colour from the tube. Anthers (1-)2-seriate, included in the tube. Withered perianth abscissing around the base as the capsule expands. Fruit a capsule with sharply angled valves. Seeds 2 in each loculus, black and shiny, usually minutely reticulate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The genus is defined here in a broad sense and contains four subgenera which have often been treated as separate genera (cf. Garbari & Greuter). When further work on chromosome configurations is available, and when all members of Subgen. {\i Pseudomuscari} (at present a heterogeneous group) are better known, the generic definition used here may be revised. The differences between the subgenera are considered to be of a lower order of importance than those that separate {\i Muscari} sensu lato from {\i Bellevalia} and {\i Hyacinethella}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Capsule-measurements are taken from pressed material, and may therefore be at variance with the shape given, which is that of fresh material.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: J. G. Baker, {\i Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 11}: 411-418 (1871). B. Bentzer,{\i  Bot. Not. }{\b 126}: 69-132 (1973). F. Garbari & W. Greuter,{\i  Taxon }{\b 19}: 329-335 (1970). T. von Heldreich, {\i Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  53}({\b 1}): 56-75 (1878). D. C. Stuart, {\i Lily Year Book}{\b  29}: 125-138 (1965);{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  30}:189-196 (1970).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Tube of mature fertile flowers pale blue to blackish-blue
\par
2 Perianth pale blue, with darker blue stripes on the ± connivent
\par
   teeth; pedicels ascending; flowering in autumn ................... {\b 13. parviflorum}
\par
2 Perianth bright blue or blackish-blue, without dark blue
\par
  stripes; pedicels patent or deflexed; flowering in spring
\par
3 Perianth concolorous; tube and teeth blackish-blue ........... {\b 12. commutatum}
\par
3 Perianth discolorous; teeth paler than tube, often white
\par
4 Perianth globose; leaves 2-3(-4) usually linear
\par
  oblanceolate; raceme usually becoming lax .............................. {\b 9. botryoides}
\par
4 Perianth ovoid or obovoid to oblong-urceolate; leaves
\par
  (2-)3-7, linear; raceme usually dense
\par
5 Flowers bright blue, sometimes tinged with purple ............. {\b 10. armeniacum}
\par
5 Flowers very dark or blackish-blue ........................................ {\b 11. neglectum} 
\par
1 Tube of mature fertile flowers brownish, yellow, whitish
\par
  or greenish
\par
6 Fertile flowers with the shoulder expanded into a distinct corona;
\par
   tube yellow or greenish to whitish; sterile flowers usually absent
\par
7 Perianth-tube yellow, tubular-urceolate ............................... {\b 1. macrocarpum}
\par
7 Perianth-tube greenish to whitish, narrowly urceolate ............ {\b 2. moschatum} 
\par
6 Fertile flowers with the shoulder not expanded into a
\par
  corona; tube brownish, yellowish or greenish; sterile
\par
  flowers usually many, often conspicuous
\par
8 Perianth-teeth blackish; bulb-tunics pale grey ....................... {\b 8. tenuiflorum}
\par
8 Perianth-teeth whitish, cream or yellow; bulb-tunics 
\par
  reddish-brown or pink
\par
9 Perianth-teeth cream to pale yellowish-brown; sterile
\par
  flowers ascending, usually forming a conspicuous corymb ........ {\b 7. comosum}
\par
9 Perianth-teeth yellow; sterile flowers ± patent or sessile
\par
10 Fertile flowers sessile or with pedicels not more than 1·5 mm
\par
11 Sterile flowers pedicellate; leaves more than 4 mm wide ..... {\b 3. cycladicum}
\par
11 Sterile flowers sessile; leaves less than 4 mm wide .................. {\b 4. gussonei}
\par
10 Fertile flowers with pedicels more than 2 mm
\par

\par
46}
\par