{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 12 Inflorescence conical, with ascending pedicels;
\par   fertile flowers dark greenish-brown; sterile flowers 
\par   few or absent ...................................................................... {\b 5. spreitzenhoferi}
\par 12 Inflorescence cylindrical, with ± patent pedicels;
\par   fertile flowers brown to yellowish-brown; sterile 
\par   flowers numerous ........................................................................... {\b 6. weissii}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Muscari}. Bulb with thick, swollen, persistent roots. Fertile flowers narrowly or tubular-urceolate, strongly constricted distally, yellow, greenish or white, the shoulder strongly expanded to form a usually brown corona. Sterile flowers minute, sessile purple, frequently absent. Capsule indehiscent when shed.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  For an explanation of the typification of the genus, cf. W. B. Turrill,{\i  Bot. Mag. }{\b 167}: t. 124 (1950).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. macrocarpum} Sweet,{\i  Brit. Fl. Gard.} ser. 1, t. 210 (1827). Leaves 10-20 cm × 5-15 mm, linear-lanceolate, pale greyish-green. Scape 10-15 cm, erect to procumbent, shorter than leaves. Raceme up to 6 cm, dense, becoming lax. Pedicel of fertile flowers 1-3 mm. Fertile flowers 8-12 mm, tubular-urceolate, purplish in bud, becoming bright yellow; teeth minute, brownish. Fruiting raceme 1-6 cm, usually dense. Capsule 10-30 × 20-30 mm, suborbicular to broadly obovate, very deeply angled. 2n = 18.{\i  Limestone cliffs. S. Aegean region}. Cr Gr. ({\i W. Anatolia and adjacent islands.})
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. moschatum} Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Horti Berol.} 378 (1809) ({\i M. muscarimi }Medicus,{\i  Muscarimia muscari} (L.) Losinsk.). Like {\b 1} but fertile flowers narrowly urceolate, purplish at first, becoming greenish to whitish at anthesis.{\i  Cultivated for its strong, musk-like scent, and naturalized in W. Italy and Sicilia.}[ It Si.] ({\i S. & W. Anatolia}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Leopoldia} (Parl.) Zahar. Bulbs with slender, annual roots. Fertile flowers tubular- or obconic-urceolate, strongly constricted distally, brownish or greenish, often more or less constricted near the middle, the shoulder not forming a corona. Sterile flowers blue or violet, often numerous and arranged in a prominent apical tuft. Capsules usually dehiscent on plant.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. M. cycladicum} P.H. Davis & Stuart,{\i  Lily Year Book}{\b  30}: 123 (1966). Bulb-tunics dark pinkish-brown. Leaves (2-)3-4, 10-20 cm × 8-25 mm, narrowly linear-lanceolate, canaliculate. Scape (5-)8-30 cm, longer or shorter than leaves. Raceme lax cylindrical. Pedicels of fertile flowers absent, or not more than 1·5 mm. Fertile flowers 5-9(-12) mm, oblong or obconical-oblong, occasionally slightly constricted in middle; shoulders rounded; distal part of tube deep brown; proximal part paler or greenish; teeth bright brownish-yellow. Pedicels of sterile flowers 4-8 mm, patent, pale violet. Sterile flowers 4-8 mm, obovoid. Capsule 8-11 × 8-25 mm, subglobose to broadly ovoid-ellipsoid, often indehiscent when shed. 2n = 36, 54. •{\i  Kikladhes.} Cr Gr.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Bentzer recognised two subspecies (under{\i  Leopoldia cycladica} (Davis & Stuart) Bentzer), but the differences are in quantitative characters which are normally quite variable in the subgenus and separation at this level does not seem justified.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. M. gussonei} (Parl.) Tod.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Panorm.} 58 (1872). Bulb-tunics dark brown. Leaves 2-3, 10-15 cm × 2·5-3 mm, linear. Scape 16-20 cm, erect, exceeding leaves. Raceme lax, cylindrical. Pedicels of fertile flowers not more than 0·5 mm. Fertile flowers 5-5·5 mm, tubular-urceolate, brownish or yellowish, sometimes slightly constricted in middle; shoulders angular; teeth yellow, recurved. Sterile flowers few, sessile, minute, crowded, bluish. Capsule and seeds unknown. 2n = 18.{\i  Maritime sands. • Sicilia, Calabria.} It Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  This species (like {\b 5}) has frequently been confused with{\b  M. maritimum} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  1}: 308 (1798), from N. Africa, which has longer-pedicellate fertile flowers and anthers (as in {\i Bellevalia}) lying beneath the perianth-teeth.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. M. spreitzenhoferi} (Heldr.) Vierh.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  66}: 166 (1916) ({\i M. creticum} Vierh.). Bulb-tunics pinkish or brown. Leaves 3-5, 6-20 cm × 8-12 mm, linear, canaliculate, the outermost conspicuously wider. Scape 5-15 cm, usually shorter than leaves. Raceme dense, conical, becoming lax, cylindrical. Pedicels of fertile flowers 4-7 mm, usually ascending at least in fruit. Fertile flowers 4-7 mm, tubular-urceolate, sometimes slightly constricted in middle; shoulders rounded, deep brown; proximal part of tube greenish-brown; teeth deep yellow, patent or recurved. Sterile flowers scarcely developed, forming a minute tuft of threads, rarely few and small. Capsule 6-8 × 6-8 mm, globose, sometimes emarginate or acuminate. 2n = 18, 36. {\i  Kriti.} Cr. ( ?{\i Algeria}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. M. weissii} Freyn,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  28}: 87 (1878) ({\i M. theraeum} (Heldr.) Boiss.). Bulb-tunics dark brown to reddish. Leaves (2-)3-4(-6), 8-30 cm × 8-15 mm, linear-lanceolate, canaliculate. Scape (6-)8-30(-45) cm, longer or shorter than leaves. Raceme lax, cylindrical. Pedicels of fertile flowers 1·5-9 mm, usually shorter than the flowers, patent at anthesis. Fertile flowers 5-9(-11) mm, oblong or obconic-tubular, occasionally slightly constricted in middle; shoulders rounded; distal part of tube dark brown; proximal brownish-yellow or greenish; teeth bright brownish-yellow. Pedicels of sterile flowers 5-9 mm, patent, usually as long as those of fertile flowers. Sterile flowers 4-8 mm, obovoid, violet or purplish, shorter or longer than the fertile. Capsule 10-15 × 9·5-10·5 mm, broadly ellipsoid or obovoid. 2n = 18, 36 (54). {\i S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Plants occur in which the teeth of the fertile flowers are cream instead of bright yellow. It seems likely that at least some of these are hybrids with {\b 7}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Kriti, which are like {\b 6} but taller, with a larger bulb, fertile flowers with cream-coloured teeth, pedicels 10-25 mm, and sterile flowers with suberect pedicels, have been described as{\b  M. dionysicum} Rech. fil.,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 105}({\b 2, 1}): 167 (1943). They have 2n = 18, 36, and may represent an extreme variant of {\b 7}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. M. comosum} (L.) Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 2 (1768) ({\i M. pharmacusanum} (Heldr.) Boiss.,{\i  M. tubiflorum} Steven,{\i  M. tenuiflorum} subsp. {\i charrelii} (Heldr. ex Rouy) Hayek,{\i  Leopoldia comosa} (L.) Parl.). Bulb-tunics pink. Leaves 3-5(-7), 7-40 (-60) cm × 5-17(-30) mm, linear, usually shorter than scape. Scape 15-50(-80) cm, erect. Raceme 40-80 × 3-6 cm, lax, cylindrical. Pedicels of fertile flowers 4-10(-15) mm, patent, not elongating. Fertile flowers 5-9·5 mm, oblong-urceolate, pale brown; shoulders rounded, darker brown; teeth cream to pale yellowish-brown. Pedicels of sterile flowers 6-25(-40) mm, fleshy, ascending, violet. Sterile flowers 2-6(-10) mm, globose to obovoid, bright violet, shorter than fertile flowers, often numerous, in a conspicuous, usually corymbose terminal tuft. Fruiting raceme 8-40 cm, lax, cylindrical. Capsule 10-15 × 6·5-8 mm, obovoid, emarginate. 2n = 18 (27).{\i  Dry grassland and cultivated ground. Europe, northwards to N. France and N.W. Ukraine, but doubtfully native in the northern part of its range.} Al Au Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu [Be Br Da Ho].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Very polymorphic. Formal taxonomic recognition of infraspecific taxa is premature.
\par
\par 47}
\par