{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. M. tenuiflorum} Tausch, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 24}: 234 (1841) ({\i Leopoldia tenuiflora} (Tausch) Heldr.). Bulb-tunics pale grey. Leaves 3-7, 15-30(-40) cm × 8-20(-30) mm, linear, canaliculate. Scape 20-60 cm, longer than leaves. Raceme 6-30 × 1·5-3 cm, lax, cylindrical. Pedicels of fertile flowers (0·5-)2-7(-20) mm, patent, shorter than flowers, not elongating after anthesis. Fertile flowers 5-9·5 mm, narrowly obconic-urceolate, pale greyish-brown; shoulders sharply angled, pale cream or greenish; teeth blackish, recurved. Pedicels of sterile flowers (2-)3·5-16 mm, bright violet, ascending to patent. Sterile flowers 3·5-14 mm, obovoid to tubular, bright violet. Fruiting raceme lax, cylindrical. Capsule 12-16 × 6·5-7·5 mm, obovoid, emarginate to obcordate. 2n = 18.{\i  Dry places. E.C. & S.E. Europe, extending locally westwards to} c. 10°{\i  E. in S. Germany.} Al Au Bu Cz Ge Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (W) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Botryanthus} (Kunth) Zahar. Bulb with slender, annual roots. Fertile flowers globose to oblong-urceolate, not waisted, strongly constricted distally, blue to blackish, never striped. Sterile flowers few or absent, sessile to pedicellate, paler than fertile flowers. Capsules dehiscent on plant.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. M. botryoides} (L.) Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 1 (1768) (incl.{\i  M. heldreichii} Boiss.). Bulb not producing offsets; tunics pale or greyish-brown. Leaves 2-3(-4), 5-25 cm × 5-12 mm, erect, linear-oblanceolate or rarely linear, abruptly contracted, hooded or shortly acuminate at apex, the upper surface paler, glaucous, often prominently ribbed. Scape 7-30 cm, almost always exceeding leaves. Raceme dense at first, becoming laxly cylindrical and 1-7 cm long, except in some mountain plants where it does not elongate. Pedicels of fertile flowers (0·5-)2-5 mm, as long as or shorter than flower, patent or deflexed (rarely flowers subsessile). Fertile flowers 2·5-4(-5) mm, globose, strongly constricted, bright blue; teeth white, recurved. Sterile flowers few, smaller and paler, shortly pedicellate. Fruiting raceme lax. Capsule 4-6 × 4-6 mm, globose. 2n = 18, 36. •{\i  C. & S.E. Europe, extending locally westwards to N.W. France.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W) Si Tu [Be Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A somewhat variable species.{\b  M. kerneri} Marchesetti,{\i  Boll. Soc. Adr. Sci. Nat. Trieste}{\b  7}: 266 (1882) and{\b  M. longifolius} Rigo,{\i  Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.} nov. ser., {\b 12}: 152 (1905), are variants from N. Italy (the former extending into S.C. Europe) with narrow leaves.{\b  M. lelievrii} Boreau, {\i Not. Pl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 29 (1846) ({\i Botryanthus lelievrii} (Boreau) Nyman), is a rare variant from C. France in which the raceme remains dense.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. M. armeniacum} Leichtlin ex Baker,{\i  Gard. Chron.} ser. 2, {\b 9}: 798 (1878) ({\i M. pyramidatum} Velen.). Bulbs with or without offsets; tunics dark brown. Leaves (2-)3-5(-7), 10-30 cm × 1-10 mm, linear or linear-lanceolate, rarely linear-elliptical, acute, the upper surface sometimes glaucous. Scape 10-40 cm. Raceme 1·5-5 cm, dense to very dense, ovoid to cylindrical. Pedicels of fertile flowers 1-5 mm, patent to deflexed, usually shorter than flowers. Fertile flowers 3·5-5·5 × 2·5-3·5 mm, obovoid to oblong-urceolate, bright blue, sometimes with a purplish tinge; teeth pale or white. Sterile flowers few, smaller, paler or concolorous. Fruiting raceme lax. Capsule 8-12 × 6·5-8 mm, obovoid, emarginate. 2n = 18.{\i  Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable. Many records of {\b 11} from the Balkan peninsula are really referable to {\b 10}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. M. neglectum} Guss. ex Ten.,{\i  Fl. Neap. Syll. App. Quinta }13 (1842) ({\i Hyacinthus racemosus} L., nom. ambig.,{\i  M. racemosum} (L.) Lam. & DC.,{\i  M. atlanticum }Boiss. & Reuter; incl.{\i  M. mordoanum} Heldr., {\i M. vandasii} Velen.). Bulbs with or without offsets; tunics dark to reddish-brown. Leaves 3-6, 6-40 cm × 1·5-8 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, canaliculate to involute, bright green, sometimes reddish at base. Scape 4-30 cm, often as long as leaves. Raceme usually dense. Pedicel of fertile flowers 0·5-5 mm, patent or deflexed, shorter than perianth. Fertile flowers 3·5-7·5 × 1·5-3·5 mm, ovoid to oblong-urceolate, strongly constricted, very dark to blackish-blue; teeth 0·3-1 mm, white, recurved. Sterile flowers up to 20, smaller and paler than fertile flowers. Fruiting raceme lax. Capsule 8-10 × 7-10 mm, ovoid to obovoid, emarginate to apiculate. 2n = 18, 36, 45, 54, 72.{\i  Europe, northwards to N. France and S.C. Russia.} Al Au Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W K, E) Sa Si Tu [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very polymorphic. There is also a range of shades of flower colour between the plants with dark blue flowers, commonly known as{\i  M. racemosum }or (in N. Africa) as{\i  M. atlanticum,} and the plants with almost black ones ascribed to M. neglectum. As the variation is continuous, formal recognition of constituent taxa is not practicable.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Within Europe, the diploid plants, with 2n = 18, have been recorded only from Greece. They are dwarf (less than 15 cm) and the bulbs have no offsets. They are often referred to {\b M. pulchellum} Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 4}): 109 (1859) ({\i Botryanthus pulchellus} (Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss.) Nyman), and may be found, on further investigation, to deserve formal infraspecific status. Many of the polyploids, however, are less than 15 cm; an octoploid (2n = 72), from Krym, is a dwarf plant with relatively large flowers, and is unusual in possessing linear-oblanceolate leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. M. commutatum} Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 426 (1827). Bulbs occasionally producing offsets; tunic dark shiny brown. Leaves 2-5, 10-30 cm × 5-15 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, with a minute scarious margin, canaliculate. Scape 6-30 cm, about as long as leaves. Raceme dense, ovoid. Pedicels of fertile flowers 2-6 mm, patent-deflexed, as long as or shorter than flowers. Fertile flowers 3·5-7 mm, obovoid-urceolate, strongly shouldered and constricted, deep blackish-violet, with recurved concolorous teeth; teeth 0·5-1 mm. Pedicels of sterile flowers 1-3 mm. Sterile flowers 2-4 mm, paler and smaller than the fertile. Fruiting raceme lax. Capsule 7-12 × 5-8 mm, oblong-ovoid or broadly ellipsoid. 2n = 18.{\i  Mediterranean region, westwards to W. Italy}. Cr Gr It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Pseudomuscari} Stuart ({\i Pseudomuscari} Garbari & W. Greuter). Roots slender, annual. Fertile flowers shortly to oblong-campanulate, slightly constricted distally (in European species), pale blue, with dark markings; pedicels ascending (in European species). Sterile flowers many or few, sessile to pedicellate. Capsules dehiscent on plant.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. M. parviflorum} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  1}: 309 (1798). Bulbs occasionally producing offsets; tunics light brown. Leaves 3-5, 7-20 cm × 1-3·5 mm, narrowly linear or filiform, rarely narrowly oblanceolate. Scape 15-35 cm, always exceeding leaves. Raceme very lax, cylindrical. Pedicels of fertile flowers 2-4·5 mm, ascending, as long as or shorter than flowers. Fertile flowers 3-5 mm, broadly oblong-obovoid, weakly constricted above, pale blue; teeth paler, with a median darker blue marking, recurved. Sterile flowers few and minute, often absent. Capsule 5-7 × 4-6 mm. Autumn-flowering. 2n = 18.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Bl Cr Gr Hs It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Garbari & Greuter refer this anomalous species to the group of species here included in Subgen.{\i  Botryanthus,} but, despite the constriction of the perianth, its affinities are with species of Sub-
\par

\par
48}
\par