{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 gen.{\i  Pseudomuscari} in Anatolia, with which it shares the dark blue marking on the teeth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 37.      Agapanthus}       L'Her.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stock a rhizome. Leaves all basal. Flowers numerous, slightly zygomorphic, in umbels subtended by a deciduous, 2-valved spathe. Bracteoles filiform, persistent. Perianth campanulate, the segments connate in basal half. Stamens inserted on perianth-tube; filaments and style declinate; anthers dorsifixed, introrse. Stigma capitate. Capsule loculicidal; seeds numerous, flat, winged, black.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. praecox} Willd., {\i Enum. Pl. Horti Berol.} 353 (1809). Rhizome short, tuber-like; plant forming dense clumps. Leaves 20-70 cm × 15-55 mm, ligulate, somewhat canaliculate, evergreen. Scape 50-100 cm. Pedicels 4-12 cm. Perianth 40-45 mm, blue or white; lobes patent, somewhat undulate, the outer 6-8 mm wide, the inner 9-11 mm wide. Stamens and style exserted. {\i Cultivated for ornament, and naturalized on rocky ground in S.W. England} ({\i Isles of Scilly}). [Br.] ({\i South Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The naturalized plant is referable to subsp.{\b  orientalis} (F. M. Leighton) F. M. Leighton,{\i  Jour. S. Afr. Bot., Suppl.}{\b  4}: 21 (1965). Subsp.{\i  praecox} differs chiefly in its longer perianth (50-70 mm).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 38.        Allium}          L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.T. Stearn. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial, scapose, bulbous herbs, usually with a distinctive smell of onion or garlic. Bulbs solitary or clustered, composed of one to several storage scales, usually tunicate. Leaves filiform to ovate, with sheathing base. Flowers in a terminal umbel at first totally enclosed within a spathe. Pedicels often with bracteoles at base. Perianth-segments persistent, free or slightly connate at base, 1- to 3-veined. Stamens free or connate at base into an annulus, inserted at base of perianth-segments and sometimes adnate to their base; anthers dorsifixed, introrse. Style gynobasic; stigmas entire or shortly 3-lobed. Fruit a membranous capsule; seeds 1-2, rarely more, in each loculus, usually triquetrous or compressed, rarely globose, black.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: E.Regel, {\i Acta Horti Petrop.}{\b  3}: 1-266 (1875). A. Levan,{\i  Hereditas}{\b  23}: 317-370 (1937). W. T. Stearn,{\i  Herbertia}{\b  11}: 11-34 (1946). J. Helm,{\i  Kulturpfl.}{\b  4}: 130-180 (1956). H. A. Jones & L. K. Mann,{\i  Onions and their Allies.} London & New York. 1963. C. Zahariadi, {\i Studii Cerc. Biol.} ({\i Ser. Bot}.){\b  20}: 539-559 (1968). C. Zahariadi,{\i  Biol. Gallo-Hellen.}{\b  6}: 27 64 (1975). R. von Bothmer, {\i Bot. Not. }{\b 125}: 62-76 (1972); {\i Op. Bot. }({\i Lund}) {\b 34}: 1-104 (1974);{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}) {\b 12}: 267-287 (1975). B.E.E. de Wilde-Duyfjes,{\i  Taxon}{\b  22}: 57-91 (1973). B.E.E. de Wilde-Duyfjes,{\i  A Revision of the Genus} Allium {\i L.} ({\i Liliaceae}){\i  in Africa}. Wageningen. 1976. W. T. Stearn, {\i Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  4}: 83-98 (1978).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Many characters of systematic value in this complex genus, notably the colour of the perianth-segments and stamens and the nature of the leaf, whether solid or hollow, smooth or keeled beneath, are observable on herbarium specimens with difficulty or not at all, often not being recorded; bulbs may also be lacking. Such incomplete and inadequately annotated material may be difficult or impossible to name. In some species the leaves wither before anthesis but their fragile remains can usually be found and should be carefully preserved.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Most species flower between May and August; the flowering period has been indicated below for the few species which normally flower earlier or later than this.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Filaments which are{\i  tricuspidate} have a wide, flattened lower part, at the apex of which is a central anther-bearing cusp and two lateral filamentous cusps.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A distinction must be made between{\i  bulbils} ({\i bulbilli}), formed in the umbel and often replacing flowers, and bulblets or increase bulbs ({\i bulbuli}) formed by the bulb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaf narrowed into a distinct petiole
\par
2 Bulb densely covered with reticulate fibres; leaves 
\par
  sheathing lower 1/3-1/2 of stem; stamens longer than 
\par
  perianth-segments (Sect.{\i  Anguinum}) ..................................... {\b 22. victorialis}
\par
2 Bulb naked, with only a few parallel fibres at base;
\par
  leaves basal; stamens shorter than perianth-segments 
\par
  (Sect.{\i  Ophioscorodon}) .............................................................. {\b 39. ursinum}
\par
1 Leaf without petiole, usually linear or filiform
\par
3 Umbel with bulbils only, without flowers
\par
4 Leaves basal, not sheathing the stem
\par
5 Leaf solitary, not more than 20 mm wide; stem 3-angled ...... {\b 37. paradoxum}
\par
5 Leaves several, 15-50 mm wide; stem terete .............................. {\b 106. nigrum}
\par
4 Leaves sheathing lower ½ or more of stem
\par
6 Spathe with 2 persistent valves much longer than umbel ........ {\b 63. oleraceum}
\par
6 Spathe shorter than umbel or deciduous
\par
7 Leaves 5-20 mm wide, solid, flat
\par
8 Leaves 2-5; main bulb with small exterior bulblets ......... {\b 87. scorodoprasum}
\par
8 Leaves 6-12; main bulb composed of several large 
\par
  bulblets within a common tunic .................................................... {\b 75. sativum}
\par
7 Leaves 0·2-4 mm wide, fistular, semicylindrical or filiform
\par
9 Spathe 1-valved, deciduous ........................................................... {\b 95. vineale}
\par
9 Spathe usually 2-valved, persistent
\par
10 Leaves up to 30 cm, 1-4 mm wide ............................... {\b 90. sphaerocephalon}
\par
10 Leaves up to 18 cm, 0·2-0·8 mm wide ................................... {\b 93. pruinatum}
\par
3  Umbel with flowers, sometimes also with bulbils
\par
11 Perianth 11-18 mm, lilac or purple (very rarely white)
\par
   campanulate
\par
12 Leaves cylindrical, fistular; umbel always erect; perianth-
\par
   segments not more than 4 mm wide, acute or acuminate  {\b 18. schoenoprasum}
\par
12 Leaves flat, solid; umbel at some time pendent; perianth-
\par
   segments 3·5-9 mm wide, rounded and apiculate at apex
\par
13 Bulb with persistent, elongated fibrous tunic; umbel 
\par
   at first pendent, later erect ................................................. {\b 15. narcissiflorum}
\par
13 Bulb without fibrous tunic or with only a few basal
\par
   fibres; umbel always pendent ................................................. {\b 16. insubricum}
\par
11 Perianth yellow, greenish, brownish or white or, if
\par
   purplish, pink or red, then not more than 12 mm
\par
14 Leaves basal or almost so, all parting from the stem 
\par
   at about the same height
\par
15 Umbel almost sessile in a rosette of patent leaves 
\par
   (Sect. {\i Chamaeprason}) ...................................................... {\b 38. chamaemoly}
\par
15 Umbel on an evident scape (Sect.{\i  Molium} pro parte)
\par
16 Leaves hairy, or at least ciliate towards base 
\par
17 Stem hairy; leaves spirally coiled (Kriti) ............................ {\b 24. circinnatum} 
\par
17 Stem glabrous; leaves straight
\par
18 Stamens slightly shorter to slightly longer than 
\par
   perianth-segments ................................................................. {\b 32. subvillosum}
\par
18 Stamens 1/3-2/3 as long as perianth-segments
\par
19 Perianth-segments 3·5-6 mm wide, with almost truncate-
\par
   indented apex; filaments triangular ........................................... {\b 29. longanum}
\par
19 Perianth-segments not more than 3 mm wide, with acute 
\par
   or obtuse apex; filaments subulate above a short triangular base 
\par
20 Pedicels 3-5 times as long as perianth-segments;
\par
   anthers usually brown ........................................................... {\b 30. subhirsutum}
\par

\par
49}
\par