{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Lakes, rivers and canals; mainly in base-rich waters. Naturalized almost throughout Europe, except for the Arctic and most of the islands}. [Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  First naturalized in Ireland in 1834, and on the continent in 1859. In most parts of Europe male plants are rare or absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. ernstiae} St John,{\i  Darwiniana}{\b  12}: 644 (1963). Leaves up to 25 × 2·5 mm, in whorls of 3 or the lower opposite, gradually tapered to the acute apex, minutely denticulate. Sepals of female flowers 3-3·5 mm; petals white.{\i  Still or slow-moving water. Cultivated in aquaria, and locally naturalized in W. Europe.}[ Br Ga.] ({\i South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. NATATOR St John. Dioecious. Male flowers breaking free and rising to the water-surface.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. E. nuttallii} (Planchon) St John, {\i Rhodora}{\b  22}: 29 (1920). Leaves up to 15 × 1·8 mm, in whorls of 3(-4) or the lowest opposite, gradually tapered to the acute apex, minutely denticulate. Sepals of female flowers 1-1·8 mm; petals white.{\i  Still or slow-moving water. Cultivated in aquaria, and naturalized in N.W. & C. Europe.} [Be Br Ge He Ho.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Spreading rapidly, and in some places tending to displace {\b 1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 6.         Hydrilla}           L.C.M. Richard 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dioecious; stems elongated. Leaves submerged, verticillate or the lowest opposite, sessile, linear (to ovate), with 2 small, fringed nodal scales. Flowers pollinated at the water-surface. Spathes tubular, axillary, sessile, 1-flowered. Petals subequalling the sepals. Male flowers breaking free and rising to the surface; stamens 3. Ovary sessile within the spathe, attenuated into a filiform beak; styles 3(-5), simple, free.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: M. J. P. Scannell & D. A. Webb, {\i Irish Nat. Jour.}{\b  18}: 327-331 (1976).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. verticillata} (L. fil.) Royle,{\i  Ill. Bot. Himal. Mount. }376 (1839). Leaves in whorls of (2-)3-8, up to 20(-40) × 2(-5) mm, conspicuously or minutely denticulate; nodal scales fringed with orange-brown hairs. Sepals of female flowers 1·5-3 mm. Petals narrower than the sepals, transparent, with a few red streaks. 2n = 16.{\i  From N.E. Germany to N. White Russia; isolated stations in W. Ireland and N.W. England; very local and often impermanent.} Br Ge Hb Rs (B, C). ({\i S. & E. Asia, E. Africa, Australia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 7.       Lagarosiphon}         Harvey
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dioecious; stems elongated. Leaves submerged, sessile, linear, with 2 minute nodal scales. Flowers pollinated at the water surface. Spathes tubular, axillary, sessile, the male many flowered, the female 1(-3)-flowered. Sepals and petals subequal. Male flowers breaking free and rising to the surface; stamens 3; staminodes 3. Ovary sessile within the spathe, attenuated into a long, filiform beak; styles 3, 2-fid, free.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: A. A. Obermeyer, {\i Bothalia}{\b  8}: 139-146 (1964).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. major} (Ridley) Moss,{\i  Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Afr.}{\b  16}: 193 (1928). Leaves up to 30 × 3 mm, alternate, densely crowded towards the ends of the branches, patent-recurved, minutely denticulate. Sepals and petals pinkish.{\i  Cultivated in aquaria and naturalized in a few ponds, lakes and rivers in W. & C. Europe.} [Br Ga He It.] ({\i S. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 8.        Blyxa}            Noronha ex Thouars 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stems short or elongated. Leaves submerged, alternate, sessile, linear. Flowers usually hermaphrodite. Spathes tubular, axillary, sessile, 1-flowered. Petals linear, longer than the sepals. Stamens 3. Ovary sessile within the spathe, attenuated into a long, filiform beak, styles 3, simple, linear, connate at the base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. japonica} (Miq.) Maxim. in Engler & Prantl, Natürl. Pflanzenfam. 2(1): 253 (1889). Stems elongated. Leaves up to 70 × 3·5 mm, minutely denticulate. Spathes sessile. Sepals 3-4 mm. Petals 6-10 mm, white.{\i  Naturalized in rice-fields in N. Italy and S.W. Portugal}. [It Lu.] ({\i S.E. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 9.       Vallisneria}           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dioecious; stems short, stoloniferous. Leaves submerged, alternate, sessile, linear. Flowers pollinated at the water-surface. Spathes tubular; male spathes pedunculate or subsessile, many-flowered; female spathes long-pedunculate, 1-flowered. Petals vestigial. Male flowers very small, breaking free and rising to the surface; stamens 2-3. Ovary sessile within the spathe, cylindrical; styles 3, 2-lobed, free.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. V. spiralis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1015 (1753). Leaves up to 10 mm wide, basal, ribbon-like, obtuse or rounded at the apex, denticulate towards the apex, with reddish dots or short streaks. Male spathes ovoid, shortly pedunculate. Peduncles of female spathes filiform, becoming spirally coiled after anthesis; sepals of female flowers 1·75-4 mm, pinkish-white. 2n = 20.{\i  S. Europe, extending northwards to N.C. France and C. Ukraine; locally naturalized elsewhere.} Bu Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, E) Tu [Be Br Ge Ho Hu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 10.         Halophila}       Thouars  
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Submerged marine plants; rhizomes slender, creeping, with 2 scales at each node. Leaves opposite, petiolate or sessile, in 1 or more pairs on short or elongated shoots. Flowers unisexual. Spathes 2-valved, sessile, usually 1-flowered. Petals absent. Male flowers pedicellate; stamens 3; anthers sessile; pollen moniliform. Ovary sessile or subsessile within the spathe, attenuated into a slender apical beak; styles 3-5, simple, filiform, free. Fruit beaked, with membranous pericarp.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: C. den Hartog, {\i The Sea-grasses of the World} 238-268. Amsterdam & London. 1970.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. stipulacea} (Forskål) Ascherson, Sitz.-Ber. Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin {\b 1867}: 3 (1867). Leaves up to 60 × 8 mm, in single pairs on short shoots, shortly petiolate, linear to oblong, obtuse, serrulate, 3-veined, with numerous ascending secondary veins, glabrous or more or less papillose or puberulent. Ovary with 3 styles. Fruit 5 mm, ellipsoid, with a beak 4-6 mm; seeds 30-40.{\i  Submerged sand or mud. Mediterranean sea, westwards to Malta.} [Cr Gr Si.] ({\i Red Sea, W. Indian Ocean}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  This species entered the Mediterranean Sea {\i via} the Suez Canal, soon after the latter was opened in 1869, and appears to be still spreading westwards.
\par

\par
5}
\par