{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 20 Pedicels 1½-3 times as long as perianth-segments;
\par
   anthers yellowish ..................................................................... {\b 31. trifoliatum} 
\par
16 Leaves glabrous
\par
21 Stigma 3-lobed; stem sharply 3-angled, flaccid after
\par
   flowering; seeds with elaiosome (Sect. {\i Briseis})
\par
22 Leaf solitary; umbels usually with bulbils and few flowers ..{\b 37. paradoxum}
\par
22 Leaves 2-5; umbel without bulbils
\par
23 Umbel unilateral; flowers always pendent and campanulate  {\b 35. triquetrum}
\par
23 Umbel diffuse; flowers patent and stellate, later 
\par
   pendent and campanulate; perianth-segments connivent 
\par
   around the capsule ................................................................. {\b 36. pendulinum}
\par
21 Stigma entire; stem terete or 2- to 3-edged, always
\par
   erect; seeds without elaiosome
\par
24 Perianth-segments 3-8 mm, not recurved; bulbs elongated,
\par
   narrowly conical or oblong, attached to a short rhizome
\par
25 Spathe persistent, with one valve 1½-3 times as long
\par
   as umbel; outer bulb-tunics coriaceous, dark brown or
\par
   blackish, breaking into firm longitudinal strips
\par
26 Stem 10-70 cm; leaves 3-7; pedicels longer than perianth ........... {\b 4. saxatile}
\par
26 Stem 3-20 cm; leaves 2-4; pedicels equalling perianth ................. {\b 5. horvati}
\par
25 Spathe persistent or deciduous, shorter than umbel;
\par
   outer bulb-tunics fibrous or membranous, pale, not 
\par
   breaking into firm longitudinal strips
\par
27 Perianth white or yellowish
\par
28 Outer bulb-tunics somewhat coriaceous, ultimately 
\par
   breaking into fibres; pedicels smooth ........................................ {\b 8. ericetorum}
\par
28 Outer bulb-tunics thinly membranous, never fibrous
\par
29 Pedicels minutely scabrid ............................................................ {\b 6. albidum}
\par
29 Pedicels smooth ..................................................................... {\b 7. stelleranum}
\par
27 Perianth purple, lilac, pink or red
\par
30 Outer tunics fibrous; umbel 1·5-2 cm in diameter;
\par
   capsule 4·5-5 mm .................................................................... {\b 9. kermesinum}
\par
30 Outer tunics membranous; umbel 2-5 cm in diameter;
\par
   capsule 3-4 mm
\par
31 Stamens and style shorter than perianth-segments ........................ {\b 2. rubens}
\par
31 Stamens and style at least as long as perianth-segments
\par
32 Leaves smooth and rounded beneath; stamens distinctly
\par
   exserted ....................................................................................... {\b 3. senescens} 
\par
32 Leaves sharply keeled beneath in a living state;
\par
   stamens only slightly exserted .................................................. {\b 1. angulosum}
\par
24 Perianth-segments 6-12 mm, rarely 3·5-5 mm and then 
\par
   recurved; bulbs ovoid or subglobose, not on a rhizome
\par
33 Stamens much longer than perianth-segments; umbel 
\par
   5-20 cm in diameter; style up to 12 mm (S.E. Russia) ............. {\b 110. caspium}
\par
33 Stamens shorter than perianth-segments; umbel not more
\par
   than 10 cm in diameter; style not more than 5 mm
\par
34 Perianth bright yellow
\par
35 Leaves 15-35 mm wide; ovary not prominently angled or crested . {\b 33. moly}
\par
35 Leaves 3-7 mm wide; ovary prominently angled, 6-crested
\par
   ........................................................................................ {\b 34. scorzonerifolium}
\par
34 Perianth white, pink, greenish or purple
\par
36 Perianth-segments patent or deflexed after anthesis;
\par
   leaves arising direct from the bulb or sheathing the 
\par
   stem only up to soil-level; ovules 4-8 in each loculus
\par
37 Perianth-segments and filaments dark purple ............... {\b 105. atropurpureum}
\par
37 Perianth-segments and filaments white, pink or greenish
\par
38 Perianth-segments 3·5-5 mm; leaves 2-10 mm wide 
\par
   (S. part of U.S.S.R.) ................................................................. {\b 108. decipiens}
\par
38 Perianth-segments 6-10 mm; leaves 10-70 mm wide
\par
39 Stem 10-40 cm; leaves about as long as stem or longer,
\par
   not more than 20 mm wide ....................................................... {\b 109. orientale}
\par
39 Stem 50-90 cm; leaves much shorter than stem, up to 
\par
   80 mm wide
\par
40 Perianth-segments 1-1·5 mm wide, broadly linear,
\par
   acuminate, with apex incurved at anthesis; filaments
\par
   narrowly triangular, 1·5-2·5 mm wide at base,
\par
   gradually narrowed above ............................................................. {\b 107. cyrilli}
\par
40 Perianth-segments 1·5-3 mm wide, narrowly elliptical,
\par
   obtuse, patent at anthesis; filaments subulate, 1-1·5 mm
\par
   wide at base, abruptly narrowed above ....................................... {\b 106. nigrum} 
\par
36 Perianth-segments erect after anthesis, connivent 
\par
   around and covering the capsule; leaves sheathing the
\par
   base of the stem for a short distance above soil-level;
\par
   ovules 2 in each loculus 
\par
41 Leaves less than 0·5 mm wide, filiform
\par
42 Pedicels subequal; perianth 6-7 mm ..................................... {\b 40. moschatum}
\par
42 Pedicels very unequal; perianth 4-5 mm ................................. {\b 41. inaequale} 
\par
41 Leaves at least 1 mm wide
\par
43 Leaves cylindrical, fistular; umbel dense; pedicels 
\par
   usually shorter than perianth ............................................ {\b 18. schoenoprasum}
\par
43 Leaves linear, flat or canaliculate, solid; umbel lax;
\par
   pedicels usually much longer than perianth 
\par
   (Sect. {\i Molium} pro parte)
\par
44 Stem trigonous; leaves up to 40 mm wide ........................ {\b 28. neapolitanum}
\par
44 Stem terete or only slightly trigonous; leaves not 
\par
   more than 20 mm wide
\par
45 Spathe dividing into 2 valves; perianth-segments white,
\par
   with purple keel, acuminate ............................................... {\b 25. massaessylum}
\par
45 Spathe 1-valved but often becoming 3- to 4-lobed;
\par
   perianth-segments white or pink, not keeled
\par
46 Outer tunics crustaceous, pitted and perforate;
\par
   perianth usually pink .................................................................... {\b 23. roseum}
\par
46 Outer tunics membranous, not pitted; perianth white 
\par
47 Perianth-segments c. 12 mm, acuminate; umbel often with
\par
   bulbils .................................................................................... {\b 26. phthioticum} 
\par
47 Perianth-segments 6-10 mm, obtuse or acute; umbel rarely with 
\par
   bulbils 
\par
48 Filaments widened in lower ½; ovary widest above middle {\b 27. breviradium} 
\par
48 Filaments slender almost to base; ovary widest at middle . {\b 30. subhirsutum}
\par
14 Leaves sheathing at least the lower ¼ or more of the
\par
   stem and parting from it at different heights
\par
49 Spathe with 2 persistent unequal valves, contracted above, 
\par
   usually into a long, tail-like appendage, from a narrowly 
\par
   ovate or lanceolate base
\par
50 Neither spathe-valve longer than umbel
\par
51 Anthers exserted
\par
52 Leaf-sheaths hairy ...................................................................... {\b 66. pilosum}
\par
52 Leaf-sheaths glabrous
\par
53 Perianth yellow; umbel lax .......................................................... {\b 68. flavum}
\par
53 Perianth white, pink or red; umbel dense 
\par
54 Outer perianth-segments widest above middle, pink or white; 
\par
   stamens all simple; anthers very slightly exserted ................. {\b 65. staticiforme} 
\par
54 Outer perianth-segments widest below middle, usually 
\par
   dark red; inner 3 stamens tricuspidate; anthers long-
\par
   exserted .......................................................................... {\b 90. sphaerocephalon}
\par

\par
50}
\par