{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 51 Anthers included or only partly exserted from perianth
\par
55 Pedicels all much shorter than flowers .......................... {\b 18. schoenoprasum}
\par
55 Some or all pedicels as long as or longer than flowers
\par
56 Perianth 7-10 mm; umbel fastigiate; tunic finely
\par
   reticulate ................................................................................... {\b 17. inderiense}
\par
56 Perianth 2·5-7 mm
\par
57 Umbel diffuse, with unequal pedicels 10-45 mm;
\par
   stem 30-60 cm (Islas Baleares and S. Spain)
\par
58 Leaf-sheaths glabrous; perianth cylindric-campanulate, purplish . {\b 48. grosii}
\par
58 Leaf-sheaths hairy; perianth cup-shaped, greenish-yellow {\b 47. chrysonemum}
\par
57 Umbel fastigiate or subglobose, with pedicels rarely 
\par
   more than 15 mm (but up to 30 mm in 41); stem 5-30 cm
\par
59 Perianth-segments 3-4 mm ................................................ {\b 51. obtusiflorum}
\par
59 Perianth-segments 4-7·5 mm
\par
60 Inner perianth-segments toothed at apex, the outer entire; 
\par
   inner stamens tricuspidate, the outer simple (Bulgaria) ............ {\b 100. jubatum}
\par
60 All perianth-segments entire; all stamens simple
\par
61 Outer tunic membranous
\par
62 Perianth-segments oblong-elliptical or narrowly obovate,
\par
   widest at or above middle ........................................................... {\b 46. frigidum}
\par
62 Perianth-segments lanceolate or narrowly lanceolate,
\par
   widest below middle
\par
63 Outer perianth-segments at least 1·5 mm wide;
\par
    stamens 3-4 mm ................................................................... {\b 44. meteoricum}
\par
63 Outer perianth-segments 1 mm wide; stamens 4-5 mm ...... {\b 45. delicatulum}
\par
61 Outer tunic fibrous
\par
64 Leaf-margin ciliate ............................................................. {\b 42. bornmuelleri}
\par
64 Leaf-margin minutely scabrid
\par
65 Pedicels almost equal, 1-2 times as long as perianth ........... {\b 40. moschatum}
\par
65 Pedicels very unequal, 3-6 times as long as perianth .............. {\b 41. inaequale}
\par
50 One or both spathe-valves longer than the umbel 
\par
66 Stamens long-exserted
\par
67 Umbel rarely more than 3 cm in diameter, dense; pedicels 
\par
   not more than 15 mm, almost equal, all ascending;
\par
   bulbs narrowly conical
\par
68 Stem 10-70 cm; leaves 3-7; pedicels longer than perianth .......... {\b 4. saxatile}
\par
68 Stem 3-20 cm; leaves 2-4; pedicels equalling perianth ................ {\b 5. horvatii}
\par
67 Umbel 1·5-5 cm in diameter, lax; pedicels up to 30 mm,
\par
   unequal, some often curved downwards; bulb ovoid or
\par
   subglobose (Sect.{\i  Codonoprasum})
\par
69 Leaf-sheaths, especially the lowest, hairy ......................... {\b 72. hirtovaginum}
\par
69 Leaf-sheaths glabrous
\par
70 Ovary narrowly obovoid, much longer than wide; perianth 
\par
   purple (very rarely white) ......................................................... {\b 71. carinatum}
\par
70 Ovary subglobose, about as long as wide; perianth 
\par
   usually yellowish
\par
71 Ovary sessile ......................................................................... {\b 74. stamineum}
\par
71 Ovary with very short but distinct stalk
\par
72 Perianth c. 5 mm; filaments 7 mm; umbel lax; pedicels
\par
   up to 40 mm, very unequal ............................................................ {\b 68. flavum}
\par
72 Perianth 2·5-4 mm; filaments 5 mm; umbel compact;
\par
   pedicels not more than 15 mm, almost equal .......................... {\b 73. hymettium} 
\par
66 Stamens included or with anthers just exserted
\par
73 Perianth 8-10 mm; anthers blackish; umbel with bulbils {\b 69. melanantherum}
\par
73 Perianth 3-8 mm; anthers yellow or reddish; umbel
\par
   without bulbils
\par
74 Leaves and sheaths hairy
\par
75 Stems not more than 15 cm; perianth-segments obtuse ............. {\b 66. pilosum}
\par
75 Stem up to 70 cm; perianth-segments acute ....................... {\b 56. paniculatum}
\par
74 Leaves and sheaths glabrous
\par
76 Umbel lax, with conspicuously unequal pedicels, the 
\par
   longest 15-70 mm 
\par
77 Umbel with bulbils, few-flowered ........................................ {\b 63. oleraceum} 
\par
77 Umbel without bulbils, many-flowered
\par
78 Pedicels slightly flattened or winged; perianth clear pink .... {\b 62. podolicum}
\par
78 Pedicels terete or ribbed; perianth variously coloured
\par
79 Ovary slightly longer than wide, oblong-cylindrical,
\par
   truncate at apex .................................................................. {\b 61. macedonicum}
\par
79 Ovary about twice as long as wide, ellipsoid, narrowed
\par
   towards apex
\par
80 Perianth-segments narrowly lanceolate or very narrowly
\par
   oblong, gradually narrowed to the acute apex; stamens 
\par
   shorter than perianth .................................................................. {\b 58. sipyleum}
\par
80 Perianth-segments mostly narrowly oblong with the apex
\par
   obtuse or almost truncate, mucronate; stamens about as
\par
   long as perianth
\par
81 Cells on ribs of leaf-sheaths much longer than wide .......... {\b 56. paniculatum}
\par
81 Cells on ribs of leaf-sheaths about as long as wide .................. {\b 60. favosum}
\par
76 Umbel more compact, the longest pedicels usually less
\par
   than 20 mm 
\par
82 Leaves sheathing c. 7/8 of stem (Kriti) ....................................... {\b 70. tardans}
\par
82 Leaves sheathing lower ¼-½ of stem
\par
83 Ovary almost as wide as long
\par
84 Umbel very dense, subglobose, many-flowered; perianth
\par
   white or pink; ovary broadly obovoid ................................... {\b 65. staticiforme}
\par
84 Umbel lax, fastigiate, usually few-flowered; perianth
\par
   yellowish, very rarely pink; ovary subglobose .......................... {\b 67. luteolum}
\par
83 Ovary 2-3 times as long as wide
\par
85 Perianth 6·5-8 mm; stamens shorter than perianth-segments
\par
   ............................................................................................... {\b 64. parnassicum}
\par
85 Perianth 3-6 mm; stamens about as long as perianth-segments
\par
86 Perianth 3-4 mm ................................................................ {\b 51. obtusiflorum}
\par
86 Perianth 5-6 mm
\par
87 Outer tunic membranous; anthers yellow .................................... {\b 57. pallens}
\par
87 Outer tunic often breaking into parallel fibres; anthers violet ... {\b 59. rupestre}
\par
49 Spathe 1-valved (sometimes 2- or 3-lobed) or deciduous,
\par
   or both 1-valved and quickly deciduous, or 2-valved with
\par
   equal valves shorter than or just equalling umbel
\par
88 Stem fistular and inflated, 5-40 mm in diameter; umbel
\par
   dense, many-flowered; perianth white or yellowish (Sect. {\i Cepa})
\par
89 Leaves circular in section; stem widest at about the
\par
   middle; perianth 7-9 mm; stamens 8-12 mm ........................... {\b 21. fistulosum}
\par
89 Leaves semicircular in section; stem widest below the
\par
   middle; perianth 3-4·5 mm; stamens 4-5 mm ................................... {\b 20. cepa}
\par
88 Stem usually solid, not inflated, usually slender
\par
90 Filaments all subulate and simple or the inner 3 with
\par
   a small tooth on each side at base
\par
91 Umbel fastigiate with erect or ascending pedicels; stem 9-25 cm
\par
92 Leaves sheathing stem almost up to umbel; perianth-
\par
   segments oblanceolate, truncate (Greece, Kriti) .................. {\b 50. callimischon}
\par
92 Leaves sheathing lower 1/2-2/3 of stem; perianth
\par
   segments lanceolate, acute or obtuse
\par
93 Spathe 1-valved, entire; outer tunic fibrous ................................. {\b 49. cupani}
\par
93 Spathe with 2 short lobes; outer tunic membranous 
\par
94 Perianth pink; ovary at anthesis acute at apex .................... {\b 52. parciflorum} 
\par
94 Perianth yellowish; ovary at anthesis rounded at apex .................. {\b 53. rouyi}
\par

\par
51}
\par