{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 91 Umbel subglobose or hemispherical; stem 20-100 cm
\par
95 Perianth blue; bulb subglobose .............................................. {\b 54. caeruleum}
\par
95 Perianth not blue; bulb narrowly ovoid or cylindrical,
\par
   rarely subglobose
\par
96 Stamens not exceeding perianth-segments
\par
97 Perianth 7-12 mm; outer bulb tunic crustaceous, pitted .............. {\b 23. roseum}
\par
97 Perianth 5-7 mm; outer bulb tunic membranous, not pitted
\par
98 Stamens c. ½ as long as perianth-segments, the inner
\par
   3 narrowly triangular .................................................................. {\b 43. rubellum}
\par
98 Stamens about as long as perianth-segments, the inner
\par
   3 subulate ................................................................................... {\b 19. schmitzii}
\par
96 Stamens exceeding perianth-segments
\par
99 Leaves 5-25 mm wide; stem 60-100 cm; perianth greenish-
\par
   yellow, smooth; filaments 7-8 mm ............................................ {\b 14. obliquum}
\par
99 Leaves 1-5 mm wide; stem usually 20-60 cm;
\par
   filaments 4-6 mm
\par
100 Bulbs narrowly ovoid, without rhizome; perianth papillose {\b 55. sabulosum}
\par
100 Bulbs almost cylindrical, elongated, with a short 
\par
    rhizome; perianth smooth
\par
101 Outer perianth-segments about twice as long as wide,
\par
    oblong-elliptical, 3-toothed at apex; spathe mostly 
\par
    1-valved (N.W. Spain) ........................................................... {\b 12. palentinum}
\par
101 Outer perianth-segments about 3 times as long as wide,
\par
    lanceolate or elliptical, obtuse or subacute 
\par
    (not toothed) at apex; spathe 2-valved
\par
102 Outer bulb-tunics splitting into brown strips;
\par
    perianth-segments c. 5 mm ............................................. {\b 13. hymenorhizum}
\par
102 Outer bulb-tunics becoming completely fibrous, often
\par
    reticulate; perianth-segments c. 4 mm
\par
103 Inner stamens with a small tooth on each side at base;
\par
    dehisced anthers c. 0·5 mm ........................................................... {\b 11. lineare}
\par
103 Inner stamens without teeth at base; dehisced anthers
\par
    c. 1·5 mm ................................................................................ {\b 10. suaveolens} 
\par
90 Filaments of inner 3 stamens tricuspidate (Sect.{\i  Allium})
\par
104 Leaves sheathing stem up to umbel .......................... {\b 103. chamaespathum}
\par
104 Leaves sheathing only lower 1/4-2/3 of stem
\par
105 Inner perianth-segments laciniate or toothed above,
\par
    the outer entire (C. Bulgaria) .................................................... {\b 100. jubatum}
\par
105 All perianth-segments entire
\par
106 Perianth-segments 7-10 mm, acuminate
\par
107 Leaves not more than 4 mm wide, fistular; stamens 
\par
    much shorter than perianth-segments ................................... {\b 104. heldreichii}
\par
107 Leaves 5-15 mm wide, flat; stamens about as long as
\par
    perianth-segments
\par
108 Perianth pink; segments smooth on keel and margin ......... {\b 85. acutiflorum}
\par
108 Perianth white; segments scabrid on keel, minutely
\par
    denticulate on margin ........................................................... {\b 86. pyrenaicum}
\par
106 Perianth-segments 2·5-7 mm, acute to obtuse
\par
109 Umbel 0·5-2·5 cm in diameter, very compact; pedicels 
\par
    all shorter or scarcely longer than flowers
\par
110 Perianth 5·5-6 mm; outer tunics reticulately fibrous ... {\b 99. gomphrenoides}
\par
110 Perianth 2·5-4(-5·5) mm; outer tunics coriaceous,
\par
    sometimes splitting into parallel fibres in upper part
\par
111 Filaments 4-7 mm, long-exserted .............................. {\b 90. sphaerocephalon}
\par
111 Filaments 3 mm, included ............................................ {\b 101. rubrovittatum}
\par
109 Umbel 1-10 cm in diameter, compact to lax; pedicels 
\par
    longer than flowers
\par
112 Stamens included or with anthers slightly exserted
\par
113 Leaves hollow, 0·5-2 mm wide
\par
114 Spathe deciduous
\par
115 Umbel usually with bulbils; central cusp of inner 
\par
    stamens c. 1·5 mm ........................................................................ {\b 95. vineale}
\par
115 Umbel without bulbils; central cusp of inner stamens
\par
    c. 0·5 mm ............................................................................... {\b 94. regelianum}
\par
114 Spathe persistent or with persistent base, 2-lobed
\par
116 Perianth-segments 3-3·5 mm, strongly papillose,
\par
    blackish-purple; perianth broadly ovoid (Spain) ............... {\b 92. melananthum}
\par
116 Perianth-segments 4-4·5 mm, papillose on keel, pink 
\par
    or purplish
\par
117 Perianth c. 3·5-5 mm, cylindrical ......................................... {\b 93. pruinatum}
\par
117 Perianth c.4 mm,ovoid .................................................. {\b 102. integerrimum}
\par
113 Leaves flat, often canaliculate above, 3-40 mm wide
\par
118 Umbel with bulbils
\par
119 Flowers usually aborted and withering in bud; spathe 
\par
    with very long beak; basal part of inner stamens 
\par
    shorter than or equalling central cusp, bulb composed
\par
    of 5-15 bulblets of ± equal size ................................................... {\b 75. sativum}
\par
119 Flowers normal; spathe with short beak; basal part of
\par
    inner stamens 2-3 times as long as central cusp, bulb
\par
    composed of 1-2 large bulbs and varying numbers of 
\par
    smaller bulblets
\par
120 Pedicels not more than 20 mm; outer perianth-segments
\par
    smooth though slightly papillose; bulblets blackish ....... {\b 87. scorodoprasum}
\par
120 At least some pedicels more than 20 mm; outer perianth-
\par
    segments scabrid on keel; bulblets yellowish .................. {\b 76. ampeloprasum}
\par
118 Umbel without bulbils
\par
121 Stamens much shorter than perianth
\par
122 Perianth purplish or reddish-purple ............................. {\b 87. scorodoprasum}
\par
122 Perianth white ...................................................................... {\b 88. albiflorum}
\par
121 Stamens about as long as perianth
\par
123 Margin of upper leaves smooth ......................................... {\b 77. polyanthum}
\par
123 Margin of upper leaves minutely scabrid
\par
124 Leaves 5-40 mm wide; pedicels 10-60 mm .................. {\b 76. ampeloprasum}
\par
124 Leaves 3-8 mm wide; pedicels 6-15(-20) mm
\par
125 Outer tunics densely fibrous; bulblets yellowish ................... {\b 84. baeticum}
\par
125 Outer tunics membranous; bulblets blackish-purple ......... {\b 89. pervestitum}
\par
112 Stamens exserted, both anthers and lateral cusps 
\par
    usually projecting well beyond the perianth
\par
126 Leaves not more than 4 mm wide, often terete
\par
127 Spathe persistent, 2- to 4-valved
\par
128 Perianth-segments white, with greenish or yellowish mid-vein,
\par
    smooth or papillose ....................................................... {\b 90. sphaerocephalon}
\par
128 Perianth-segments red or blackish-purple, papillose
\par
129 Perianth cylindrical to narrowly ovoid; anthers long-
\par
    exserted ......................................................................... {\b 90. sphaerocephalon}
\par
129 Perianth subglobose; anthers scarcely exserted .............. {\b 92. melananthum}
\par
127 Spathe deciduous, 1-valved
\par
130 Umbel usually with bulbils; outer perianth-segments
\par
    narrowly ovate, smooth ............................................................... {\b 95. vineale}
\par

\par
52}
\par