{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 130 Umbel without bulbils; outer perianth-segments narrowly 
\par
    oblong or lanceolate
\par
131 Outer perianth-segments strongly papillose on mid-vein;
\par
    inner widest below the middle
\par
132 Perianth pink; inner segments slightly narrower than
\par
    filaments ................................................................................ {\b 94. regelianum}
\par
132 Perianth whitish; inner segments slightly wider than
\par
    filaments ...................................................................................... {\b 83. talijevii}
\par
131 Outer perianth-segments smooth or papillose on mid-
\par
    vein;inner widest at or above the middle
\par
133 Inner and outer perianth-segments subequal; basal part
\par
    of filament less than twice as long as central cusp ................... {\b 97. guttatum}
\par
133 Inner perianth-segments distinctly longer than the outer
\par
134 Perianth-segments white with green stripe, the outer
\par
    papillose on keel; pedicels 5-15 mm; basal part of 
\par
    filament 2-3 times as long as central cusp ............................... {\b 98. dilatatum}
\par
134 Perianth-segments purple, smooth; pedicels 10-25 mm;
\par
    basal part of filament equalling or shorter than 
\par
    central cusp ....................................................................... {\b 96. amethystinum}
\par
126 Leaves more than 4 mm wide
\par
135 Leaves fistular
\par
136 Spathe deciduous, 1-valved; umbel often apparently 
\par
    2-tiered with the outer pedicels short and deflexed 
\par
    and the inner long and erect; lateral cusps of inner
\par
    stamens much longer than the central one ........................ {\b 96. amethystinum}
\par
136 Spathe persistent, 2-valved; umbel ovoid, hemispherical
\par
    or subglobose; lateral cusps of inner stamens about as
\par
    long as the central one
\par
137 Umbel less than 3 cm in diameter, usually ovoid ...... {\b 90. sphaerocephalon}
\par
137 Umbel up to 6·5 cm in diameter, hemispherical .............. {\b 91. proponticum}
\par
135 Leaves flat, usually canaliculate
\par
138 Leaf-margin smooth .......................................................... {\b 77. polyanthum}
\par
138 Leaf-margin minutely scabrid
\par
139 Outer tunics of bulb becoming reticulately fibrous;
\par
    perianth usually dark purple .............................................. {\b 79. atronolaceum}
\par
139 Outer tunics membranous or coriaceous, occasionally
\par
    with parallel fibres; perianth white, pink, lilac,
\par
    purple or pale green
\par
140 Outer perianth-segments with some large tooth-like
\par
    papillae along the keel, the lateral surface smooth 
\par
    or with smaller papillae
\par
141 Basal part of inner stamens 1-1·5 mm wide; top of 
\par
    stem bent or coiled before anthesis ............................................... {\b 82. pardoi}
\par
141 Basal part of inner stamens 1·5-2·5 mm simple,wide;
\par
    top of stem erect before anthesis
\par
142 Bulblets usually numerous; outer perianth-segments 
\par
    mostly widest about middle ............................................. {\b 76. ampeloprasum} 
\par
142 Bulblets few; outer perianth-segments mostly widest 
\par
    near base .................................................................................. {\b 80. bourgeaui}
\par
140 Outer perianth-segments without large papillae on keel
\par
143 Leaves sheathing lower ¾ of stem; upper leaves much
\par
    exceeding the stem ...................................................................... {\b 83. talijevii}
\par
143 Leaves sheathing the lower ¼-½ of stem; upper 
\par
    leaves not exceeding the stem
\par
144 Perianth-segments almost smooth, with sparse, low,
\par
    ellipsoid papillae (France) .................................................. {\b 73. scaberrimum}
\par
144 Perianth-segments covered with dense, uniform, minute
\par
    papillae circular at base
\par
145 Outer stamens simple; inner perianth-segments narrowly
\par
    oblong ...................................................................................... {\b 80. bourgeaui}
\par
145 Outer stamens often tricuspidate; inner perianth-
\par
    segments narrowly obovate ................................................ {\b 81. commutatum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. RHIZIRIDEUM G. Don ex Koch (incl.Sect. {\i Oreiprason} F. Hermann, Sect.{\i  Petroprason} F. Hermann). Bulbs narrowly conical to cylindrical, usually clustered on a short rhizome. Leaves almost basal to sheathing the lower ½ of the stem, flat, not fistular. Stem angled or terete. Spathe usually shorter than pedicels, which are usually bracteolate at base. Perianth usually cup-shaped or campanulate, rarely stellate or subglobose. Stamens simple, rarely with small teeth at base of inner filaments. Ovary with distinct nectariferous pores; ovules 2 in each loculus; stigmas entire or 3-lobed. Seeds angular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. angulosum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 300 (1753). Bulbs 0·5-1 cm in diameter; cylindrical or narrowly conical, clustered on a horizontal rhizome; tunics membranous, thin. Stem 20-45 cm, angular, 2-edged above. Leaves 4-6, 10-25 cm × 1·5-6 mm, basal, linear, canaliculate above, sharply keeled beneath in a living state. Spathe up to 1 cm, 2- to 5-lobed, persistent. Umbel 2·5-4·5 cm in diameter, hemispherical, many-flowered; pedicels 10-30 mm, almost equal. Perianth cup-shaped; segments 4-6 × 1·5-2·5 mm, pale purple, the outer cymbiform, narrowly ovate, the inner elliptical, longer than the outer, acute or obtuse. Stamens scarcely longer than the segments, with exserted anthers; filaments c. 5 mm, almost equal at base; anthers at first yellow, later dark purple. Capsule c. 3·5 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Damp meadows near rivers. C. & E. Europe, extending to E. France and N. Italy.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, E) [Rs (N. B)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Not easily separable from {\b 3} in a dried state, although the stamens are only slightly exserted, but when living distinguishable morphologically by the keel-forming midrib on the lower side of the leaf and ecologically by its preference for damp places subject to seasonal flooding.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. rubens} Schrader ex Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Horti Berol.}{\b  1}: 360 (1809). Bulbs 0·5-1 cm in diameter, narrowly conical, crowded on a rhizome; outer tunics membranous. Stem 10-25 cm, slightly ribbed. Leaves 5-6, 5-20 cm, 1-2 mm, basal, filiform, semi-terete, canaliculate. Spathe up to 1 cm, shorter than the umbel, 1-valved, sometimes 2-lobed, persistent. Umbel 2-3 cm in diameter, globose or hemispherical, few-flowered, lax; pedicels 8-12 mm, almost equal. Perianth broadly campanulate; segments 4-5 × 2·5 mm, purplish, narrowly ovate, obtuse. Stamens included or with scarcely exserted anthers; filaments c. 4 mm, simple; anthers yellow. Style included.{\i  Rocky slopes, screes and steppes. S. Ural and adjacent lowlands.} Rs (C, E). ({\i N. & C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. senescens} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 299 (1753). Bulbs c. 1 cm in diameter, oblong or narrowly conical, clustered on a short horizontal rhizome; tunics membranous, thin. Stem 7-45 cm, angular, 2-edged above. Leaves 4-9, 4-30 cm × (1-)1·5-2(-6) mm basal, linear,almost flat, slightly rounded but not keeled beneath. Spathe 5-8 mm, to 3-lobed, persistent, shorter than pedicel. Umbel 2-5 cm in diameter, hemispherical, many-flowered; pedicels 8-20 mm. Perianth cup-shaped; segments 3·5-8 × 2-2·5 mm, lilac, the outer cymbiform, lanceolate or narrowly ovate, the inner elliptical or narrowly ovate, longer than the outer, acute or obtuse. Stamens exserted; filaments 4-6·5 mm,
\par

\par
53}
\par