{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 the outer 0·5 mm and the inner 1 mm wide at base, simple. Ovary deeply 3-lobed. Capsule 4 mm. 2n = 16, 24, 32+0-4B. {\i Dry, usually rocky places. C. & S. Europe, extending to C. France, S. Sweden and C. Ukraine.} Au Bu Cz †Da Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju ?Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Si Su [No].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The European plant described above is subsp.{\b  montanum }(Fries) Holub,{\i  Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}){\b  5}: 341 (1970) ({\i A. montanum} F. W. Schmidt, non Schrank, {\i A. lusitanicum} Lam., {\i A. fallax} Schultes & Schultes fil., nom. illegit.). Other subspecies occur in Siberia and C. Asia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. saxatile} Bieb.,{\i  Tabl. Prov. Casp.} 114 (1798) (incl. {\i A. globosum} Bieb. ex Redouté,{\i  A. marschallianum} Vved.). Bulbs 0·5-1·5 cm in diameter, narrowly conical, attached to a short rhizome; outer tunics coriaceous, splitting lengthwise into strips. Stem 10-70 cm, terete. Leaves 3-7, 5-20 cm × 0·5-1 mm, sheathing the lower 1/3 or less of the stem, filiform, canaliculate. Spathe 2-valved; valves unequal, one long-beaked, up to 3 cm and distinctly longer than the umbel, persistent. Umbel 2-4 cm in diameter, subglobose or hemispherical, many-flowered; pedicels 5-15 mm, almost equal. Perianth cup-shaped; segments 3·5-6 × 1-2 mm, deep pink to white, elliptical, acute. Stamens exserted; filaments 4-5 mm, simple, connate at base. Capsule 3·5-4·5 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Rocky slopes and steppes. S.E. Europe, extending westwards to N. & C. Italy and northwards to} c. 55° 30' {\i N. in C. Russia.} Bu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Although few collections are annotated as to the flower-colour in a living state, there would appear to be regional colour-differentiation. Plants with pink perianth and purple anthers (typical{\i  A. saxatile}) occur from the E. Alps eastwards, while plants with yellowish-white perianth and yellow anthers ({\i A. marschallianum} Vved.) occur in N. Italy, the N. part of the Balkan peninsula and Krym. Further study of these variants is required to ascertain their status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. horvatii} Lovric,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  119}: 569 (1972). Bulbs up to 0·6 cm in diameter, very narrowly ovoid, closely clustered; outer tunic membranous, blackish, almost entire. Stem 3-20 cm. Leaves 2-4, up to 12 cm × 0·5-1·5 mm, sheathing only the lower 1/5 of the stem and almost basal, filiform. Spathe 2-valved; valves ovate, unequal, acute, the longest equalling the umbel. Umbel 1·5-2 cm in diameter, hemispherical, with 3-25 flowers; pedicels 2-5 mm, ascending. Perianth cup-shaped; segments 4 × 1·5 mm, yellowish-white, with greenish mid-vein, acute, the inner slightly longer than the outer. Stamens long-exserted; filaments simple, connate at base. Capsule 4 mm, 6-ribbed. 2n = 16. {\i Coastal rocks. N. Jugoslavia }({\i Kvarner archipelago}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. albidum} Fischer ex Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3}: 260 (1819). Bulbs 0·5-1 cm in diameter, almost cylindrical or very narrowly conical, clustered on a horizontal rhizome; outer tunics membranous. Stem 10-30 cm, slightly ribbed. Leaves 5-9, 4-14 cm × 0·3-2·5 mm, basal, filiform. Spathe 2-valved; valves up to 1 cm, persistent. Umbel 1·5-2·5 cm in diameter, hemispherical or fastigiate, many-flowered; pedicels 8-15 mm, almost equal, ribbed and scabrid with very minute teeth. Perianth cupshaped or stellate; segments 3-5 × 1-1·5 mm, white or yellowish, narrowly oblong, obtuse. Stamens 3-4 mm, exserted; filaments simple; anthers yellow. Capsule 3 mm. 2n = 16. {\i Bulgaria, Romania, U.S.S.R. northwards to} c. 55°{\i  N}. Bu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b albidum} (incl. {\i A. flavescens} Besser,{\i  A. ammophilum} Heuffel): Pedicels 2-3 times as long as flowers. Perianth yellowish-white; segments 3-4 mm. 2n = 16. {\i Steppes and sandy ground. • Throughout the range of the species except Krym}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b caucasicum} (Regel) Stearn, {\i Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  4}: 126 (1978) ({\i A. albidum} Fischer ex Besser, {\i A. angulosum }var.{\i  caucasicum} Regel): Pedicels 1½-2 times as long as flowers. Perianth whitish, sometimes tinged with pink; segments 4-5 mm. {\i Rocky places. Krym.} ({\i Caucasus.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. stelleranum} Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  2}: 82 (1799). Bulbs 0·5-1 cm in diameter, narrowly conical, clustered on a rhizome; outer tunics membranous. Stem 10-30 cm, slightly ribbed. Leaves 4-6, up to 21 cm × 1·5 mm, all basal, filiform, semi-terete. Spathe shorter than the umbel, persistent. Umbel 2-3 cm in diameter globose or hemispherical, few-flowered; pedicels 10-15 mm smooth, almost equal. Perianth cup-shaped; segments 4-5 mm, yellowish-white, elliptical, obtuse. Stamens exserted; filaments up to 10 mm, simple; anthers yellow. Style exserted.{\i  Stony slopes. C. Ural and adjacent lowlands}. Rs (C). ({\i Siberia, Mongolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. ericetorum} Thore,{\i  Essai Chlor. Land. }123 (1803) (incl.{\i  A. ochroleucum} Waldst. & Kit.). Bulbs 0·5-1·5 cm in diameter, almost cylindrical or very narrowly conical; outer tunics breaking up into parallel fibres. Stem 10-40 cm, terete. Leaves 3-4, up to 25 cm × 0·5-3 mm, sheathing not more than 1/5 of the stem and almost basal, linear, flat. Spathe 2-valved; valves up to 1 cm, unequal, shorter than the umbel. Umbel 1-2·5 cm in diameter; hemispherical; pedicels 4-10 mm, almost equal, smooth. Perianth cup-shaped; segments 3·5-4 × 1·5-2 mm, white or yellowish, sometimes tinged with pink, the outer elliptical, the inner narrowly ovate, obtuse. Stamens long-exserted; filaments 4·5-6·5 mm, simple; anthers brownish. Capsule 3·5-4 mm. 2n = 16+0-1B, 32.{\i  Heaths and rocky hillsides. • S.W. France, N. Spain, N. Portugal, N. & C. Italy, Jugoslavia, Carpathians}. Au Cz Ga Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 9. A. kermesinum} Reichenb.,{\i  Fl. Germ. Exsicc.} cent. 22, no. 2141 (1842). Bulbs 0·5-1 cm in diameter, very narrowly conical or oblong, on a short rhizome; outer tunics with dense, almost parallel fibres. Stem 10-30 cm, slightly 2-edged. Leaves 3-4, 10-25 cm × 1-5 mm, linear, flat. Spathe 2-valved; valves c. 0·7 cm, narrowly ovate, acuminate, shorter than the umbel, persistent. Umbel 1·5-2 cm in diameter, hemispherical, with 8-20 flowers; pedicels 5-7 mm, almost equal. Perianth cupshaped; segments 4 × 1·5-2 mm, red, the outer cymbiform-lanceolate, the inner narrowly ovate, obtuse. Stamens exserted filaments 5·5 mm, 0·5 mm wide at base, simple. Capsule 3·5-5 mm. 2n = 16. {\i Calcareous rocks,} 1200-2220{\i  m. • S.E. Alps }({\i Slovenija}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. suaveolens} Jacq.,{\i  Collect. Bot.}{\b  2}: 305 (1789). Bulbs 1-1·5 cm in diameter, almost cylindrical to very narrowly conical, attached to a short rhizome; outer tunics breaking up into layers of parallel fibres. Stem (20-)30-50(-60) cm, terete. Leaves 2-5, up to 40 cm × 1·5-3 mm, sheathing the lower 1/4-1/3 of the stem, linear, flat, keeled beneath. Spathe 2-valved; valves up to 1·5 cm, unequal, about as long as the umbel, persistent. Umbel 2-3·5 cm in diameter, hemispherical; pedicels 8-20 mm. Perianth cup-shaped; segments 4-5 × 1·5-2 mm, pink or white with pink keel, the outer elliptical, the inner narrowly ovate, obtuse. Stamens long-exserted; filaments 6-7 mm, simple; anthers c. 1·5 mm when dehisced, brownish. Capsule c. 5 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Damp meadows and moors. • S. & W. parts of C. Europe, N. Italy; Albania. }Al Au Ga Ge He Hu It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. lineare} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 295 (1753) (incl. {\i A. strictum} Schrader). Bulbs cylindrical, solitary or paired, on a short oblique rhizome
\par

\par
54}
\par