{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 5-10 mm thick; outer tunics with brown reticulate fibres. Stem 25-60 cm, slightly ribbed. Leaves 2-4, 18 cm × 3·5 mm, sheathing the lower 1/3 of the stem, linear, solid, ribbed beneath, with minutely denticulate margins. Spathe up to 1 cm, 2-valved, about as long as the umbel, persistent. Umbel 1·5-3 cm in diameter, hemispherical, many-flowered, dense; pedicels up to 15 mm, almost equal. Perianth campanulate; segments 4 × 1·5 mm, pink to lilac-purple, lanceolate, obtuse. Stamens slightly to much longer than the segments; filaments 4·5-6 mm, the outer subulate, the inner abruptly widened and up to 0·7 mm wide at base, often with a short basal tooth on one or both sides; anthers c. 0·5 mm when dehisced. Capsule 3·5-4 mm. 2n = 16, 48.{\i  Rocky slopes, mountain grassland and steppes. Locally in the mountains and hill-country of C. Europe, from S.W. Poland to the S.W. Alps and W. Ukraine; S. & E. Russia and E. Ukraine; isolated stations in N.W. Russia.} Au Cz Ga Ge He It Po Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. palentinum} Losa & Montserrat,{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  11}({\b 2}): 423 (1953). Bulbs cylindrical, attached to a short rhizome; outer tunics membranous, glossy, brown. Stem 25-40 cm. Leaves 3, narrow, linear, sheathing the lower 1/3 of the stem. Spathe 1- or (less often) 2-valved, shorter than the umbel, persistent. Umbel hemispherical, many-flowered, c. 2 cm in diameter. Perianth campanulate; segments c. 6 × 3 mm, pink, the outer oblong-elliptical, 3-toothed at the apex, the inner elliptical, obtuse. Stamens long-exserted; filaments c. 8 mm, simple, the inner 3 abruptly widened at base with a small obtuse tooth on each side; anthers purple. {\i Crevices in calcareous rocks,} 1400-2200{\i  m. • Mountains of N.W. Spain }({\i N.E. part of prov. León}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. A. hymenorhizum} Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Altaica}{\b  2}: 12 (1830). Bulbs 1-2 cm in diameter, cylindrical, attached to a short rhizome; outer tunics breaking into coriaceous, glossy, brown longitudinal strips. Stem 40-90 cm, terete. Leaves 4-6, up to 30 cm × 3-6 mm, linear, flat, their bases sheathing most of the lower ½ of the stem. Spathe 2-valved, almost as long as the umbel, persistent or deciduous. Umbel 2-3·5 cm in diameter, subglobose, many-flowered, dense; pedicels 10-15 mm, almost equal. Perianth campanulate; segments 4-6 × 1·5-2 mm, purplish-pink, narrowly oblong or lanceolate, obtuse or subacute. Stamens long-exserted; filaments c. 7·7 mm, simple; anthers yellow. Capsule 4-5 mm.{\i  Water-meadows. S. Ural }({\i by the river Tanalyk, S. of Bajmak}). Rs (C). ({\i W. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. obliquum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 296 (1753). Bulbs 2-3 cm in diameter, narrowly ovoid; outer tunic membranous, reddish-brown. Stem 60-100 cm, terete. Leaves 6-10, up to 35 cm × 20 mm, sheathing the lower ½ of the stem, linear, ascending, canaliculate. Spathe 1-valved, persistent, shorter than pedicels. Umbel 3·5-4 cm in diameter, spherical or hemispherical, dense, many-flowered; pedicels 10-20 mm, unequal. Perianth broadly cupshaped or subglobose; segments 4-5 × 2·5 mm, pale yellowish-green very concave, the outer broadly ovate-elliptical, the inner ovate acute. Stamens exserted; filaments 7-8 mm. Capsule 3 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Meadows, woods and cliffs. S.E. Russia; one station in C. Romania.} Rm Rs (E). ({\i Siberia, C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. A. narcissiflorum} Vill., {\i Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 18 (1779). Bulbs 0·5 cm in diameter, oblong, clustered on a short rhizome; outer tunics persisting as layers of parallel fibres 1·5-5·5 cm. Stem 15-35 cm, 2-edged. Leaves 3-5, 9-28 cm × 2-6 mm, sheathing the stem in its lower part all to about the same level, linear, flat. Spathe up to 1·8 cm, 1-valved, often 2- to 3-lobed, persistent. Umbel at first nodding, later erect, fastigiate, with 5-8 flowers; pedicels 8-18 mm. Perianth campanulate; segments 10-15 mm, purple, the outer 3·5-5 mm wide, lanceolate or oblanceolate, acute or obtuse, the inner 4·5-7 mm wide, narrowly obovate, rounded at apex. Stamens included; filaments c. 5 mm; simple; stigma 3-lobed. Capsule c. 5 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Screes. • S.W. Alps and their foothills; once found in N.W. Portugal}. Ga It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. A. insubricum} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Cat. Graines Jard. Bot. Genève}{\b  1856}: 4 (1857). Bulbs 0·5 cm in diameter, oblong, clustered on a short rhizome; outer tunics membranous, thin, sometimes with a few parallel fibres at base. Stem 16-30 cm, 2-edged. Leaves 3-4, 12-20 cm × 2-5 mm, sheathing the stem in its lower part all to about the same level, linear, flat. Spathe up to 1·8 cm, 1-valved, acute, persistent. Umbel permanently nodding, fastigiate, with 3-5 flowers; pedicels 8-20 mm. Perianth campanulate; segments 18 mm, purple, the outer 6 mm wide, oblanceolate, apiculate, the inner c. 9 mm wide, narrowly obovate, rounded at apex. Stamens included; filaments 6 mm, simple. Stigma 3-lobed. 2n = 14. {\i Calcareous rocks and screes,} 800-2100 {\i m. • S. Alps, between Lago di Como and Lago di Garda.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. A. inderiense} Fischer ex Bunge in Goebel,{\i  Reise Steppen Russl.}{\b  2}: 311 (1838). Bulbs 0·7-1·5 cm in diameter, narrowly conical, clustered on a short rhizome; outer tunics reticulately fibrous. Stem 20-40 cm, terete. Leaves 3-5, up to 6 cm × 1-3 mm, sheathing the lower ¼ of the stem, linear, canaliculate. Spathe 2-valved; valves up to 1·5 cm, shortly beaked, persistent. Umbel 1·5-3 cm in diameter, fastigiate or hemispherical, few-flowered; pedicels 5-15 mm in fruit. Perianth campanulate; segments 7-10 × 2·5-3 mm, purplish, with darker mid-vein, lanceolate, acute. Stamens equalling or slightly longer than the perianth; filaments 8 mm or more, simple, adnate to the perianth at base for 1·5 mm; anthers violet.{\i  Steppes. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E). ({\i W.C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. SCHOENOPRASUM Dumort. (Sect. {\i Schoenoprason} F. Hermann). Bulbs cylindrical or very narrowly conical, on a short rhizome. Stems terete. Leaves almost basal or sheathing the lower 1/4-1/3 of the stem, cylindrical, fistular. Spathe equalling or shorter than pedicels, which are without bracteoles at base. Perianth campanulate. Stamens simple. Ovary with deep, rounded nectariferous pits; ovules 2 in each loculus; stigma entire. Seeds angular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. A. schoenoprasum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 301 (1753). Bulbs 0·5-1 cm in diameter, very narrowly conical, clustered on a short rhizome; outer tunics membranous, sometimes splitting into coriaceous strips. Stem 5-50 cm, hollow. Leaves 1-2, up to 35 cm × 1-6 mm, sheathing up to the lower 1/3 of the stem, sometimes almost basal, cylindrical, fistular. Spathe up to 1·5 cm, with the 2-3 ovate lobes mucronate, equalling or shorter than umbel, persistent. Umbel 1·5-5 cm in diameter,hemispherical or ovoid, dense, with 8-30 flowers; pedicels 2-15 mm. Perianth-segments 7-15 × 2·5-4 mm, lilac or pale purple, occasionally white, usually lanceolate, acute or acuminate. Stamens included; filaments 3-6 mm, c. ½ as long as segments; anthers yellow. Capsule 4 mm. 2n = 16. {\i Streamsides, damp meadows, damp mountain rocks and rocky pastures. Much of Europe, but only on mountains in the south; cultivated for its edible leaves and frequently naturalized.} Au Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr *Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su [Az Be].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable and plastic, with some local differentiation. Numerous variants have been described but they show considerable overlap in characters. Possibly the most distinct is a robust arctic-montane taxon ({\i A. montanum }Schrank, non F. W.
\par

\par
55}
\par