{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Schmidt,{\i  A. foliosum} Clarion ex DC.) up to 50 cm high with the umbel 3-5 cm in diameter and long-acuminate perianth-segments 10-15 mm, sometimes distinguished as var.{\i  alpinum} DC., var. {\i sibiricum} (L.) Garcke or subsp.{\i  sibiricum} (L.) Celak. (though doubtfully identical with the probably tetraploid{\i  A. sibiricum} L. of Siberia).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. A. schmitzii} Coutinho, {\i Bol. Soc. Brot.}{\b  13}: 103 (1896). Bulbs 1-1·5 cm in diameter, very narrowly conical, with a very short rhizome; outer tunics membranous. Stem 30-60 cm. Leaves 1-3, up to 22 cm × 0·5-2·5 mm, sheathing the lower 1/4-1/3 of the stem, linear, fistular. Spathe 2-valved; valves unequal, the larger up to 1·4 cm, shortly acuminate, persistent. Umbel 2·5-6·5 cm in diameter, hemispherical; pedicels 15-25 mm, almost equal. Perianth-segments 5-7 × 1·5-2 mm, purple or pink, with dark mid-vein, lanceolate, acute. Stamens equalling perianth; filaments c. 4·5 mm, connate at base into an annulus c. 1 mm high; anthers brownish. Ovary subglobose. Capsule 3 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  River banks and rock-crevices. • E.Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. CEPA (Miller) Prokh. (incl. Sect.{\i  Phyllodolon} (Salisb.) Prokh.). Bulbs cylindrical to subglobose, usually clustered on a short rhizome. Leaves sheathing lower part of stem, distichous, fistular. Stem terete, fistular. Spathe shorter than or almost equalling pedicels. Perianth stellate to campanulate. Stamens simple or with small teeth at base of inner filaments. Ovary with distinct nectariferous pores; ovules 2 in each loculus; stigma entire. Seeds angular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. A. cepa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 301 (1753) (incl. {\i A. ascalonicum} auct., non L.). Bulbs varying in size and shape from cultivar to cultivar, often depressed-globose and up to 10 cm in diameter; outer tunics membranous. Stem up to 100 cm and up to 30 mm in diameter, tapering from inflated lower part. Leaves up to 10, up to 40 cm and up to 20 mm in diameter, usually almost semicircular in section and slightly flattened on upper side, basal in first year, in second year their bases sheathing the lower 1/6 of the stem. Spathe often 3-valved, persistent, shorter than the umbel. Umbel 4-9 cm in diameter, subglobose or hemispherical, dense, many-flowered; pedicels up to 40 mm, almost equal. Perianth stellate; segments 3-4·5 × 2-2·5 mm, white, with green stripe, slightly unequal, the outer ovate, the inner oblong, obtuse or acute. Stamens exserted; filaments 4-5 mm, the outer subulate, the inner with an expanded base up to 2 mm wide and shortly toothed on each side. Ovary whitish. Capsule c. 5 mm. 2n = 16. {\i Cultivated on a field scale throughout most of Europe for its edible bulbs} ({\i onions}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The common onion exists in numerous cultivars resulting from some 3,000 years of cultivation and is usually grown as a biennial, but there are perennial variants with narrow leaves or with large bulbils and usually few flowers in the umbel (cf. H. A. Jones & L. K. Mann, {\i Onions and their Allies} 32-36 (1963)). It is unknown in a wild state, though probably derived from{\i  A. oschaninii} B. Fedtsch. ({\i A. cepa }var.{\i  sylvestre} Regel) of C. Asia.{\b  A. cornutum} G.C. Clementi ex Vis.,{\i  Fl. Dalm.}{\b  1}: 139 (1842), from S.W. Jugoslavia (near Budva), may be a bulbilliferous form derived from former cultivation. The name{\i  A. ascalonicam} L. was based on a Palestinian species later named{\i  A. hierochuntinum} Boiss., but has long been applied to variants of{\i  A. cepa} called shallots (cf. W. T. Stearn, {\i Bull. Brit. Mus.} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 2}: 181 (1960)).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. A. fistulosum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 301 (1753). Bulbs 1-2·5 cm in diameter, cylindrical, adnate to a short rhizome; outer tunics membranous. Stem 12-70 cm, 10-20 mm in diameter, tapering from the inflated middle part. Leaves 2-6, 6-30 cm × 5-15 mm, their bases sheathing the lower 1/4-1/3 of the stem, fistular, circular in section, terete. Spathe 1- to 2-valved; valves up to 2 cm, ovate, acute, almost equalling the umbel. Umbel 1·5-5 cm in diameter, subglobose or broadly ovoid, dense, many-flowered; pedicels 3-20 mm, unequal. Perianth conically campanulate; segments 6-7 × 2 mm, yellowish-white, unequal, the outer cymbiform, lanceolate, the inner 7-9 × 3 mm, narrowly ovate, acuminate. Stamens long-exserted; filaments 8-12 mm, simple; anthers yellow. Capsule 4 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Cultivated locally as a vegetable, and found as an occasional escape from gardens; naturalized in S.C. Norway on turf roofs}. [No.]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Unknown in a wild state, but originally from E. Asia, where it is widely cultivated; closely allied to{\b  A. altaicum} Pallas, {\i Reise}{\b  2}: 737 (1773), from C. Asia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. ANGUINUM G. Don ex Koch (Sect. {\i Nikeprason} F. Hermann). Bulbs almost cylindrical, clustered on a short rhizome, with dense, reticulately fibrous tunics. Stem 2-edged below. Leaves sheathing lower 1/3-1/2 of the stem, shortly petiolate, with broad lamina. Spathe shorter than pedicels, 1- to 2-valved, persistent. Perianth stellate or cup-shaped. Stamens simple. Ovary with distinct nectariferous pores; ovules 2 in each loculus; stigma simple. Seeds subglobose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. A. victorialis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 295 (1753). Bulbs 5-6 × 1-2 cm. Stem 30-60 cm. Leaves 2-3, the lamina 8-25 cm × 16-90 mm, narrowly lanceolate to broadly elliptical, acute or obtuse, narrowed at base into a short petiole. Umbel 3-5 cm in diameter, globose or hemispherical, many-flowered; pedicels 10-30 mm, unequal. Perianth-segments 4-5 × 2-2·5 mm, dull or greenish-white, the outer lanceolate, the inner narrowly ovate, acute or obtuse, ultimately deflexed. Stamens exserted; filaments c. 6 mm, simple; anthers yellow. Capsule c. 4 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Rocky places and mountain pastures. Mountains of Europe, from the Vosges, Sudeten Mts. and C. Ural southwards to C. Spain and S.W. Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. MOLIUM G. Don ex Koch (incl. Sect. {\i Rhodoprason} F. Hermann, Sect.{\i  Xanthoprason} F. Hermann). Bulbs ovoid or subglobose; not rhizomatous. Leaves almost basal, with short above-ground sheath, flat. Stem terete or angled. Spathe shorter than or equalling pedicels. Perianth stellate to campanulate or cylindrical. Ovary with distinct nectariferous pores; ovules 2 in each loculus; stigma entire. Seeds angular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. A. roseum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 296 (1753). Bulbs c. 1·5 cm in diameter, broadly ovoid or subglobose, with numerous bulblets; outermost tunic crustaceous, pitted with numerous minute often hexagonal perforations, inner tunics smooth. Stem 10-65 cm, terete. Leaves 2-4, 12-35 cm × 1-14 mm, sheathing the lower 1/5 of the stem, linear, glabrous, or with scabrid margin. Spathe up to 1·5 cm, 1-valved, deeply 3- to 4-lobed, shorter than pedicels, persistent. Umbel up to 7 cm in diameter, fastigiate or hemispherical, with 5-30 flowers, without bulbils and usually many-flowered and fertile (var.{\i  roseum}), or with bulbils and then usually few-flowered and sterile (var.{\i  bulbiferum }DC.); pedicels 7-45 mm. Perianth campanulate to broadly cup-shaped; segments 7-12 × 3-5 mm, pink or white, the inner narrowly elliptical, the outer narrowly obovate, acute to rounded at apex. Stamens included; filaments c. 5 mm, subulate, simple; anthers yellow. Capsule 4 mm. 2n = 16, 32. {\i Cultivated ground and dry, open habitats. S. Europe.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A common, widespread, variable species which has been divided into numerous named taxa based on width of leaf, length of pedicels, presence or absence of bulbils in the umbel and colour of flowers, with little or no coherence between the characters. Variants with bulbils replacing flowers in the umbel have
\par

\par
56}
\par