{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 probably arisen independently in different populations and, owing to their ease of vegetative multiplication, form clones; these have been named{\i  A. ambiguum} Sm., non DC., {\i A. carneum} Targ.-Toz., {\i A. amoenum} G. Don, {\i A. roseum} subsp.{\i  bulbiferum} (DC.) E.F. Warburg, var.{\i  bulbiferum }DC., var.{\i  bulbilliferum} Vis. and var. {\i carneum} (Targ.-Tozz.) Reichenb. Possibly worthy of taxonomic recognition is a dwarf variant long known from Corse, Sardegna and Isola di Giglio, which has been named {\i A. confertum }Jordan & Fourr. ({\i A. roseum }var.{\i  insulare} Genn., {\i A. roseum} var.{\i  humile} Sommier).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. A. circinnatum} Sieber, {\i Reise Kreta }{\b 2}: 316 (1823). Bulbs 0·7 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics chartaceous, pitted. Stem 5-18 cm, terete, hairy. Leaves 2-5, up to 24 cm × 1-1·5 mm, almost basal, linear, twisted or coiled especially at the apex into up to 10 coils, covered with long, patent hairs. Spathe 6-10 mm, 1-valved, 1- or 2-lobed at the apex, about as long as pedicels, persistent. Umbel fastigiate, with 2-5 flowers; pedicels 3-11 mm. Perianth stellate; segments 5-6 × 1·5-2 mm, white, with pink mid-vein, the outer oblong, the inner lanceolate, acute or obtuse. Stamens included; filaments c. 4 mm, simple; anthers yellow. Capsule 3 mm. Flowering March-April. {\i Dry, stony hillsides. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. A. massaessylum} Batt. & Trabut,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  39}: 74 (1892). Bulbs 1-1·5 cm in diameter, ovoid or subglobose; outer tunics chartaceous, often with faint jigsaw pattern. Stem 15-40 cm, terete. Leaves 2-3, up to 20 cm × 5-10 mm, basal, linear, glabrous, canaliculate. Spathe 2-valved, persistent, shorter than pedicels. Umbel 3-5·5 cm in diameter, fastigiate, many-flowered, lax; pedicels 10-20 mm, unequal. Perianth cupshaped; segments 10-14 × 3·5-5 mm, white, with purple mid-vein, the outer elliptical, the inner narrowly elliptical, somewhat acute. Stamens included; filaments 5-6 mm, simple; anthers yellow. 2n = 14.{\i  Portugal, S.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. A. phthioticum} Boiss. & Heldr. ex Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  5}: 274 (1882). Bulbs 1·5 cm in diameter, subglobose; outer tunics membranous, not pitted. Stem up to 55 cm, terete. Leaves 3-4, up to 30 cm × 10 mm, sheathing the lower part of the stem, linear. Spathe up to 1-5 cm, 1- or 2-valved, 3- to 4-lobed, persistent. Umbel fastigiate, with 12-15 flowers, sometimes bulbilliferous; pedicels 30-65 mm, very unequal. Perianth cylindrical; segments c. 13 × 2·5-4·5 mm, whitish, the outer lanceolate, the inner narrowly lanceolate, acute. Stamens included; filaments 8-9 mm; anthers yellow. {\i Mountain pastures. • S.C. Greece} ({\i Oiti, S.W. of Lamia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. A. breviradium} (Halácsy) Stearn,{\i  Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  4}: 138 (1978) ({\i A. neapolitanum }var.{\i  breviradium} Halácsy). Bulbs 1·5-2 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics membranous, not pitted. Stem 30-35 cm, slightly angled. Leaves 2-4, up to 24 cm × 10 mm, sheathing the lower 1/6 of the stem and almost basal, linear. Spathe 1-valved, 3- to 4-lobed, persistent, about as long as the pedicels. Umbel fastigiate, with 5-30 flowers, not bulbilliferous; pedicels 10-15 mm, almost equal. Perianth cylindrical campanulate; segments 9-12 × 3 mm, whitish, narrowly lanceolate, acuminate. Stamens included; filaments 7 mm, simple. Capsule 4 mm. •{\i  Mountains of S. Albania, S. Jugoslavia and N.C. Greece.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. A. neapolitanum} Cyr.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Neap.}{\b  1}: 13 (1788). Bulbs 1-2 cm in diameter, subglobose; outer tunics membranous or crustaceous, not pitted. Stem 20-50 cm, triquetrous, with 2 edges slightly winged. Leaves usually 2, 8-35 × 5-20 mm, sheathing the lower 1/5-1/4 of the stem and almost basal, very narrowly lanceolate to linear, keeled beneath, glabrous, sometimes with denticulate margin. Spathe 1-valved, entire, persistent, shorter than pedicels. Umbel 5-8 cm in diameter, fastigiate or hemispherical, many-flowered; pedicels 15-35 mm. Perianth cup-shaped or stellate; segments 7-12 × 4-6 mm, white, the outer broadly elliptical, the inner elliptical, obtuse. Stamens included; filaments c. 5 mm, simple. Capsule 5 mm, enclosed within the connivent, glistening perianth-segments. 2n = 14, 21, 28, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36.{\i  Pastures, cultivated ground and dry, open habitats. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. A. longanum} Pamp.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Ital.}{\b  1912}: 116 (1912). Bulbs 0·8-1·5 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics membranous, not pitted. Stem 15-42 cm, terete. Leaves 2-3, up to 30 cm × 3-8 mm, linear, sparsely or profusely ciliate. Spathe up to 1·5 cm, 1-valved, often 2-lobed, persistent, a little shorter than pedicels. Umbel 2-4·5 cm in diameter, fastigiate, with 6-25 flowers; pedicels 8-20 mm. Perianth campanulate, segments white, pink-tinged, narrowly oblong, unequal, the outer 7-12 × 4·5-6 mm, the inner 6-10 × 3-4·5 mm, truncate-rounded and emarginate at apex. Stamens included; filaments unequal, the outer 3·5-4·5 mm, the inner 5-6·5 mm, narrowly triangular; anthers yellow. Capsule 4 mm. {\i S. Aegean region} ({\i Kriti, Sirna, Astipalaia}). Cr Gr. ({\i Cyrenaica, Egypt}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. A. subhirsutum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 295 (1753) ({\i A. clusianum} Retz.). Bulbs up to 1·5 cm in diameter, subglobose; tunic membranous, not pitted. Stem 7-30 cm, terete. Leaves 2-3, 6-45 cm × 2-10 mm, almost basal, linear, ciliate. Spathe up to 1·3 cm, 1-valved, persistent, shorter than pedicels. Umbel 2·5-7 cm in diameter, hemispherical and lax, or fastigiate; pedicels up to 40 mm, 3-5 times as long as the perianth-segments, irregularly patent. Perianth stellate; segments 7-9 mm, white, lanceolate to oblanceolate, obtuse to acute. Stamens 1/2-2/3 as long as perianth; filaments 4-6 mm, subulate, simple; anthers usually brown, occasionally yellow. Capsule 3 mm. 2n = 14, 28.{\i  Rocky or sandy places. Mediterranean region.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si [Az].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. permixtum }Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Prodr.}{\b  1}: add. 8 (1827), from the C. Mediterranean region (Corse to Malta), differs chiefly in having the leaves not ciliate; it needs further study.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. A. trifoliatum} Cyr., {\i Pl. Rar. Neap.}{\b  2}: 11 (1792). Bulbs up to 1·2 cm in diameter, subglobose; outer tunic membranous, not pitted. Stem 15-45 cm, terete. Leaves 2-3, 5-60 cm × 2-15 mm almost basal, linear, sparsely hairy. Spathe up to 2 cm, 1-valved persistent. Umbel 2·5-4 cm in diameter, fastigiate; pedicels up to 20 mm, 1½-3 times as long as perianth-segments. Perianth stellate; segments 7-10 mm, white, tinged with pink or with a pink vein, often reddening with age, lanceolate, acute. Stamens ½ as long as perianth; filaments 4-5 mm, subulate, simple; anthers yellowish. Capsule 4-5 mm.{\i  Pastures and stony ground. Mediterranean region, from Kriti to S.E. France.} Cr Ga It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. A. subvillosum} Salzm. ex Schultes & Schultes fil.,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  7}: 1104 (1830). Bulbs up to 1·5 cm in diameter, subglobose; outer tunics membranous. Stem 5-40 cm, terete. Leaves 2-5, 6-30 cm × 2-20 mm, almost basal, linear, ciliate. Spathe up to 1·5 cm, 1-valved, often becoming 3-lobed, persistent. Umbel 2·5-4·5 cm in diameter, hemispherical, many-flowered; pedicels up to 20 mm, up to twice as long as the perianth-segments. Perianth broadly cup-shaped; segments 5-9 × 1·5-2 mm, completely white, the outer narrowly ovate, the inner narrowly elliptical, obtuse or acute. Stamens slightly shorter to slightly longer than perianth; filaments 6-11 mm; anthers yellow. Capsule 3·5-4 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Maritime sands and grasslands. S.}
\par

\par
57}
\par