{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Portugal, S. Spain, Mallorca; islands of C. Mediterranean region.} Bl Hs Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. A. moly} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 301 (1753). Bulb up to 2·5 cm in diameter, subglobose; outer tunic chartaceous. Stem 12-35 cm, terete. Leaves (1-)2(-3), 20-30 cm × 15-35 mm, almost basal, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, glabrous, glaucous, keeled below. Spathe 2-valved, persistent, shorter than pedicels. Umbel 4-7 cm in diameter, fastigiate or hemispherical, many-flowered, without bulbils (var.{\i  moly}), rarely with bulbils and few flowers (var.{\i  bulbilliferum} Rouy); pedicels 15-35 mm, unequal, ascending. Perianth stellate; segments 9-12 × 4-5 mm, yellow, with greenish line outside, the outer elliptical, the inner oblanceolate, acute. Stamens shorter than segments; filaments 5-6 mm, yellow, simple. Ovary not prominently angled. Capsule covered by persistent, connivent perianth-segments. 2n = 14. {\i Shady mountain rocks. • E. Spain, S.W. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. A. scorzonerifolium} Desf. ex DC. in Redouté, {\i Liliacées}{\b  2}: t. 99 (1804). Bulb c. 1·5 cm in diameter, subglobose; outer tunics papery. Stem 14-30 cm, angled above. Leaves 1-3, 18-40 cm × 3-7 mm, almost basal, linear, keeled below, glaucous. Spathe 1-valved, caducous. Umbel 4-5 cm in diameter, fastigiate, with up to 15 flowers and without bulbils (var. {\i xericiense} (Pérez Lara) R. Fernandes), or with bulbils and few flowers (var.{\i  scorzonerifolium}); pedicels 15-30 mm, ascending. Perianth stellate; segments 7-10 × 2-4 mm, yellow, lanceolate or narrowly elliptical, acute or obtuse. Stamens shorter than segments; filaments 4-6 mm, yellow, simple. Ovary distinctly angled, with 6 minute crests. 2n = 14.{\i  Rock crevices. • W. & C. Spain, N.W. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. BRISEIS (Salisb.) Stearn. Bulbs subglobose; not rhizomatous. Leaves almost basal, with short above-ground sheath, so strongly keeled as to be triquetrous. Stem triquetrous, flaccid after anthesis. Spathe shorter than pedicels, 2-valved, persistent. Perianth campanulate or stellate. Stamens simple, included. Ovary with minute nectariferous pores; ovules 2 in each loculus; stigma 3-lobed. Seeds angular, with white elaiosome.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. A. triquetrum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 300 (1753). Bulbs 1·5 cm in diameter; outer tunic membranous. Stem 10-45 cm. Leaves usually 2-3, up to 42 cm × 17 mm. Spathe up to 2·5 cm. Umbel with 3-15 flowers, usually one-sided, lax, without bulbils; pedicels up to 25 mm. Perianth drooping, campanulate; segments 10-18 × 2-5 mm, white, with distinct longitudinal green stripe, lanceolate, acute. Stamens 6-7 mm. Capsule 6-7 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Woods, streamsides and damp, shady places. W. Mediterranean region.} Bl Co Ga Hs It Sa Si [Az Br Hb *Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. A. pendulinum} Ten., {\i Prodr. Fl. Nap.} 22 (1810). Bulbs c. 1 cm in diameter; outer tunic membranous. Stem 6-25 cm. Leaves 2, up to 25 cm × 7 mm, soon withering. Umbel with 5-9 flowers, lax, not secund, without bulbils; pedicels up to 40 mm, ascending at anthesis, later drooping. Perianth stellate; segments 3-5 × 1·1-1·4 mm, white, with longitudinal green stripe, lanceolate, acute. Filaments 4·5 mm. Capsule 4-6 mm. 2n = 14. {\i Woods and damp, shady places. • C. Mediterranean region.} Co It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. A. paradoxum} (Bieb.) G. Don,{\i  Monogr. Allium} 72 (1827). Bulbs 0·5-1 cm in diameter; tunic membranous. Stem 15-30 cm. Leaf 1, up to 30 cm × 20 mm. Umbel usually reduced to flower (in Europe), usually with small green subglobose bulbils and often then without flowers; pedicel 20-45 mm. Perianth campanulate; segments 12 × 6 mm, white, with faint longitudinal green stripe, obtuse. Filaments 5 mm. Capsule rarely produced in Europe. 2n = 16.{\i  Cultivated as a curiosity and locally naturalized in C. & N.W. Europe.} [Br Cz Da Ge Ho.] ({\i Caucasus, Iran}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. CHAMAEPRASON F. Hermann. Bulbs subglobose; not rhizomatous. Leaves basal. Stem very short, the umbel almost sessile in the rosette of leaves. Spathe shorter than the pedicels which are recurved in fruit. Ovary with 2 ovules in each loculus. Stigma entire. Seeds angular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. A. chamaemoly} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }301 (1753). Bulbs 0·5-1 cm in diameter; outer tunic chartaceous, pitted. Leaves 2-5, 3-27 cm × 3-10 mm, usually spread flat on the ground, their bases entirely sheathing the stem, linear, ciliate at margin, sometimes hairy on the surface. Spathe 1-valved, 2- to 4-lobed, persistent. Umbel 1·5-2·5 cm in diameter, fastigiate, with 2-20 flowers; pedicels 5-10 mm. Perianth stellate; segments 5-9 × 1·5-2 mm, white, with a green or purplish mid-vein, oblong, acute or obtuse. Stamens shorter than segments; filaments c. 4 mm. Capsule c. 4 mm. Flowering December to March. 2n = 22.{\i  Grassland and sandy ground. Mediterranean region.} Al Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. OPHIOSCORODON (Wallr.) Bubani (Sect.{\i  Arktoprason} F. Hermann). Bulbs subcylindrical, not rhizomatous. Leaves basal, petiolate, with broad, resupinate blade. Stem sharply angled. Spathe shorter than pedicels, 2-valved, persistent. Perianth stellate. Stamens simple. Ovary with 2 ovules in each loculus. Stigma simple. Seeds subglobose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. A. ursinum} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }300 (1753). Bulbs c. 4 × 1 cm, narrow; outer tunic papery, with a few parallel fibres at base. Stem 10-50 cm, usually 2-angled and semi-cylindrical, sometimes 3-angled. Leaves 2-3; lamina 6-20 cm × 15-80 mm, narrowly elliptical to narrowly ovate, acute, attenuate into the petiole and rounded or subcordate at base. Umbel 2·5-6 cm in diameter, with 6-20 flowers, lax; pedicels 10-15 mm, ascending. Perianth-segments 7-12 × 2-2·5 mm, white, lanceolate, acute. Stamens c. 7 mm. Capsule 3-4 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Woods. Most of Europe, northwards to} 64°{\i  N. in Norway, but absent from much of the north-east and E. Russia, and rare in the Mediterranean region.} Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ursinum}: Pedicels scabrid with numerous papillae.{\i  W. & C. Europe, N. & C. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ucrainicum} Kleopow & Oxner, {\i Sched. Herb. Fl. Ucr.} 1. 10 no. 37 (1935): Pedicels smooth.{\i  E. & S.E. Europe, C. & S. Italy, Sicilia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Transitional populations between these subspecies occur in E.C. Europe (cf. J. Soják,{\i  Preslia}{\b  40}: 294-300 (1968)).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. SCORODON Koch (incl. Sect. {\i Crommyum} Subsect.{\i  Haplostemon} Ser. {\i Brachyspatha} Boiss., Sect.{\i  Haplostemon} (Boiss.) Halácsy, Sect. {\i Brevispatha }Valsecchi, Sect.{\i  Cupanioscordum} Ceschm.). Bulbs ovoid or subglobose; not rhizomatous. Stem terete. Leaves sheathing the lower ¼-½ of the stem, usually filiform. Spathe usually shorter than the pedicels. Perianth tubular to stellate. Stamens simple or the inner sometimes with 2 short basal teeth. Ovary with distinct nectariferous pores; ovules 2 in each loculus. Stigma entire. Seeds angular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. A. moschatum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 298 (1753). Bulbs c. 1 cm in diameter, narrowly ovoid, clustered; outer tunics separating into fibres, reticulate at apex but parallel below. Stem 10-30 cm. Leaves 3-6, up to 14 cm × 0·5 mm, sheathing the lower (¼-½) of the stem, filiform. Spathe 2-valved; valves patent, shorter than pedicels, persistent. Umbel fastigiate, with 3-12 flowers; pedicels 10-15 mm, almost equal. Perianth campanulate; segments 6-7 × 1·5-2 mm, pink, with darker mid-vein or white with brown
\par

\par
58}
\par