{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 mid-vein, lanceolate, acute. Stamens included; filaments c. 4 mm. Capsule 3 mm. 2n = 16. {\i Dry places. • S. Europe, extending northwards to Hungary.} Al Bu Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. A. inaequale} Janka,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  30}: 603 (1860). Like {\b 40} but the pedicels 10-30 mm, very unequal, 3-6 times as long as the flowers; perianth-segments usually 4-5 mm.{\i  Steppes and sandy or rocky slopes. S. part of U.S.S.R., northwards to} 52° 30'{\i  N.} Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. A. bornmuelleri} Hayek, {\i Feddes Repert. }{\b 21}: 260 (1925). Bulbs c. 0·5 cm in diameter, narrowly ovoid; outer tunics becoming fibrous. Stem 10-20 cm. Leaves 2-3, up to 3 cm × 0·5 mm, sheathing the lower 1/5-1/3 of the stem, very shortly pubescent, filiform, minutely ciliate. Spathe 0·5-1·5 cm, 2-valved; valves unequal, ovate at base, contracted above into a slender appendage, persistent. Umbel 1·5-2·5 cm in diameter, lax, few-flowered; pedicels 4-12 mm, slightly unequal. Perianth cup-shaped; segments 4-4·5 × 1·5 mm, pink, narrowly elliptical, subacute or obtuse. Stamens included; filaments c. 4 mm, simple; anthers purple. Capsule 3·5 mm. •{\i  Macedonia.} Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. A. rubellum} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 264 (1808) (incl. {\i A. albanum} Grossh.). Bulbs 1-1·5 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics coriaceous; bulblets pale yellowish or brownish. Stem 10-60 cm. Leaves 3-5, up to 30 cm × 1-5 mm, sheathing the lower ¼ of the stem, narrowly linear to filiform, fistular. Spathe shorter than umbel, long-beaked, caducous. Umbel 2·5-4 cm in diameter, hemispherical, many-flowered, dense; pedicels 5-15 mm, almost equal. Perianth campanulate; segments 5-6 × 1·5-2 mm, pink, with darker mid-vein, lanceolate, acute. Stamens included; filaments c. 3 mm, simple, the inner narrowly triangular and 1½-2 times as wide at base as the outer; anthers yellow. Capsule 3 mm.{\i  Dry steppes and semi-deserts. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (?C, E). ({\i Caucasus and Caspian region}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. A. meteoricum} Heldr. & Hausskn. ex Halácsy, {\i Consp. Fl. Graec.}{\b  3}: 250 (1904). Bulb 0·8-1·2 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics membranous. Stem 10-40 cm. Leaves 2-3 up to 12 cm × 2·3 mm, sheathing the lower 1/5-1/3 of the stem, filiform, scabrid. Spathe c. 0·5-1 cm, 2-valved; valves unequal, ovate at base, contracted above into a slender appendage, persistent. Umbel 1-3 cm in diameter, fastigiate or hemispherical; pedicels 3-25 mm, unequal. Perianth cylindrical; segments 4·5-6 mm, the outer 1·5-1·8 mm wide, the inner 1-1·5 mm wide, pink, lanceolate, acute to obtuse. Stamens included; filaments 3·5-4 mm, simple; anthers yellow. Ovary subglobose. Capsule 3·5 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry hillsides and mountain rocks. • C. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. A. delicatulum} Sievers ex Schultes & Schultes fil., {\i Syst. Veg,}{\b  7}: 1133 (1830). Bulbs 0·5-1·5 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics papery. Stem 9-45 cm. Leaves 2-3, up to 6 cm or more × 0·3-1·5 mm, sheathing the lower 1/3-1/2 of the stem, filiform. Spathe up to 0·7 cm, 2-valved; valves unequal, beaked, persistent. Umbel 1-3 cm in diameter, hemispherical or fastigiate; pedicels 5-10 mm, almost equal. Perianth campanulate; segments 4-6 × 1 mm, whitish or pink, with darker mid-vein, lanceolate, acute. Stamens included; filaments 4-5 mm, simple, adnate to the segments for 0·5 mm; anthers yellowish. Capsule 3 mm.{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (C, E). ({\i W.C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. A. frigidum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 2}({\b 13}): 34 (1853). Bulbs 0·5-1 cm in diameter, subglobose or ovoid; outer tunics membranous. Stem 10-20 cm. Leaves 2-3, up to 5 cm × 0·7 mm, sheathing the lower 1/2-2/3 of the stem, filiform, canaliculate, both lamina and sheaths pubescent with white hairs, or glabrous. Spathe 0·8-1·2 cm, 2-valved; valves narrowly ovate or lanceolate at base, narrowed above, equalling or shorter than the umbel. Umbel 1·5-4 cm in diameter, fastigiate, lax with 3-16 flowers; pedicels 5-15 mm, very unequal. Perianth narrowly infundibuliform; segments 5-6 × 1-1·5 mm, yellowish or pink, narrowly oblong-elliptical, acute to obtuse. Stamens with exserted anthers; filaments 6 mm, simple. Ovary ellipsoid. Capsule 5 mm.{\i  Mountain rocks and screes, }1250-2300{\i  m. • S. Greece} ({\i Peloponnisos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. A. chrysonemum} Stearn, {\i Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  4}: 149 (1978). Bulbs c. 1·5 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics membranous, breaking at apex into parallel fibres. Stem 30-60 cm. Leaves 3-4, up to 15 cm × 2 mm, filiform, fistular, withered at anthesis, sheathing the lower 1/3 of the stem, the lamina and sheath with sparse, long hairs. Spathe 2-valved; valves unequal, the larger up to 1·5 cm, shortly beaked, persistent. Umbel c. 4 cm in diameter, lax, many-flowered; pedicels 10-15 mm and mostly nodding in flower, up to 45 mm and erect in fruit. Perianth cupshaped; segments 4·5-5 × 2-2·4 mm, pale greenish-yellow, with green mid-vein, the outer narrowly ovate, almost truncate, the inner oblong, obtuse or subacute. Stamens slightly exserted; filaments 5 mm, yellow, sometimes reddish in upper part, simple; anthers yellow. Capsule c. 4 mm. 2n = 32. {\i Stony soil among rocks.} 670-2000{\i  m. • S.E. Spain }({\i prov. Jaen}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. A. grosii} Font Quer, {\i Butll. Inst. Catalana Hist. Nat.}{\b  24}: 145 (1924). Bulbs 1·5 cm in diameter. Stem 30-40 cm. Leaves linear, sheathing the lower 1/3 of the stem, flat, withered at anthesis. Spathe 2-valved; valves unequal, the larger up to 2·5 cm, long-acuminate, persistent. Umbel up to 5·5 cm in diameter, lax, many-flowered; pedicels 10-25 mm, the outer recurved. Perianth cylindrical; segments 6 × 1·5 mm, violet-purple, with darker mid-vein, narrowly oblong, obtuse. Stamens included; filaments c. 4 mm, simple, connate at base into an annulus 1 mm high; anthers purple. Ovary almost globose.{\i  Among rocks. • Islas Baleares} ({\i Ibiza}). Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. A. cupani} Rafin.,{\i  Caratt.} 86 (1810). Bulbs 0·7-1·5 cm in diameter, narrowly ovoid; outer tunics reticulately fibrous. Stem 9-30 cm. Leaves 3-5, up to 8 cm × 0·4 mm, sheathing the lower 1/3-3/4 of the stem, glabrous or pubescent, filiform. Spathe 1·5-2 cm, 1-valved, tubular at base, persistent. Umbel fastigiate, with 3-15 flowers; pedicels up to 40 mm, very unequal. Perianth cylindrical; segments 5·5-9 × 1·5-2 mm, whitish or pink, narrowly oblong, acute to obtuse. Stamens included; filaments c. 5 mm, simple; anthers yellow. Capsule 4 mm.{\i  Dry, rocky ground. Mediterranean region and S. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bl Bu Cr Gr It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cupani}: Bulb-tunics adherent at base of bulb. 2n = 32.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except Islas Baleares and Aegean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b hirtovaginatum} (Kunth) Stearn, {\i Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  4}: 151 (1978): Bulb-tunics breaking away from base of bulb. 2n = 16.{\i  Islas Baleares }({\i Cabrera});{\i  S. Greece and Aegean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. A. callimischon} Link,{\i  Linnaea }{\b 9}: 140 (1835). Bulbs c. 1 cm in diameter, narrowly ovoid, outer tunics coriaceous, ultimately breaking into parallel fibres. Stem 9-38 cm. Leaves 3-5, the lowest up to 30 cm × 1 mm, sheathing the stem almost up to the umbel, filiform, slightly canaliculate, glabrous. Spathe 2-4 cm, 1-valved, erect, persistent. Umbel fastigiate, with 8-25 flowers; pedicels 7-25 mm, very unequal. Perianth cup-shaped or
\par

\par
59}
\par