{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min55}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min56}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords639}{\nofchars3646}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \qc\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 173.       SCHEUCHZERIACEAE}{\fs28 
\par }{\fs24  Edit. S.M. Walters. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial herbs with creeping rhizomes. Leaves alternate, linear, sheathing at the base. Flowers hermaphrodite, bracteate, in few-flowered racemes. Perianth of 6 segments, sepaloid. Stamens 6, with elongated filaments; anthers opening by longitudinal slits. Carpels 3(6), shortly connate at the base; ovules 2 or few in each carpel. Fruiting carpels follicular, inflated; seeds without endosperm; embryo straight.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.        Scheuchzeria}{\fs28         L.
\par }{\fs24  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Stems leafy. Leaves semi-terete, entire, with a pore on the upper side at the apex; sheaths auriculate. Racemes lax, 3- to 10 flowered; bracts leaf-like, with reduced blades. Perianth-segments narrowly lanceolate. Stigmas sessile.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. S. palustris}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl. }{\fs28 338 (1753). Rhizome clothed with persistent leaf-bases. Leaves up to 40 cm, equalling or exceeding the stem. Perianth-segments 2-3 mm, yellowish-green. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Wet bogs. Europe southwards to the Pyrenees, Alps and S. Carpathians.}{\fs28  Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge \'86Hb He Ho It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 174.       APONOGETONACEAE}{\fs28 
\par }{\fs24  Edit. V.H. Heywood 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Aquatic perennial herbs. Leaves basal, alternate, sheathing at the base. Flowers hermaphrodite or unisexual, ebracteate, in pedunculate spikes. Perianth of 1-3 segments. Stamens 6-18, with elongated filaments; anthers opening by longitudinal slits. Carpels 3-8, free; ovules 2-8 in each carpel. Fruit a whorl of follicles; seeds without endosperm; embryo straight.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.          Aponogeton}{\fs28          L.
\par }{\fs24 Edit V.H. Heywood}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Stock tuberous. Leaves submerged or floating, petiolate or rarely sessile. Spikes simple or 2- (or more-) furcate, at first enclosed in a deciduous spathe. Perianth-segments petaloid. Styles short or somewhat elongated.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. A. distachyos}{\fs28  L. fil.,}{\i\fs28  Suppl.}{\fs28  215 (1781). Leaves up to 25 \'d7 7 cm, floating, long-petiolate, elliptic-oblong, rounded or obtuse at the base and apex. Flowers hermaphrodite, distichous in 2-furcate dorsiventral spikes. Perianth-segments 1-2, 10-20 mm, elliptical, white. Carpels 3. }{\i\fs28 Cultivated for ornament; naturalized in England and France.}{\fs28  [Br Ga.] (}{\i\fs28 S. Africa.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 175.        JUNCAGINACEAE}{\fs28 
\par }{\fs24  Edit. S.M. Walters. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Aquatic or marsh herbs; stems stout. Leaves basal, alternate, linear, sheathing at the base. Flowers hermaphrodite or unisexual, ebracteate, in pedunculate racemes or spikes. Perianth of 2-6 sepaloid segments. Stamens 3 or 6, often adnate at the base to the perianth-segments; anthers sessile, 2-thecous, opening by longitudinal slits. Carpels 3 or 6, free or connate, each with 1 ovule; styles short or stigmas sessile. Fruit apocarpous or syncarpous, the fruitlets separating when ripe; seeds with or without endosperm; embryo straight.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.        Triglochin}{\fs28             L.
\par }{\fs24  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial or annual marsh plants. Flowers hermaphrodite, in racemes. Perianth-segments 6. Stamens 6, or 3 by abortion. Carpels 6, connate, all or only 3 fertile. Fruit syncarpous, the fruitlets separating when ripe; seeds without endosperm.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 All 6 carpels fertile; rhizomes thick, not stoloniferous ............... }{\b\fs28 1. maritima}{\fs28 
\par 1 Only 3 carpels fertile
\par 2 Stock a fibrous-coated bulb, not stoloniferous .............................. }{\b\fs28 4. bulbosa}{\fs28 
\par 2 Stock a slender, stoloniferous rhizome
\par 3 Fruit 7-10 mm, clavate, attenuate and substipitate at the base ..... }{\b\fs28 2. palustris}{\fs28  
\par 3 Fruit 1\'b75-2 mm, globose, rounded at the base .................................. }{\b\fs28 3. striata}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  Sect. HEXAGLOCHIN Dumort. All 6 carpels fertile.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. T. maritima}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl. }{\fs28 339 (1753). Perennial up to 60 cm; rhizome short, thick, clothed with sheaths of old leaves. Leaves up to 4 mm wide, semi-terete. Flowers 3-4 mm. Stamens 6. Fruit 3-4 mm, oblong-ovoid, rounded at the base, ascending. 2n = 24, 30, 36, 48.}{\i\fs28  Saline marshes. Europe, southwards to C. Portugal, N.C. Italy and Bulgaria.}{\fs28  Au Be Bl Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par 
\par   Sect. TRIGLOCHIN. Only 3 carpels fertile.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. T. palustris}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  338 (1753). Perennial up to 70 cm; rhizome slender, stoloniferous. Leaves up to 2 mm wide, semiterete. Flowers 2-3 mm. Stamens 6. Fruit 7-10 mm, clavate, attenuate and substipitate at the base, ascending. 2n = 24.}{\i\fs28  Marshes and wet meadows. Much of Europe, but absent from most of the Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par 
\par 6}
\par }