{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 infundibuliform; segments 5-7 × 1·5 mm, white, with brown or reddish mid-vein, often becoming pink with age, oblanceolate, truncate. Stamens included or with anthers exserted; filaments c. 6 mm, simple; anthers red before dehiscence. Capsule 5 mm. 2n = 16. Flowering September-October.{\i  Rocky ground. • S. Greece, Kriti. }Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b callimischon}: Perianth-segments unspotted. 2n = 16.{\i  S. Greece.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b haemostictum} Stearn,{\i  Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  4}: 151 (1978): Perianth-segments with dark red spots in upper part. 2n = 16.{\i  Kriti}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. A. obtusiflorum} DC. in Redouté,{\i  Liliacées}{\b  2}: t. 118 (1805) ({\i A. maritimum} Rafin.). Bulbs c. 1 cm in diameter, subglobose; outer tunics membranous. Stem 4-18 cm. Leaves 2-3, 3-15 cm × 0·2-0·5 mm, sheathing the lower 1/3-1/2 of the stem, filiform. Spathe 2-valved, shorter than pedicels, persistent. Umbel up to 1·5 cm in diameter, subglobose, many-flowered; pedicels 2-12 mm, very unequal, the outermost recurved, the innermost erect and longer. Perianth tubular-ellipsoid; segments 3-4 × 1-2 mm, white or pale pink, with darker mid-vein, oblong, the outer wider, truncate-rounded. Stamens included; filaments 2·5 mm, simple, narrowly triangular. Capsule 2·5 mm.{\i  Maritime sands, cliffs and hillsides. • Sicilia; a few isolated stations in S. & E. Greece.} Gr Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. A. parciflorum} Viv.,{\i  Fl. Cors., App.}{\b  1}: 2 (1825). Bulbs 1-1·5 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics coriaceous, breaking into strips of parallel fibres. Stem 9-30 cm. Leaves 3-4, up to 10 cm × 0·4 mm, withered at anthesis, sheathing the lower 1/3-1/2 of the stem, filiform. Spathe 2-lobed, tubular below, the lobes unequal, the longest up to 1·4 cm. Umbel fastigiate, with 2-10 flowers; pedicels very unequal, erect or ascending, the shortest 5 mm, the longest up to 35 mm. Perianth tubular-campanulate; segments 5-6 × 1-1·3 mm, pink, lanceolate, acute. Stamens included; filaments 3 mm, simple. Capsule 45 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Among rocks. • Corse, Sardegna. }Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. A. rouyi} Gaut. in Rouy,{\i  Ill. Pl. Eur. Rar.}{\b  10}: 81 (1898). Bulbs c. 0·8 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics membranous. Stem 19-27 cm. Leaves 3-4, up to 5 cm × 0·4 mm, sheathing the lower 1/4-2/5 of the stem, filiform. Spathe 2-valved; valves 0·6-0·8 cm, ovate to lanceolate, acuminate, almost equal, persistent. Umbel fastigiate, lax, with 5-14 flowers; pedicels 5-15 mm, very unequal, ascending. Perianth campanulate; segments 5·5-6 × 1·5-1·8 mm, yellowish, oblong-lanceolate, obtuse. Stamens included; filaments 5 mm, simple, connate at base into an annulus 0·5 mm high; anthers yellow, becoming brownish. Capsule 4 mm.  •{\i S.W. Spain} ({\i Sierra Bermeja, prov. Malaga}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. A. caeruleum} Pallas,{\i  Reise}{\b  2}: 737 (1773). Bulbs 1-2 cm in diameter, subglobose; outer tunics membranous. Stem 20-80 cm. Leaves 2-4, 7 cm × 2-4 mm, sheathing the lower 1/4-1/3 of the stem, linear, triquetrous with prominent keel. Spathe up to 1·5 cm, 2-valved; valves ovate, acute or acuminate, persistent. Umbel 3-4 cm in diameter, subglobose or hemispherical, many flowered; pedicels 10-20 mm, almost equal. Perianth cupshaped; segments 3·5-4·5 × 1·2-1·4 mm, blue, with darker mid-vein, lanceolate, acute. Stamens equalling or slightly longer than segments; filaments 4 mm, simple, broadly triangular at base, narrowed above, connate into an annulus at base; anthers blue. Capsule 3 mm.{\i  Salt-marshes and steppes. S.E. Russia.} Rs (E). ({\i C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. A. sabulosum} Steven ex Bunge in Goebel,{\i  Reise Steppen Russl.}{\b  2}: 311 (1838). Bulbs 1·5-2 cm in diameter, narrowly ovoid; outer tunics coriaceous, striate; bulblets pale brown. Stem 20-60 cm, fistular. Leaves 3-4, up to 18 cm × 1-3 mm sheathing the lower ¼ of the stem, linear, fistular. Spathe almost equalling the umbel, caducous. Umbel c. 3 cm in diameter, subglobose or hemispherical, many-flowered, dense; pedicels c. 10 mm, almost equal. Perianth hemispherical; segments 3-4 mm, the outer c. 1·5 mm wide, cymbiform, the inner c. 2·5 mm wide, greenish or whitish, elliptical to broadly elliptical, truncate to emarginate, papillose. Stamens exserted; filaments 4 mm, simple; anthers yellow. Capsule 3 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Sandy deserts. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E). ({\i C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. CODONOPRASUM Reichenb. (incl. Sect.{\i  Macrospatha} G. Don ex Kunth, Sect. {\i Rhynchoprason} F. Hermann, Sect. {\i Haemoprason} F. Hermann, Sect.{\i  Phalerea} Zahar.). Bulbs ovoid; not rhizomatous. Stem terete. Leaves sheathing up to 2/3 of the stem. Spathe 2-valved, the valves unequal, each with an ovate or lanceolate, usually strongly veined base, narrowed above into a tail-like appendage, longer than the pedicels. Perianth cup-shaped, campanulate, funnel-shaped, cylindrical or obovoid, never stellate. Stamens simple. Ovary with or without minute inconspicuous nectariferous pores; ovules 2 in each loculus. Stigma entire. Seeds angular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. A. paniculatum} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2}: 978 (1759). Bulbs 1-2·5 cm in diameter; outer tunics membranous. Stem 30-70 cm. Leaves 3-5, up to 25 cm × (1-)2(-5) mm, sheathing the lower of the stem, linear, canaliculate above, prominently ribbed beneath. Spathe 2-valved; valves unequal, ovate to narrowly lanceolate at base, contracted above into a long appendage, the longer valve 5-14 cm, greatly exceeding the pedicels. Umbel 3·5-7 cm in diameter, diffuse, hemispherical to ovoid, usually many-flowered, without bulbils; pedicels 10-70 mm, very unequal, the outer curving outwards, the inner erect. Perianth campanulate, becoming narrowly ovoid; segments 4·5-7 × 1·5-2·5 mm, narrowly obovate to elliptical, usually obtuse. Stamens included or slightly exserted; filaments c. 5 mm, connate at base into an annulus c. 1·5 mm high, sometimes with a small tooth in the sinus; anthers yellow. Ovary ellipsoid, twice as long as wide, narrowed at base and apex; style 1-2 mm, slightly exserted. Capsule c. 5 mm. 2n = 16, 40.{\i  Europe, northwards to N.C. France S.E. Czechoslovakia and C. Russia.} Al Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Az].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable; the following classification is provisional.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaf-sheath hairy ......................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b villosulum}
\par
1 Leaf-sheaths glabrous
\par
2 Perianth lilac-pink or white ......................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b paniculatum}
\par
2 Perianth brownish, yellowish or dirty white, sometimes
\par
  tinged with pink or with reddish streaks
\par
3 Spathe-valves usually 2-many times as long as umbel;
\par
  perianth 5-6 mm .................................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b fuscum}
\par
3 Spathe-valves not more than twice as long as umbel;
\par
  perianth 4-4·5 mm ........................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b euboicum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b paniculatum}: Leaf-sheaths glabrous. Spathe-valves usually 2-many times as long as umbel. Perianth 4·5-7 mm, lilac-pink to white. 2n = 24, 32.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b fuscum} (Waldst. & Kit.) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} ed. 2, 136 (1894) ({\i A. fuscum} Waldst. & Kit.): Leaf-sheaths glabrous. Spathe-valves usually 2-many times as long as umbel. Perianth 5-6 mm, greenish-brown or dirty white, sometimes tinged with pink. 2n = 16, 32.{\i  Romania to Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b euboicum} (Rech. fil.) Stearn, {\i Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  4}: 161 (1978) ({\i A. euboicum} Rech. fil.): Leaf-sheaths glabrous. Spathe-valves not more than twice as long as umbel. Perianth
\par

\par
60}
\par