{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 4-4·5 mm, brownish or yellowish, often with reddish streaks. •{\i  E. Greece} ({\i Evvoia}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b villosulum} (Halácsy) Stearn,{\i  op. cit.}{\b  4}: 161 (1978) ({\i A. paniculatum} var.{\i  villosulum} Halácsy, {\i A. rhodopeum} Velen.): Leaf-sheaths hairy. Spathe-valves twice as long as umbel. Perianth 4·5-5·5 mm, purplish or brownish-pink, with darker mid-vein. 2n = 16. •{\i  Greece and Bulgaria}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. A. pallens} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 427 (1762). Bulbs 1-1·5 cm in diameter; outer tunic membranous. Stem 10-30(-65) cm. Leaves 3-4, 6-16(-30) cm × 0·5-2(-5) mm, filiform to linear, sheathing the lower 1/3-1/2 of the stem. Spathe 2-valved; valves unequal, persistent, narrowly ovate or lanceolate at base, contracted above into a slender appendage, longer than the pedicels, the longest 2·5-10 cm. Umbel 1·5-3·5 cm in diameter, hemispherical or fastigiate, compact, 10- to 70-flowered; pedicels 5-15 mm, almost equal, up to 25 mm in fruit. Perianth narrowly campanulate; segments 3·5-5 × 1·5-2 mm, white or pink, narrowly oblong, slightly wider above than below the middle. Stamens included, with partly exserted anthers; filaments 3·5-4 mm, almost as long as segments, connate at base into an annulus 1 mm high; anthers yellow. Ovary narrowly ellipsoid, 2-3 times as long as wide at anthesis. Capsule 4 mm. 2n = 16. {\i  S. Europe.} Bl Bu Co Gr Hs It Ju Lu ?Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In their usual states {\i A. paniculatum} and {\i A. pallens} are readily distinguished, but some herbarium specimens are difficult to allocate. The inrolling of the upper edges of the perianth-segments in drying often makes them appear more acute than they really are.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pallens} ({\i A. paniculatum} var. {\i pallens} (L.) Regel, {\i A. coppoleri} Tineo,{\i  A. amblyanthum} Zahar.): Umbel compact. Perianth usually white; segments truncate-rounded at apex.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tenuiflorum} (Ten.) Stearn, {\i Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  4}: 161 (1978) ({\i A. tenuiflorum} Ten., {\i A. paniculatum} subsp. {\i tenuiflorum} (Ten.) Brand): Umbel often lax. Perianth usually pink; segments obtuse to acute, c. 2 mm wide. Capsule almost equalling perianth-segments.{\i  From Sardegna to Bulgaria}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b siciliense} Stearn,{\i  loc. cit.} (1978): Umbel lax. Perianth pink; segments acute, c. 1·5 mm wide. Capsule much shorter than perianth-segments. •{\i  Sicilia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. convallarioides} Grossh. in Grossh. & Schischkin, {\i Sched. Herb. Pl. Or. Exsicc.}{\b  1924}: no. 107 (1924), originally described from Armenia and known to occur in Iran and Iraq, has been recorded from Krym by T. J. Omelczuk,{\i  Ukr. Bot.Zur.}{\b  19} ({\b 2}): 27 (1962). It has white flowers with almost truncate perianth-segments and dehisced anthers 1 mm long. Takhtajan & Fedorov,{\i  Fl. Erevana }323 (1972), consider it conspecific with {\i A. myrianthum} Boiss. (vide {\b 71}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. A. sipyleum} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 5}): 58 (1844). Bulbs c. 1·5 cm in diameter; outer tunics membranous. Stem 10-30 cm. Leaves 3-4, 3-16 × 0·3-1 mm, sheathing the lower 1/2-2/3 of the stem, filiform, canaliculate above, ribbed beneath, minutely scabrid. Spathe-valves unequal, very narrowly lanceolate at base, gradually contracted into a long appendage, the longer valve 3-5 cm and exceeding the pedicels. Umbel 2-4 cm in diameter, fastigiate, few- to many-flowered, without bulbils; pedicels 5-30 mm, very unequal, ascending or erect. Perianth narrowly campanulate; segments 5-5·5 × 1-1·5 mm, pale pink, with red mid-vein, very narrowly oblong, acute. Stamens included; filaments c. 4·5 mm; anthers pale yellow. Ovary ellipsoid. Capsule c. 4 mm.{\i  S.E. Aegean region} ({\i Astipalaia}). Gr. ({\i Khios, W. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. A. rupestre} Steven,{\i  Mém. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  3}: 260 (1812). Bulbs c. 1 cm in diameter; outer tunics membranous. Stem 25-40 cm. Leaves 2-3, up to 12 cm × 0·5-1 mm, filiform, sheathing the lower ½ of the stem. Spathe 2-valved; valves unequal, linear at base, narrowed above into a long slender appendage, longer than the pedicels, the longer up to 5 cm. Umbel 2-3 cm in diameter, fastigiate or hemispherical, few-flowered; pedicels 5-10 mm, almost equal. Perianth narrowly campanulate; segments 5-6 × 1·5 mm, pale pink, narrowly elliptical, obtuse, apiculate. Stamens included or scarcely exserted; filaments c. 4·5 mm; anthers violet. Ovary ellipsoid. Capsule c. 4·5 mm.{\i  Rocks and stony slopes. Krym.} ?Bu Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus, Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. A. favosum} Zahar.,{\i  Biol. Gallo-Hellen.}{\b  6}: 54 (1975). Bulbs 1-1·5 cm in diameter; outer tunics membranous. Stem 15-25 cm. Leaves 3-5, up to 10 cm × 1-3·5 mm, filiform or linear, glabrous, sheathing the lower 1/3-1/2 of the stem, the ribs of the sheaths papillose with rows of cells as wide as long (visible at × 30). Spathe 2-valved; valves persistent, unequal, lanceolate at base, narrowed above into a slender appendage, the longer up to 8 cm. Umbel 3-4·5 cm in diameter, fastigiate or hemispherical; pedicels 10-35 mm, unequal. Perianth cup-shaped; segments 4-5 × 2 mm, pink or whitish and with a pale pink mid-vein, elliptical-oblong, obtuse but apiculate. Stamens slightly exserted; filaments c. 4·5 mm; anthers yellow. Ovary ellipsoid, scabrid above; style 2-3 mm. Capsule 4·5 mm. •{\i  N. Greece} ({\i Makedhonia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. A. macedonicum} Zahar., {\i op. cit.} 56 (1975). Bulbs 0·6-1 cm in diameter; outer tunics membranous, breaking into longitudinal strips. Stem 8-25 cm. Leaves 3-5, up to 30 cm × 0·5-4 mm, linear, sheathing the lower 1/3-1/2 of the stem. Spathe 2-valved; valves unequal, persistent, narrowly lanceolate at base, contracted above into a long slender appendage much longer than the pedicels, the longer up to 17 cm. Umbel 2-4·5 cm in diameter, fastigiate, usually many-flowered; pedicels 10-40 mm, unequal. Perianth cup-shaped; segments c. 5 × 2·5 mm, pale purplish, elliptical, acute, apiculate, pink. Stamens included; filaments c. 4·5 mm, almost as long as segments, united at base into an annulus c. 1 mm high; anthers yellow. Ovary oblong-cylindrical, papillose above, rounded-truncate at apex. Capsule c. 4 mm. {\i Sandy ground, }1650-1700 {\i m. • N.E. Greece} ({\i Pangaion}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. A. podolicum} Blocki ex Racib. & Szafer,{\i  Fl. Polska}{\b  1}: 124 (1919). Bulbs 0·5-1 cm in diameter; outer tunics membranous. Stem 15-50 cm. Leaves 3-5, up to 14 cm × 0·4-1 mm, filiform, sheathing the lower ½ or more of the stem. Spathe 2-valved; valves unequal, persistent, both much longer than the umbel, the longer up to 20 cm, lanceolate at base, contracted above into a very long, slender appendage. Umbel 2·5-4·5 cm in diameter, many-flowered, lax, without bulbils; pedicels 5-30 mm, very unequal, slightly flattened or winged, curved, the inner ascending, the outer deflexed. Perianth campanulate; segments 6 × 2 mm, clear pink, the outer narrowly elliptical, rounded, the inner oblanceolate, almost truncate. Stamens included; filaments c. 5 mm, connate at base into an annulus c. 1 mm high; anthers yellow. Ovary at anthesis ellipsoid, nearly twice as long as wide, rounded-truncate at apex. Capsule c. 5 mm.{\i  Dry steppes and stony slopes. • E. Hungary to W. Ukraine.} Hu Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 63. A. oleraceum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 299 (1753). Bulbs 1-1·5 cm in diameter; outer tunics membranous. Stem 25-100 cm. Leaves 2-4, up to 25 cm × 0·5-4 mm, linear to filiform, fistular in lower part, canaliculate above, prominently ribbed beneath, the veins usually scabrid with minute teeth; sheathing the lower ½ or more of the stem. Spathe 2-valved; valves unequal, lanceolate at base,
\par

\par
61}
\par