{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 contracted above into a long slender appendage longer than the pedicels, the longer up to 20 cm. Umbel diffuse, lax, 5- to 40-flowered, with few or many bulbils, sometimes with bulbils only, the outermost pedicels curving downwards at anthesis; pedicels 15-60 mm, unequal, slightly flattened or winged. Perianth campanulate; segments 7 × 2·5-3 mm, whitish, variably tinged with green, pink or brown, the outer narrowly obovate, the inner oblong-elliptical, obtuse, mucronate. Stamens included; filaments 4·5-5·5 mm, connate at base into an annulus c. 1·5 mm high; anthers yellow or reddish. Ovary at anthesis narrowly obovoid, c. 4 times as long as wide, rounded-truncate at apex. Capsule rarely produced. 2n = 32, 40.{\i  Cultivated land, roadsides, rocky ground and scrub. Much of Europe, but rare in most of the south.} Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Si Su [Is].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. A. parnassicum} (Boiss.) Halácsy,{\i  Consp. Fl. Graec. }{\b 3}: 255 (1904). Bulbs c. 1 cm in diameter; outer tunics membranous. Stem 10-24 cm, terete, slightly angled above. Leaves 2-3, 5 cm or more × 0·6-0·8 mm, semiterete, scabridulous, sheathing the lower 1/3-1/2 of the stem. Spathe 2-valved; valves unequal, the longest 2·5-6 cm, longer than the umbel, narrowly lanceolate at base, contracted above into a slender appendage. Umbel lax, 2·5-3 cm in diameter, 5- to 25-flowered, fastigiate; pedicels up to 15 mm, unequal. Perianth funnel-shaped; segments c. 7 × 2 mm, pink, narrowly oblong-elliptical, obtuse. Stamens included, filaments c. 6 mm; anthers yellow. Ovary narrowly obovoid. Capsule 4 mm.{\i  Rocky ground. • Mountains of S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. A. staticiforme} Sibth. & Sm., {\i Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 225 (1809). Bulbs 0·8-1·5 cm in diameter; outer tunics coriaceous, often breaking at apex into parallel fibres. Stem 7-30 cm, often curved in lower part. Leaves 2-4, up to 13 cm × 0·5-2 mm, filiform, fistular, glabrous at base, sheathing the lower 1/3-1/2 of the stem. Spathe 2-valved; valves unequal, shorter than to longer than the umbel, ovate at base, contracted above into a slender appendage, the larger 1-3 cm, the smaller 0·5-2 cm. Umbel 1·5-2·5 cm in diameter, hemispherical, usually dense, 10- to 60-flowered; pedicels 5-12 mm, almost equal. Perianth obovoid; segments 3-3·5 × 1·4-1·6 mm, elliptical, pink, with red mid-vein (forma {\i staticiforme}), or white, with green or lilac mid-vein (forma {\i flexuosum} (D'Urv.) Zahar.), elliptical, the inner slightly wider than the outer, rounded at apex. Stamens slightly exserted; filaments 3·5-4 mm; anthers red or yellow. Ovary obovoid, shortly stipitate. Capsule c. 3 mm. •{\i  S. Greece, S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 66. A. pilosum} Sibth. & Sm., {\i loc. cit.} (1809). Bulbs 1 cm in diameter; outer tunics coriaceous. Stem 2·5-15 cm. Leaves 2-4, up to 9 cm × 0·5 mm, filiform, semi-cylindrical, sheathing the lower 1/3 of the stem, the lamina and sheath with long patent hairs. Spathe 2-valved; valves up to 3 cm, persistent, lanceolate at base, narrowed above into an appendage exceeding the umbel. Umbel 1·5-4 cm in diameter, hemispherical, dense, few- to many-flowered; outer pedicels 5-15 mm, almost equal, curved. Perianth cup-shaped; segments 3-4 × 1-1·5 mm, narrowly elliptical, obtuse, lilac. Stamens with exserted anthers; filaments 4-5 mm; anthers yellow. Capsule 3·5 mm.{\i  Kikladhes.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A closely allied, if not conspecific plant, with a few-flowered, fastigiate umbel, shorter spathe, unequal pedicels up to 12 mm and longer stamens, occurs in the Peloponnisos (near Messini).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 67. A. luteolum} Halácsy, {\i Consp. Fl. Graec.}{\b  3}: 256 (1904). Bulbs 0·5-0·8 cm in diameter; outer tunics membranous. Stem 3-20 cm. Leaves 2-3, up to 10 cm × 0·5 mm, filiform, semiterete, canaliculate above, sheathing the lower 1/4-1/3 of the stem. Spathe 2-valved; valves narrowly triangular at base, narrowed above, the longer up to 3 cm and longer than the umbel. Umbel 1-2·5 cm in diameter, lax, 5- to 25-flowered; pedicels up to 10 mm, unequal, patent or curved. Perianth narrowly cup-shaped; segments 3-4 × 1-1·5 mm, yellowish (very rarely pink; forma{\i  roseolum} Stearn), elliptical, obtuse. Stamens included; filaments 3-4 mm; anthers yellow. Ovary subglobose. Capsule 3-3·5 mm.{\i  Cliffs and scrub. • Kikladhes.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 68. A. flavum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 298 (1753). Bulbs 1-1·5 cm in diameter; outer tunics membranous. Stem 8-50 cm, glaucous. Leaves 2-3, up to 20 cm × 2 mm, solid, glaucous, smooth, sheathing the lower 1/3-1/2 of the stem. Spathe 2-valved; valves unequal, narrowly triangular at base, contracted above into a long slender appendage longer than the pedicels, the longer up to 11 cm. Umbel diffuse, fastigiate or hemispherical, without bulbils, 9- to 60-flowered, the outer pedicels usually curving downwards at anthesis; pedicels 3-25 mm, unequal, erect in fruit. Perianth campanulate; segments 4·5-5 × 2 mm, oblong, rounded at apex. Stamens exserted; filaments c. 7 mm; anthers yellow to violet. Ovary subglobose, contracted at base into a very short stipe. Capsule c. 4 mm.{\i  Dry slopes. • S. & S.C. Europe, extending northwards to} c. 50° 30' {\i N. in S. Russia, but absent from the Iberian peninsula.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b flavum} (incl. {\i A. guicciardii} Heldr.): Perianth lemon yellow. Filaments yellow. Ovary about as long as wide. 2n = 16, 32. {\i Throughout the range of the species except the U.S.S.R}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tauricum} (Besser ex Reichenb.) Stearn,{\i  Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  4}: 167 (1978) ({\i A. flavum} var.{\i  tauricum} Besser ex Reichenb., {\i A. paczoskianum} Tuzson, {\i A. tauricum} (Besser ex Reichenb.) Grossh., {\i A. pulchellum} auct. ross., non G. Don): Perianth yellowish, or almost white, tinged with green, pink or brown. Filaments often purple in upper part. Ovary slightly longer than wide. 2n = 32.{\i  S.E. Europe, from Greece to S.E. Russia.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Dwarf mountain variants of subsp. ({\b a}) have been distinguished as var.{\i  minus }Boiss., var.{\i  calabrum} (N. Terracc.) Fiori, {\i A. nebrodense} Guss., {\i A. webbii} G.C. Clementi and{\i  A. guicciardii} Heldr. {\i A. sphaeropodum} Klokov in Kotov & Barbarich,{\i  Fl. RSS Ucr. }{\b 3}: 405 (1950), from W. Ukraine and Moldavia, may belong to subsp. ({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 69. A. melanantherum} Pancic,{\i  Elem. Fl. Bulg.} 64 (1883). Bulbs 1-1·5 cm in diameter; outer tunics membranous, with fine, close, parallel fibres separating at the top. Stem 13-40 cm. Leaves 1-3, up to 20 cm × 2 mm, filiform, sheathing the lower ¼-½ of the stem; margins scabrid. Spathe 2-valved; valves unequal, one 0·5-2 cm, the other 1-6 cm, persistent, longer than the pedicels, narrowly ovate or lanceolate at base, abruptly contracted above into a filiform appendage. Umbel fastigiate, 3- to 25-flowered, with a few bulbils; pedicels 1-2·5 mm, unequal. Perianth cylindrical; segments 8-10 × 1-2 mm, pink, with red mid-vein, very narrowly oblong, obtuse. Stamens included; filaments c. 6 mm; anthers blackish; pollen yellow. Capsule 4 mm. 2n = 16, 24+1B, 32.{\i  Meadows and pastures, up to} 2000{\i  m. • Mountains of Bulgaria, E. Jugoslavia and N. Greece.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 70. A. tardans} W. Greuter & Zahar., {\i Biol. Gallo-Hellen.}{\b  6}: 51 (1975). Bulbs 1-1·5 cm in diameter; outer tunics membranous, breaking into strips, continued upwards as a neck around base of stem. Stem 10-30 cm. Leaves 3-4, up to 16 cm × 0·5 mm, filiform, withered at anthesis, much longer than the stem, sheathing the lower 5/6 of the stem. Spathe 2-valved; valves persistent, unequal, one 2·5-4 cm, much longer than umbel, narrowly triangular at base, contracted above into a long appendage,
\par

\par
62}
\par