{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  the other valve 0·7-2 cm. Umbel 1-2·5 cm in diameter, fastigiate, 6- to 15-flowered. Perianth campanulate, erect; segments 5-6·5 × 1·8-2 mm, pale pink, with green mid-vein, the outer narrowly oblong, the inner oblanceolate, rounded and almost truncate at apex. Stamens included or with anthers partly exserted; filaments 5-5·5 mm, connate at base into an annulus 1·5 mm high; anthers pink before dehiscence, later whitish. Ovary narrowly oblong-ellipsoid, deeply sulcate. Capsule c. 4·5 mm.{\i  Rocky places,} 400-800{\i  m. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 71. A. carinatum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 297 (1753). Bulbs c. 1 cm in diameter; outer tunics membranous, sometimes breaking into longitudinal strips. Stem 30-60 cm. Leaves 2-4, up to 20 cm × 1-2·5 mm, linear, slightly canaliculate above, ribbed below with 3-5 prominent veins, sheathing the lower 1/2-3/5 of the stem. Spathe 2-valved; valves unequal, persistent, lanceolate at base, contracted above into a long slender appendage, the longest up to 12 cm, longer than the pedicels. Umbel diffuse, the outer pedicels curving downwards; pedicels 10-25 mm, unequal. Perianth cup-shaped; segments 4-6 × 1·5-2 mm, purple, cymbiform, oblong-elliptical, obtuse. Stamens long-exserted; filaments 6·5-9 mm; anthers purple; pollen yellow. Ovary narrowly obovoid, narrowed at the base, rounded at apex. Capsule 5 mm.{\i  Meadows, heaths and scrub. S. & C. Europe, extending northwards to S. Sweden and Estonia; naturalized in N.W. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B) Su Tu [Be Br Hb Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b carinatum}: Umbel with bulbils. Flowers 0-30. Capsules rarely produced. 2n = 16, 24, 26.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except S. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pulchellum} Bonnier & Layens,{\i  Fl. Fr.} 299 (1894) ({\i A. pulchellum} G. Don, nom. illegit., {\i A. flavum} var.{\i  pulchellum} Regel): Umbel without bulbils. Flowers often numerous. Capsules with fertile seed abundantly produced. 2n = 16.{\i  S. Europe, westwards to S.E France}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. myrianthum} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 5}): 59 (1844), from S.W. Asia, has been recorded from Turkey-in-Europe (near Istanbul), but probably only as a casual introduction; it can be distinguished from {\b 71} most easily by its hemispherical or subglobose umbel, cylindrical perianth, with white segments 2-3 × 0·7-1 mm, filaments 2·5-4 mm and yellow anthers.{\i  A. convallarioides }Grossh. (cf. {\b 57}) may be synonymous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 72. A. hirtovaginum} P. Candargy, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b 44}: 142 (1897). Bulb c. 1 cm in diameter; outer tunics membranous. Stem 10-20 cm. Leaves 3, up to 14 cm × 0·4 mm, sheathing the lower ½ or more of the stem, filiform, canaliculate above, the lamina and sheath with many ascending hairs. Spathe 2-valved; valves unequal, narrowly lanceolate or linear at base, narrowed above into a long slender appendage longer than the pedicels, the longer 5-12 cm. Umbel 2-3·5 cm in diameter, diffuse, with 10-25 flowers; pedicels up to 20 mm, unequal. Perianth campanulate; segments 4-4·3 × 1-2 mm, pink, oblong, obtuse. Stamens exserted; filaments c. 5 mm; anthers yellow. Ovary subglobose, contracted at base into a very short stipe.{\i  E. Greece} ({\i Prov. Trikkala}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 73. A. hymettium} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 3}({\b 4}): 120 (1859). Bulbs 0·5-1 cm in diameter; outer tunics membranous. Stem 4-30 cm. Leaves 3-4, up to 11 cm × 0·5 mm, filiform, usually scabridulous with minute teeth along the veins beneath, sheathing the lower 2/3-3/4 of the stem. Spathe 2-valved; valves unequal, up to 9 cm and longer than the pedicels, lanceolate at base, contracted above into a slender filiform appendage. Umbel 1-3 cm in diameter, hemispherical or fastigiate, 8- to 30-flowered; pedicels 5-12 mm, almost equal. Perianth cupshaped; segments 3·5-4 mm, greenish, yellow- sometimes brown-tinged (sometimes reddish when dry), the outer narrowly elliptical, c. 1·5 mm wide, the inner elliptical, c. 2 mm wide, obtuse. Stamens exserted; filaments c. 5 mm, connate at base into an annulus c. 0·5 mm high; anthers yellow. Ovary subglobose or broadly ellipsoid, stalked. Capsule c. 3 mm. •{\i  S. & E. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 74. A. stamineum} Boiss.,{\i  op. cit.} 119 (1859). Bulbs c. 1 cm in diameter; outer tunics membranous. Stem 10-35 cm. Leaves 3-4, up to 15 cm × 0·5-1 mm, filiform, sheathing the lower 1/3-1/2 of the stem. Spathe 2-valved; valves unequal, persistent, lanceolate at base, contracted above into a slender appendage, the longer 1·5-7 cm, usually not much longer than the pedicels. Umbel 2·5-7 cm in diameter, usually many-flowered, lax; pedicels 10-40 mm, very unequal. Perianth cup-shaped; segments 3·5-5 × 1·6-2·2 mm, pale purplish, the outer oblong, rounded at apex, the inner narrowly ovate, obtuse. Stamens exserted; filaments c. 5 mm, connate at base into an annulus c. 0·6 mm high. Ovary subglobose, sessile; style c. 3 mm. Capsule c. 3 mm.{\i  S.E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. amphipulchellum} Zahar.,{\i  Biol. Gallo-Hellen.}{\b  6}: 57 (1975), described from N. Greece (Makedhonia), is said to vary in flower-colour from yellowish-green to violet within the same population; it may be conspecific with{\b  74}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ALLIUM (Sect.{\i  Alliotypus }Dumort., Sect. {\i Porrum} (Miller) G. Don ex Koch). Bulbs ovoid or subglobose; not rhizomatous. Stem usually terete. Leaves linear, flat or fistular, sheathing the lower ¼ or more of the stem. Spathe 1- or 2-valved, usually beaked and caducous. Perianth cylindrical, campanulate or ovoid, with permanently connivent segments. Stamens usually dimorphic, the outer 3 usually simple, rarely toothed or tricuspidate, the inner 3 always tricuspidate with a broad flat basal lamina topped by a central anther-bearing cusp and two (rarely 4) sterile, usually much elongated cusps. Ovary with distinct nectariferous pores; ovules 2 in each loculus; stigma entire. Seeds angular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A difficult section including many closely allied taxa; bulbs, bulblets and notes on flower-colour may be needed for their separation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 75. A. sativum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 296 (1753). Bulbs 3-6 cm in diameter, depressed-ovoid, composed of 5-15(-60) bulblets; outer tunics membranous. Stem 25-100(-200) cm. Leaves 6-12, up to 60 cm × 12(-30) mm, linear, flat, keeled, sheathing the lower ½ of the stem. Spathe up to 25 cm, 1-valved, with long beak, caducous. Umbel 2·5-5 cm in diameter, usually with few flowers (which often abort and wither in bud) and many bulbils; pedicels 10-20 mm, unequal. Perianth cup-shaped; segments 3-5 mm, greenish-white, pink, rarely white or purple, smooth, the outer lanceolate, acute, the inner ovate-lanceolate. Stamens included or equalling perianth; outer 3 filaments 6-8 mm, simple or tricuspidate, the inner 3 with the basal lamina broadly oblong, 1·5-2 mm wide and 1/3 as long to about as long as the central cusp, lateral cusps 2 or 4, much longer than the central cusp. {\i Cultivated widely in S. Europe for its bulbs} ({\i garlic}) {\i used for flavouring}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable, and probably derived from{\i  A. longicuspis} Regel from C. Asia. Before anthesis the stem of var.{\i  ophioscorodon} (Link) Döll({\i A. controversum} Schrader,{\i  A. ophioscorodon} Link, {\i A. sativum} subsp.{\i  ophioscorodon} (Link) J. Holub) is coiled in one or two wide loops.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 76. A. ampeloprasum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 294 (1753). Bulbs 2-6 cm in diameter, broadly ovoid or subglobose; outer tunic membranous;
\par

\par
63}
\par