{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 bulblets usually numerous, yellowish. Stem 45-180 cm, stout. Leaves 4-10, up to 50 cm × 5-40 mm, linear, flat, canaliculate, with scabrid margin, sheathing the lower 1/3-1/2 of the stem. Spathe 1-valved, caducous. Umbel 5-9 cm in diameter, globose, usually dense, with up to 500 flowers, but with as few as 30 flowers in variants with bulbils; pedicels 15-50 mm, unequal. Perianth cup-shaped or campanulate; segments 4-5·5 × 1·3-2·4 mm, white, pink or dark red, the outer mostly oblong-lanceolate, concave, subacute, mucronate, the inner mostly narrowly ovate or spathulate, obtuse or rounded at apex, equalling or a little shorter than the outer, both with large papillae especially on the keel. Stamens slightly or distinctly exserted; outer 3 filaments 4-6 mm, usually simple, the lower 1/3 oblong and 0·5-1 mm wide, contracted above, the inner 3 with the basal lamina oblong-elliptical and 1·5-2·5 mm wide, usually at least as wide as the perianth-segments, nearly twice as long as the central cusps. Capsule 4 mm. 2n = 16, 32, 40, 48, 56, 80.{\i  Mainly on disturbed ground. S. & W. Europe.} Al Bl *Br Bu Cr Ga Gr *Hb Hs It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si Tu [Az Co Cz].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable, and probably spread by human activity. Normally the umbel has no bulbils. Var.{\i  babingtonii} (Borrer) Syme ({\i A. babingtonii} Borrer), with few flowers and bulbils 8-15 mm, occurs in W. Ireland and S.W. England; var.{\i  bulbiferum} Syme ({\i A. ampeloprasum} var. {\i bulbilliferum} Lloyd), with bulbils 6-8 mm, occurs in the Channel Islands and W. France (Ile d'Yeu, Vendée); both are possibly relics of former cultivation. The species forms a polyploid series; the nomenclatural type from Steep Holm Island, Bristol Channel, England (var.{\i  holmense} Ascherson & Graebner) has 2n = 48. Variants with white flowers of this and of {\b 81} have been thought to be conspecific with {\i A. leucanthum} C. Koch ({\i A. ampeloprasum} subsp.{\i  leucanthum }(C. Koch) Hayek), an allied species from the Caucasus.{\i  A. scopulicola} Font Quer,{\i  Butll. Inst. Catalana Hist. Nat. }{\b 24}: 144 (1924), from Islas Baleares (Ibiza), is probably conspecific with {\b 76. A. porrum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 295 (1753) ({\i A. ampeloprasum} var.{\i  porrum} (L.) Gay), the cultivated leek, is a cultigen (with 2n = 32) derived from {\b 76} but distinct enough in bulb, life-cycle and chemistry through many centuries of cultivation and selection to be kept apart (cf. B. Bonnet,{\i  Saussurea }{\b 7}: 121-155 (1976)).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 77. A. polyanthum} Schultes & Schultes fil., {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  7}: 1016 (1830). Bulbs 1·5-2 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics membranous; bulblets yellowish. Stem 40-80 cm. Leaves 3-6, 10-25 cm × 3-20 mm, linear, flat, with smooth margin, sheathing the lower ¼ of the stem. Spathe 1-valved, long-beaked, caducous. Umbel 4-8 cm in diameter, subglobose, many-flowered, lax; pedicels up to 40 mm, unequal. Perianth ovoid; segments 4-5 × 1·2-2 mm, narrowly elliptical, pink, the inner wider than the outer, acute or slightly obtuse, scabrid or papillose on keel. Stamens included, variable in length; outer 3 filaments up to 4·5 mm, simple, the inner 3 with the basal lamina much longer than the central cusp, the lateral cusps 2-3 times as long as the central cusp. Capsule c. 3 mm. 2n = 20, 32.{\i  S.W. Europe.} Bl Co Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 78. A. scaberrimum} Serres, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b 4}: 439 (1857). Bulbs small, ovoid; outer tunics membranous; bulblets yellow. Stem 40-80 cm. Leaves usually 4, up to 30 cm × 12 mm, linear, flat, not reaching the umbel, sheathing almost the lower ½ of the stem, the margin denticulate. Spathe caducous. Umbel 3-5 cm in diameter, hemispherical, many-flowered; pedicels up to 25 mm, unequal. Perianth narrowly ovoid; segments 4·5 × 1·5 mm, whitish, narrowly oblong to lanceolate, obtuse, papillose. Stamens slightly exserted; outer 3 filaments 5 mm, subulate, the inner 3 with the basal lamina ciliate and much longer than the central cusp, the lateral cusps much longer than the central cusp; anthers pale yellow. Capsule 3 mm. •{\i  S.E. France }({\i Hautes Alpes, near Gap}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Possibly a naturalized species of uncertain provenance.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 79. A. atroviolaceum} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 1}({\b 7}): 112 (1846). Bulbs 1-2·5 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics membranous, becoming fibrous; bulblets yellowish-brown. Stem 50-120 cm. Leaves 3-6, up to 20 cm × 4-12 mm, flat, with denticulate margin, sheathing the lower 1/3-1/2 of the stem. Spathe 1-valved, long-beaked, caducous. Umbel 3-6 cm in diameter, globose, rarely ovoid; pedicels up to 30 mm, unequal. Perianth cup-shaped; segments 3·5-5 × 1·2-2·5 mm, usually dark purple, rarely paler or greenish-tinged, the outer narrowly ovate, acute, the inner ovate, obtuse, with a few large papillae on the keel. Stamens exserted; outer 3 filaments 4-5 mm, simple, the inner with the basal lamina narrower than the inner perianth-segments and 1½ times as long as the central cusp, the lateral cusps much longer than the central cusp. Capsule 2·5 mm. 2n = 16, 24, 32, 40, 48.{\i  Cultivated ground and dry grassland. S.E. & E.C. Europe.} Bu Cz Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from S. Ukraine have been referred to {\i A. atroviolaceum} var. {\i firmotunicatum} (Fomin) Grossh. ({\i A. firmotunicatum} Fomin), but it is uncertain whether the differential characters are constant.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 80. A. bourgeaui} Rech. fil.,{\i  Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 47}: 150 (1936). Bulbs c. 1·5 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics membranous; bulblets 8-16 mm, yellowish-brown to brown. Stem 45-115 cm. Leaves 4-11, 6-25 mm wide, linear, flat, keeled, with the margin scabrid, sheathing the lower 1/3-1/2 of the stem, withered at anthesis. Spathe 1-valved, quickly caducous, ovate at base, abruptly contracted above into a beak up to 15 cm. Umbel 3-6 cm in diameter, subglobose or hemispherical,many-flowered; pedicels 10-25 mm, almost equal. Perianth cylindrical, campanulate, ellipsoid or ovoid; segments 2·5-5·5 × 1-2·5 mm, cymbiform, the outer mostly lanceolate and acute or obtuse, the inner narrowly oblong and obtuse or truncate. Stamens long-exserted; outer 3 filaments 3·5-4·5 mm, simple, the inner 3 with the basal lamina about twice as long as the central cusp, ciliate; anthers yellow, red or purple. Capsule c. 4 mm.{\i  Cliffs and rocky slopes. S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perianth ellipsoid or ovoid, reddish; outer segments 4-5 mm,
\par
  with small and large papillae especially along keel ........... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b creticum} 
\par
1 Perianth campanulate or cylindrical; outer segments 2·5-4 mm,
\par
  with uniform small papillae
\par
2 Perianth pale green; anthers yellow ............................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b bourgeaui}
\par
2 Perianth purple; anthers purple .................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b cycladicum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b bourgeaui}: Stem 45-90 cm. Umbel 3-5 cm in diameter. Perianth cylindrical, rarely almost campanulate, pale green; outer segments 2·5-4 mm, densely covered with small papillae. Anthers yellow. 2n = 16.{\i  Karpathos, Kasos}.
\par
 ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cycladicum} Bothmer,{\i  Op. Bot.} ({\i Lund}) {\b 34}: 23 (1974): Stem 45-100 cm. Umbel 3-6 cm in diameter. Perianth campanulate to cylindrical, dark purple; outer segments 2·5-4 mm, densely covered with small papillae. Anthers purple. 2n = 16, 24, 32.{\i  E. Peloponnisos, Kikladhes} ({\i Astipalaia}).
\par
 ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b creticum} Bothmer,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}) {\b 12}: 272 (1975): Stem 60-115 cm. Umbel 5-6 cm in diameter. Perianth ellipsoid or ovoid, pink to red; outer segments 4-5 mm, covered with small papillae and also with some larger papillae along the keel. Anthers yellow. 2n = 32. •{\i  Kriti}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 81. A. commutatum} Guss.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Inar. }339 (1854) ({\i A. ampeloprasum} var.{\i  commutatum} (Guss.) Fiori, {\i A. bimetrale}
\par

\par
64}
\par