{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Gand., {\i A. ampeloprasum }subsp. {\i bimetrale} (Gand.) Hayek). Bulbs up to 6 cm in diameter, subglobose; outer tunics membranous or coriaceous, enclosing large yellowish bulblets. Stem up to 180 cm, solid. Leaves 5-11, up to 50 × 5 cm, sheathing the lower 1/4-2/3 of the stem, canaliculate but not keeled, glabrous. Spathe 1-valved, with ovoid base c. 2 cm, abruptly contracted above into a 2-edged beak 16-30 cm, caducous. Perianth ovoid; segments 4 × 1·5 mm, whitish-pink or dull magenta with green or purple keel, the outer lanceolate, acute, strongly concave, the inner narrowly obovate, obtuse, with serrate margin, all covered externally with minute papillae (only visible under microscope). Stamens exserted; outer 3 filaments c. 5 mm, usually tricuspidate with the basal lamina c. 0·5 mm wide, or sometimes simple; inner with the base c. 1 mm wide, the base and the lateral cusps about as long as the central cusp. Capsule c. 4 mm. 2n = 16, 24, 32.{\i  Open habitats near the sea. C. & E. Mediterranean region.} Co Cr Gr It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 82. A. pardoi} Loscos, {\i Trat. Pl. Arag.}{\b  1}: 9 (1876). Bulbs 3-4 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunic membranous, ultimately breaking into parallel fibres; bulblets numerous. Stem c. 90 cm, the apex nodding before anthesis. Leaves 4-5, up to 45 cm × 12 mm, linear, flat, keeled beneath, sheathing the lower 1/3-1/2 of the stem; margin and keel minutely denticulate. Spathe 1-valved, c. 4·5 cm, beaked, caducous. Umbel 3-5 cm in diameter, subglobose or ovoid, many-flowered; pedicels unequal, the longest up to 30 mm. Flowers cylindrical; segments smooth, dull white, with green mid-vein, the outer c. 4·2 mm, lanceolate, the inner 2·8 mm, narrowly ovate, acute. Stamens exserted; outer 3 filaments simple, the inner 3 with the basal lamina slightly longer than the central cusp, the lateral cusps longer than the central cusp; anthers yellow.{\i  Near cultivated land. N.E. Spain} ({\i Teruel and Zaragoza prov}.). *Hs. (?{\i Algeria,} ?{\i Tunisia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Possibly a variant of {\b 76}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 83. A. talijevii} Klokov in Kotov & Barbarich, {\i Fl. RSS Ucr.}{\b  3}: 406 (1950). Bulbs 2·5-3 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics membranous, becoming indistinctly reticulately fibrous; bulblets yellowish. Stem 45-50 cm. Leaves 5-7, 45-50 cm × 5-12 mm, linear, sheathing the lower ¾ of the stem, the uppermost long-overtopping the umbel; margin very scabrid. Spathe caducous. Umbel hemispherical; pedicels 12-25 mm, unequal. Perianth ovoid-campanulate; segments c. 3·5 mm, whitish, the outer oblong-lanceolate, with the keel smooth or slightly scabrid at the apex, the inner oblong-elliptical. Stamens exserted; outer 3 filaments simple, the inner 3 not ciliate. •{\i  S.E. Ukraine} ({\i S.E. of Donetsk}). Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 84. A. baeticum} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 1}({\b 7}): 113 (1846). Bulbs 2-2·5 cm in diameter, narrowly ovoid; outer tunic coriaceous, breaking from above downwards into parallel or partly reticulate fibres elongated into a neck 2·5-9 cm. Stem 30-90 cm. Leaves 3-6, up to 40 cm × 6 mm, flat, usually withered at anthesis, sheathing the lower ½ of the stem. Spathe c. 3 cm, 1-valved, long-beaked, caducous. Umbel 3-6 cm in diameter, hemispherical; pedicels up to 25 mm, unequal. Perianth cylindrical; segments 4-5 × 1·2-2 mm, white, narrowly oblong, obtuse or subacute, usually papillose, particularly on the keel. Stamens included or slightly exserted; outer 3 filaments c. 6 mm, simple, the inner 3 with the basal lamina slightly shorter than or as long as the central cusp. Capsule c. 4 mm. 2n = 32.{\i  Rock-crevices. S. Spain, W.C. Portugal.} Hs Lu. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 85. A. acutiflorum} Loisel. in Desv., {\i Jour. Bot. Rédigé}{\b  2}: 279 (1809). Bulbs 1-1·5 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics membranous or coriaceous, splitting longitudinally. Stem 15-50 cm. Leaves 2-3, 8-20 cm × 1-6 mm, linear, flat, sheathing the lower 1/5-1/3 of the stem; margin minutely denticulate. Spathe up to 2 cm, 1- to 2-valved, shortly beaked, often persistent. Umbel 1·5-5 cm in diameter, hemispherical, many-flowered. Perianth campanulate; segments 6-7·5 × 2 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, purplish, smooth; keel slightly papillose. Stamens included; outer 3 filaments c. 4 mm, simple, very narrowly triangular, the inner 3 with the basal lamina ciliate and much longer than the central cusp, the lateral cusps twice as long as the central cusp; anthers yellowish. Capsule c. 4 mm.{\i  Sandy or rocky ground, mainly near the sea. • S. France, Corse, N.W. Italy. }Co Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 86. A. pyrenaicum} Costa & Vayr. in Costa,{\i  Introd. Fl. Cataluña} ed. 2,{\i  Supl.} 92 (1877). Bulbs 2-3 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics membranous. Stem 55-100 cm. Leaves 5-6, up to 45 cm × 15 mm, linear, flat, keeled beneath, sheathing the lower ¼-½ of the stem; margin minutely denticulate. Spathe c. 7 cm, 1-valved, long-beaked, caducous. Umbel 4-7 cm in diameter, subglobose, many-flowered; pedicels up to 25 mm, almost equal. Perianth narrowly campanulate; segments 7-9 × 2 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, dull white, with green mid-vein, margin minutely serrate; keel scabrid. Stamens included except for their filiform cusps; outer 3 filaments c. 4 mm, simple, very narrowly triangular, the inner 3 with the basal lamina a little longer than the central cusp, the lateral cusps twice as long as the central cusp; anthers brown. Capsule c. 6 mm.{\i  Among rocks,} 900-1200{\i  m. • E. Pyrenees}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 87. A. scorodoprasum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 297 (1753). Bulbs 1-2 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics membranous, sometimes breaking into fibrous strips; bulblets reddish-black. Stem 25-90 cm. Leaves 2-5, up to 27 cm × 20 mm, linear, narrowed at base, flat or canaliculate, solid, sheathing the lower 1/3-1/2 of the stem. Spathe c. 1·5 cm, shortly beaked, deciduous. Umbel 1-5 cm in diameter; pedicels up to 20 mm, unequal. Perianth ovoid; segments lilac to dark purple, the outer 4-6·5 × 1·5-2·5 mm, lanceolate or narrowly ovate, the inner 4-7 × 1·5-3·5 mm, narrowly oblong or ovate, subacute or obtuse, papillose along the keel. Stamens included, usually papillose; outer 3 filaments 2·5-4·5 mm, simple, very narrowly triangular, the inner 3 with the basal lamina 3 or more times as long as the central cusp, the lateral cusps 2-3 times as long as the central cusp; anthers yellow. Capsule c. 5 mm.{\i  Most of Europe, northwards to England and S. Finland, but rare in the south-west.} Au ?Bl Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu [Be Hb].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The following are usually treated as distinct species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Umbel with purplish bulbils and 0-12 flowers, 
\par
  apparently sterile ..................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b scorodoprasum} 
\par
1 Umbel without bulbils, many-flowered, subglobose or
\par
  hemispherical
\par
2 Perianth pinkish or rose-violet; Krym ................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b jajlae}
\par
2 Perianth dark purple
\par
3 Outer perianth-segments dark purple, the inner paler,
\par
  with broad, whitish margin ............................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b rotundum}
\par
3 Outer and inner perianth-segments uniformly dark purple
\par
  ........................................................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b waldsteinii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rotundum} (L.) Stearn,{\i  Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  4}: 178 (1978) ({\i A. rotundum} L.): Leaves 2-10 mm wide. Umbel many-flowered, subglobose or hemispherical, without bulbils. Perianth with outer segments dark purple; inner segments paler, with broad whitish margins and purple median stripe. Capsule c. 5 mm; seeds freely produced. 2n = 16+0-2B, 32, 38+1B, 40+1-4B, 48+1B.{\i  S. Europe, extending northwards to C. Germany, Czechoslovakia and S.C. Ukraine}.
\par

\par
65}
\par