{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b waldsteinii} (G. Don) Stearn,{\i  op. cit. }179 (1978) ({\i A. waldsteinii} G. Don, {\i A. rotundum} subsp. {\i waldsteinii} (G. Don) Soó): Leaves 2-10 mm wide. Umbel subglobose or hemispherical, without bulbils. Perianth with outer and inner segments uniformly dark purple. 2n = 16, 32, 40, 48.{\i  U.S.S.R., northwards to }c. 55°{\i  N., Hungary, E. Romania, N. Jugoslavia, N.E. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b jajlae} (Vved.) Stearn,{\i  loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i A. jajlae} Vved.): Leaves 3-5 mm wide. Umbel many-flowered, subglobose, without bulbils. Perianth uniformly rose-violet. {\i Mountains of Krym} ({\i Nikita Yaila}). ({\i Caucasus.})
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b scorodoprasum}: Leaves 5-20 mm wide. Umbel lax, with 0-12 flowers and numerous purple bulbils. Capsule rarely produced. 2n = 16, 24.{\i  Mainly in N. & C. Europe, but extending locally southwards to Bulgaria and Krym}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Apparently a derivative of subsp. ({\b a}), owing its wide and scattered distribution partly to former cultivation as a culinary plant.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 88. A. albiflorum} Omelczuk,{\i  Ukr. Bol. Zur. }{\b 19}({\b 2}): 19 (1962). Bulbs 1-1·8 cm in diameter; outer tunics membranous; bulblets reddish-brown. Stem 40-70 cm. Leaves 3-4, 2·5-3 mm wide, sheathing the lower ½ of the stem, flat, with scabrid margin. Spathe shortly beaked, caducous. Umbel fastigiate, many-flowered; pedicels of perfect flowers 10-15 mm, ascending, of almost sessile male flowers much shorter. Perianth ovoid; segments white, the outer 4·5 × 1·3 mm, broadly lanceolate, subacute, scabrid on the keel, the inner 5 × 2·5 mm, obovate, obtuse. Stamens included; outer 3 filaments simple, subulate; inner 3 with the basal lamina 3½ times as long as the central cusp, the lateral cusps twice as long as the central cusp. Capsule c. 3·5 mm. •{\i  Mountains of Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Distinguished most readily from {\b 87} by its white flowers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 89. A. pervestitum} Klokov in Kotov & Barbarich,{\i  Fl. RSS Ucr.}{\b  3}: 406 (1950). Bulbs 1-1·8 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics membranous, becoming finely reticulately fibrous; bulblets dark purple or purplish-brown. Stem 35-55 cm. Leaves 3-5, 6-8 mm wide, linear, flat, sheathing the lower 2/3 of the stem; margin scabrid or minutely ciliate. Spathe caducous. Umbel subglobose or fasciculate; pedicels 6-15 mm, unequal. Perianth ovoid-campanulate; segments c. 4 mm, yellowish-white, often tinged with pink, the outer ovate-lanceolate, scabrid on the keel and margin, the inner oblong, smooth. Stamens slightly exserted; outer 3 filaments c. 4 mm, simple, the inner 3 with the basal lamina 3 times as long as the central cusp, the lateral cusps 3 times as long as the central cusp. Capsule c. 3 mm.{\i  Saline marshes. • S. Ukraine} ({\i estuary of the R. Molocnaja, S. of Melitopol'}). Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 90. A. sphaerocephalon} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 297 (1753). Bulbs 1-2 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics membranous or coriaceous, sometimes breaking into parallel fibres; bulblets white or yellowish, acuminate, stalked and enclosed within sheath on lower part of the stem. Stem 5-90 cm. Leaves 2-6, up to 30 cm × 1-4 mm, fistular, semicylindrical, canaliculate, sheathing the lower ¼-½ of the stem. Spathe up to 2 cm, usually 2-valved, shortly beaked, persistent, shorter than the umbel. Umbel 1-6 cm in diameter, usually less than 3 cm, subglobose to very broadly ovoid, sometimes with bulbils; pedicels 2-30 mm, unequal. Perianth cylindrical to narrowly ovoid; segments 3·5-5·5 × 1·2-2·5 mm, pink to dark reddish-purple or white with green or yellowish keel, the outer mostly narrowly ovate or lanceolate, keeled, the inner slightly narrower, obtuse to almost truncate or subacute, papillose or smooth on keel and surface. Stamens exserted; outer 3 filaments 4-7 mm, simple or rarely tricuspidate, the inner 3 with the basal lamina 1-2 times as long as the central cusp, the lateral cusps shorter to longer than the 1·5-3 mm central cusp; anthers reddish before dehiscence. Capsule c. 4 mm.{\i  Cultivated ground and other dry, open habitats. Europe, northwards to Belgium and S.C. Russia}. Al Au Be ?Bl Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu. (N. Africa.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A very variable and plastic species with some local differentiation. Variants with bulbils in the umbel have been named{\b  A. loscosii} K. Richter, {\i Pl. Eur.}{\b 1}: 199 (1890) ({\i A. purpureum} Loscos, non Salisb.).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The following are sometimes treated as distinct species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perianth-segments pink or reddish-purple .......... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b sphaerocephalon}
\par
1 Perianth-segments white with green or yellowish keel
\par
2 Perianth and pedicels smooth ............................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b anense}
\par
2 Perianth and pedicels papillose ..................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b trachypus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sphaerocephalon}: 2n = 16+0-2B.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b arvense} (Guss.) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} 702 (1882) ({\i A. arvense} Guss., {\i A. sphaerocephalum }var. {\i viridi-album} Tineo): {\i C. to E. Mediterranean region}.
\par
 ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b trachypus} (Boiss. & Spruner) Stearn,{\i  Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  4}: 181 (1978):{\i  Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 91. A. proponticum} Stearn & N. Özhatay,{\i  Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  3}: 48 (1977). Bulb 1·5-2·5 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics membranous; bulblets white, acuminate. Leaves 3, up to 35 cm × 7 mm, fistular, semicylindrical, canaliculate, sheathing the lower ½ of the stem. Stem c. 120 cm. Spathe up to 2·5 cm, 2-valved, beaked, persistent. Umbel c. 6·5 cm in diameter, hemispherical, without bulbils; pedicels up to 35 mm, almost equal, papillose towards the apex. Perianth narrowly ovoid; segments pale pinkish-purple, the outer 3·5 × 2 mm, broadly oblong, keeled, the inner 4 × 2·5 mm, ovate, subacute, papillose on keel and surface. Stamens exserted; outer 3 filaments c. 5·5 mm, simple, the inner 3 with the basal lamina 1½ times as long as the central cusp, the lateral cusps longer than the c. 2 mm central cusp. 2n = 16.{\i  Rocky slopes. • Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i near Tekirdag}). Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 92. A. melananthum} Coincy,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i Paris}) {\b 9}: 336 (1895). Bulbs c. 0·8 cm in diameter, narrowly ovoid; outer tunics membranous. Stem 25-60 cm. Leaves 3-4, up to 10 cm or more × 2 mm, filiform, fistular, striate, sheathing the lower 1/5-1/3 of the stem. Spathe up to 0·5 cm, 2-valved, acuminate, persistent. Umbel 1-2 cm in diameter, subglobose, dense; pedicels 2-6 mm. Perianth very broadly ovoid; segments 3-3·5 × 1·5-2 mm, dark purple, the outer narrowly ovate, subacute, the inner oblong, obtuse, concave, strongly papillose. Stamens slightly exserted; outer 3 filaments c. 2·5 mm, simple, narrowly triangular at base, narrowed above, the inner 3 with the basal lamina 2-3 times as long as the central cusp, the lateral cusps slightly longer than the central cusp; anthers purplish. Capsule c. 3 mm. •{\i  S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 93. A. pruinatum} Link ex Sprengel, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 35 (1825) ({\i A. welwitschii} Regel). Bulbs c. 1 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics membranous, becoming split into narrow segments. Stem 20-40 cm. Leaves c. 3, up to 7 cm or more × 0·3 mm or more, filiform, sheathing the lower 1/4-1/3 of the stem, withered at anthesis. Spathe up to 1 cm, 2-valved, shortly beaked, persistent. Umbel 1-2 cm in diameter, hemispherical, rarely with bulbils
\par

\par
66}
\par