{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 (var.{\i  bulbiferum} Coutinho); pedicels 2-15 mm, unequal. Perianth cylindrical; segments 4·5 × 1·5-2 mm, narrowly ovate, acute, purple, papillose on keel. Stamens included; outer 3 filaments simple, subulate, the inner 3 with the broad part twice as long as the central cusp, the lateral cusps more than twice as long as the central cusp; central cusp 0·1 mm; anthers yellowish or reddish. Capsule 3 mm. 2n.= 16.{\i  Dry scrub. • C. & S. Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 94. A. regelianum} A. Becker,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscow}{\b  55}({\b 1}): 146 (1880). Bulbs c. 1 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics membranous; bulblets dark purplish-brown. Stem 33-60 cm. Leaves 3, up to 20 cm × 0·5-2 mm, linear, fistular, many-veined, with minutely denticulate margin, sheathing the lower 1/3-1/2 of the stem. Spathe caducous. Umbel 1·5-2 cm in diameter, hemispherical or ovoid, many-flowered; pedicels unequal, the longest up to 20 mm. Perianth cylindrical; segments c. 4-5 × 1·5 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acute, smooth, purplish. Stamens slightly exserted; outer 3 filaments up to 4 mm, simple, the inner 3 with the basal lamina not ciliate and nearly twice as long as the central cusp, the lateral cusps slightly or much longer than the central cusp. Capsule 2·5-3 mm. •{\i  S. & E. Ukraine, S.E. Russia.} Rs (W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. scythicum} Zoz,{\i  Ucen. Zap. Khar'kovsk. Derz. Univ.}{\b  4}: 65 (1936), reported from steppes in S. Ukraine (E. of Herson), with whitish or pale lilac perianth and the lateral cusps of the inner stamens c. 3 times as long as the central cusp, is doubtfully distinct from {\b 94}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 95. A. vineale} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 299 (1753). Bulbs 1-2 cm, ovoid; outer tunics splitting into strips with parallel fibres; bulblets yellowish. Stem 30-120 cm. Leaves 2-4, 15-60 cm × 1·5-4 mm, sub-cylindrical, fistular, sheathing the lower 1/3-2/3 of the stem. Spathe usually 3 cm or more, 1-valved, caducous, the beak as long as or a little longer than the base. Umbel 2-5 cm in diameter, subglobose, ovoid or hemispherical, many-flowered, and with few or no bulbils, or few-flowered and with several bulbils; pedicels 5-30 mm, unequal. Perianth campanulate; segments 2-4·5 × 1·2-1·5 mm, pink to dark red or greenish-white, the outer narrowly oblong-ovate, subacute or obtuse, very concave, the inner narrowly oblong or almost narrowly obovate, rounded at apex, rarely narrowly oblong-ovate and subacute, smooth. Stamens almost included to distinctly exserted, outer 3 filaments 3·5-4 mm, simple, the inner 3 with the basal lamina slightly or distinctly longer than the central cusp, the lateral cusps much longer than the central cusp, anthers yellow. Capsule 3-3·5 mm. 2n = 16, 32, 40. {\i Dry pastures, cultivated ground and roadsides. Most of Europe except the extreme north and C. & E. Russia.} All except Az Cr Fa Is Rs (N, E) Sb, but doubtfully native in some territories.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A variable species widespread as a weed in cultivated land and its vicinity, with extreme variants of very different aspect. The variant with the flowers completely replaced by bulbils in the umbel has been distinguished as var.{\i  compactum} (Thuill.) Cosson & Germ. ({\i A. compactum} Thuill.), that with bulbils and flowers as var.{\i  typicum} Ascherson & Graebner ({\i A. vineale} L. sensu stricto), and that with flowers but without bulbils as var. {\i capsuliferum} Koch ({\i A. rilaense} Panov,{\i  A. vineale} subsp.{\i  capsuliferum} (Koch) Ceschm.), but all may occur in the same population or only one may be present. A constant variant with dark red flowers, distinguished as var.{\i  purpureum} H.P.G. Koch ({\i A. kochii} Lange), occurs in the Baltic region. Plants from the Balkan peninsula with greenish-white flowers have been named var. {\i virens} Boiss. ({\i A. affine} Boiss. & Heldr., non Ledeb.,{\i  A. assimile} Halácsy).{\b  A. ebusitanum }Font Quer,{\i  Butll. Inst. Catalana Hist. Nat.}{\b  24}: 145 (1924), from Islas Baleares (Ibiza), apparently belongs to this complex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 96. A. amethystinum} Tausch, {\i Syll. Pl. Nov. Ratisbon.} ({\i Konigl. Baier. Bot. Ges.}) {\b 2}: 256 (1828) ({\i A. descendens} auct., non L., {\i A. segetum} Jan ex Schultes & Schultes fil.,{\i  A. stojanovii} Kovatschev). Bulbs 1·5-2 cm in diameter, subglobose; outer tunics membranous; bulblets absent or few, yellowish. Stem 20-120 cm, often reddish in upper part. Leaves 3-7, up to 50 cm × 8 mm, linear, fistular, canaliculate, sheathing the lower 1/4-1/3 of the stem, usually withered at anthesis. Spathe 2-7 cm, 1-valved, long-beaked, caducous. Umbel 2·5-6·5 cm in diameter, subglobose, many-flowered; pedicels 10-25 mm at anthesis, the central ones sometimes up to 50 mm in fruit, often reddish. Perianth cylindrical; segments purple, the outer 3-4·5 × 1-1·8 mm, narrowly oblong or oblong-elliptical, usually longer and narrower than the inner, obtuse or truncate, smooth. Stamens exserted, ciliate below; outer 3 filaments 4·5-6 mm, simple, the inner 3 with the basal lamina slightly wider than the inner segments and shorter than or equalling the central cusp, the lateral cusps 1½ or more times as long as the central cusp. Capsule c. 4 mm. 2n = 16, 24, 32.{\i  Cultivated ground and rocky places. C. & E. Mediterranean region, extending to S.E. Bulgaria.} Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 97. A. guttatum} Steven,{\i  Mém. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  2}: 173 (1809). Bulbs 1-2 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics membranous or coriaceous, sometimes breaking into parallel fibres; bulblets yellowish. Stem 10-90 cm. Leaves 2-5, up to 30 cm × 3 mm, filiform, semi-terete or flattened, fistular, sheathing the lower 1/3-2/3 of the stem. Spathe 1-5 cm, 1-valved, with beak 1·5-4 cm, caducous. Umbel 1·5-5 cm in diameter, subglobose, ovoid or hemispherical, many-flowered; pedicels unequal, the central erect in fruit and up to 30 mm, the outer much shorter and deflexed, thus sometimes forming an apparently double umbel, with large membranous bracteoles at base like an involucre. Perianth cylindrical; segments 2·5-4·5 × 1-1·2 mm, the outer oblong, keeled, obtuse or subacute, the inner narrowly oblong-spathulate, truncate-rounded, smooth. Stamens exserted; outer 3 filaments 3·5-4 mm, simple, the inner 3 with the basal lamina slightly longer than the central cusp, the lateral cusps usually much longer than the central cusp; anthers yellow or dark red. Capsule c. 3 mm.{\i  Dry places. S. Europe.} Al Bu Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  This species comprises three major vicarious populations, distinguishable by flower-colour and with little geographical overlap.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perianth-segments bright pink to deep purple ............ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b dalmaticum}
\par
1 Perianth-segments whitish, apart from keel and purple blotch
\par
2 Penanth-segments with conspicuous suborbicular purple
\par
  blotch ............................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b guttatum}
\par
2 Perianth-segments with green or pink stripe ................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b sardoum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b guttatum} ({\i A. margaritaceum} var. {\i guttatum }(Steven) Gay): 2n = 16.{\i  From the Aegean region to E.C. Ukraine}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sardoum} (Moris) Stearn,{\i  Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  4}: 184 (1978) ({\i A. margaritaceum} Sm., non Moench, {\i A. sardoum} Moris, {\i A. gaditanum} Pérez Lara ex Willk.,{\i  A. confusum} Halácsy): 2n = 16, 32, 48. •{\i  From Portugal to Turkey-in-Europe}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b dalmaticum} (A. Kerner ex Janchen) Stearn, {\i loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i A. dalmaticum} A. Kerner ex Janchen). 2n = 24. •{\i  From Albania and W. Jugoslavia to E. Bulgaria}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 98. A. dilatatum} Zahar., {\i Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  3}: 88 (1977). Bulbs 1·5-2 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics membranous.
\par
67}
\par