{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Stem 25-50 cm. Leaves 3-4, 1-2 mm wide, filiform, fistular, sheathing the lower 1/2-4/5 of the stem, withered at anthesis. Spathe 1-valved, caducous. Umbel 1·5-4 cm in diameter, hemispherical, with 15-35 flowers; pedicels 5-15 mm. Perianth narrowly cylindrical; segments white, with broad green keel, the outer 4 × 0·8-1·4 mm, lanceolate, acute or subacute, the inner 4·5-5 × 0·8-1·6 mm, oblong-spathulate, almost truncate at apex, mucronate, papillose on the keel. Stamens exserted; outer 3 filaments 4·5-5 mm, simple, the inner 3 with the basal lamina nearly 3 times as long as the central cusp, the lateral cusps twice as long as the central cusp; anthers greenish. Capsule 3·5-4 mm.{\i  Rocky places,} 400-800{\i  m. • S.W. Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perhaps best treated as a further subspecies of {\b 97}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 99. A. gomphrenoides} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 1}({\b 7}): 114 (1846). Bulbs 0·6-1 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics reticulately fibrous. Stem 8-24 cm. Leaves 2-3, up to 15 cm × 1 mm, filiform, sheathing the lower 1/6-1/3 of the stem. Spathe up to 1 cm, 2-lobed, short-beaked, persistent. Umbel 1-2 cm in diameter, hemispherical, dense; pedicels 2-8 mm, slightly unequal. Perianth campanulate; segments 5·5-7 × 1·5-2·5 mm, oblong-elliptical, obtuse and emarginate to lanceolate and acute, smooth, pink to deep purple. Stamens included; outer 3 filaments c. 3·5 mm, simple, the inner 3 with the basal lamina c. 3 times as long as the central cusp, the lateral cusps twice as long as the central cusp; anthers pale yellow. Capsule c. 3·5 mm.{\i  S. Greece }({\i S. Peloponnisos, Kithira}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 100. A. jubatum} Macbride,{\i  Contr. Gray Herb.} nov. ser.,{\b  56}: 7 (1918) ({\i A. cristatum} Boiss., non S. Watson). Bulbs c. 1 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics membranous. Stem 30-38 cm. Leaves 2-3, up to 18 cm × 1-2 mm, fistular, semiterete, sheathing the lower 1/3 of the stem. Spathe up to 1 cm, 2- to 3-lobed, persistent. Umbel c. 2 cm in diameter, subglobose, dense, many-flowered; pedicels up to 8 mm, almost equal. Perianth oblong; segments dimorphic, the outer c. 6·5 × 2 mm, purplish, oblong, acute, cymbiform, scabrid on the keel, the inner 7-7·5 × 2·5 mm, whitish, narrowly oblong, the apex almost truncate and with numerous short teeth, papillose outside. Stamens included; outer 3 filaments 3·5 mm, simple, the inner 3 with the basal lamina c. 5 times as long as the central cusp, the lateral cusps more than twice as long as the central cusp; anthers pale yellow. {\i Woods. C. Bulgaria} ({\i near Kalofer}) . Bu. ({\i N.W. Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Not found again in Bulgaria since the original collection.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 101. A. rubrovittatum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} ({\b 2}){\b 13}: 29 (1853). Bulbs 0·5-1 cm in diameter, narrowly ovoid; outer tunics coriaceous. Stem 2·5-20 cm, slightly ribbed. Leaves 3-4, 2·5-15 cm × 2-5 mm, filiform, sheathing the lower 1/3 of the stem. Spathe 2-valved, up to 0·5 cm, shortly beaked, persistent. Umbel 0·8-2 cm in diameter, hemispherical or broadly ovoid, dense, 5- to 30-flowered; pedicels 1-6(-12) mm, unequal. Perianth campanulate; segments 3·5-4 × 1·5 mm, narrowly ovate, obtuse or subacute, strongly papillose, reddish, with a broad white margin. Stamens finally just exserted; outer 3 filaments 3-4 mm, simple, the inner 3 with the basal lamina 3 times as long as the central cusp, the lateral cusps about twice as long as the central cusp; anthers usually dark purple, but sometimes yellow. Capsule c. 3 mm.{\i  Dry, rocky ground. • Kriti, Karpathos.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 102. A. integerrimum} Zahar.,{\i  Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  3}: 90 (1977). Bulbs 0·8-1 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics coriaceous. Stem 30-40 cm. Leaves 3-4, 1-1·5 mm wide, filiform, sheathing the lower 1/4-1/3 of the stem. Spathe shorter than umbel, 2-valved, persistent. Umbel 1-2·5 cm in diameter, subglobose, dense; pedicels 1-12 mm, unequal. Perianth campanulate; segments 4 × 1·5-2 mm, pink, the outer lanceolate, the inner narrowly ovate, inconspicuously papillose, obtuse. Stamens slightly exserted; outer 3 filaments 4·5 mm, simple, the inner 3 with the basal lamina twice as long as the central cusp, the lateral cusps twice as long as the central cusp. Capsule c. 3 mm. •{\i  E. Greece} ({\i Olimbos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 103. A. chamaespathum} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 1}({\b 7}): 113 (1846). Bulbs 1·8-2·5 cm in diameter, ovoid, without bulblets; outer tunics papery, thin. Stem (10-)25-30(-60) cm. Leaves 2-3, up to 30 cm × 4 mm, fistular, canaliculate above, almost withered at anthesis, sheathing the stem up to the umbel. Spathe 2·5-5 cm, 1-valved, beaked, caducous, but often held in place by uppermost leaf. Umbel 3-4·5 cm in diameter, globose or hemispherical; pedicels 10-15 mm, almost equal. Perianth cylindrical; segments 4-4·5 × 1·3-1·8 mm, white or dull green, narrowly oblong, the outer rounded at apex, the inner truncate. Stamens slightly exserted; outer 3 filaments 1·5-2·5 mm, simple, the inner 3 with the basal lamina about twice as long as the central cusp, the lateral cusps as long as or shorter than the central cusp. Capsule c. 5 mm. 2n = 16. Flowering September-October.{\i  Rocky limestone slopes. • S. half of Balkan peninsula, Kriti.} Al Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 104. A. heldreichii} Boiss., {\i op. cit.}{\b  3}({\b 4}): 116(1859). Bulb c. 1 cm in diameter, broadly ovoid; outer tunics membranous, blackish. Stem 20-60 cm. Leaves 2-4, 5-30 cm × 0·5-3 mm, terete, fistular, erect, sheathing the lower 1/4-1/3 of the stem. Spathe 2-valved; valves 1-1·5 cm, unequal, lanceolate, acuminate, persistent. Umbel 2·5-4·5 cm in diameter, globose or hemispherical; pedicels 5-15 mm, unequal. Perianth campanulate; segments c. 10 × 2·5-3 mm, pink, lanceolate, acute, smooth. Stamens included; outer 3 filaments c. 5·5 mm, simple, the inner 3 with the broad base much narrower than the inner perianth-segment and 4 times as long as the central cusp, the lateral cusps 2-3 times as long as the central cusp, ciliate in lower part; anthers yellow. Capsule 4-5 mm. 2n = 16. {\i Among rocks,} 700-2000{\i  m. • Mountains of N. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. MELANOCROMMYUM Webb & Berth. (Sect. {\i Melamprason} F. Hermann). Bulbs subglobose or broadly ovoid; not rhizomatous. Leaves basal, with no above-ground sheath. Stem usually longer than leaves, terete. Spathe shorter than pedicels, becoming 2- to 4-fid, persistent. Perianth usually stellate, with segments ultimately deflexed. Stamens simple. Ovary with 4-8 ovules in each loculus; stigma entire. Seeds angular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 105. A. atropurpureum} Waldst. & Kit., {\i Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  1}: 16 (1800) ({\i A. nigrum} var.{\i  atropurpureum} (Waldst. & Kit.) Vis.). Bulbs 1·5-3 cm in diameter, subglobose; outer tunics membranous. Stem 40-100 cm. Leaves 3-7, 15-35 cm × 10-40 mm, broadly linear. Spathe 2-valved; valves up to 2 cm, ovate, acute. Umbel 3-7 cm in diameter, fastigiate, many-flowered; pedicels 20-40 mm. Perianth stellate at anthesis, later deflexed; segments 7-9 × 1 mm, dark purple, linear, acute. Stamens shorter than perianth-segments; filaments 4-5 mm, connate into an annulus at the base, shortly triangular at base, abruptly narrowed above into a subulate filament; anthers purple. Capsule 6-8 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Cultivated ground and dry, open habitats. • Hungary, Romania and N. & E. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Hu Ju Rm Tu [Au].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 106. A. nigrum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 430 (1762) (incl. {\i A. multibulbosum} Jacq., {\i A. magicum} auct., ? an L.). Bulbs 2·5-3 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics membranous. Stem 60-90 cm. Leaves 3-6, up to 50 × 8 cm, broadly linear. Spathe becoming
\par

\par
68}
\par