{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 2- to 4-fid; valves up to 3 cm, narrowly triangular, acuminate. Umbel 5-10 cm in diameter, hemispherical or fastigiate, many-flowered, very rarely with bulbils; pedicels 25-45 mm. Perianth stellate at anthesis, later deflexed; segments 6-9 × 1·5-3·5 mm, white or pale lilac, with a greenish mid-vein, narrowly oblong-elliptical, obtuse. Stamens shorter than perianth-segments; filaments c. 5 mm, connate into an annulus at base, 1-1·5 mm wide and triangular at base, narrowed above into a subulate or very narrowly triangular filament; anthers yellowish. Capsule 6-8 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Cultivated ground and waste places. S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga †Ge Gr Hs It Ju Lu ?Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [?Au].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. auctum} Omelczuk,{\i  Ukr. Bot. Zur.}{\b  19}({\b 2}): 22 (1962), from Krym, with pinkish-violet perianth, is doubtfully distinct from {\b 106}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 107. A. cyrilli} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  3}: 364 (1828-1829). Bulbs 1-2 cm in diameter, broadly ovoid; outer tunics membranous. Stem 50-60 cm. Leaves 3-5, 20-30 cm × 10-35 mm, all basal, broadly linear. Spathe becoming 2- to 3-fid; valves up to 2 cm, narrowly triangular, acuminate. Umbel 4-7 cm in diameter, hemispherical or fastigiate, many-flowered; pedicels 15-25 mm, almost equal. Perianth cup-shaped at anthesis, later deflexed; segments 6-7 × 1-1·5 mm, white, with broad green median stripe, linear, acute, the apices curving inwards at anthesis. Stamens about as long as perianth-segments; filaments c. 6·5 mm, connate into an annulus at the base, 1·5-2 mm wide and narrowly triangular at base, gradually narrowed above into a subulate, fleshy filament; anthers yellowish. Capsule c. 5 mm.{\i  Cultivated ground. S. & E. Greece; S. Italy. }Gr It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 108. A. decipiens} Fischer ex Schultes & Schultes fil., {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  7}: 1117 (1830). Bulbs 1-1·5 cm in diameter, broadly ovoid; outer tunics membranous. Stem 20-50 cm. Leaves 1-3, up to 25 cm × 2-10 mm, linear. Spathe 2-valved; valves up to 1 cm, broadly ovate. Umbel 2·5-5 cm in diameter, hemispherical or fastigiate, few- to many-flowered; pedicels 10-30 mm, almost equal. Perianth stellate, later deflexed; segments 3·5-4·5 × 1-2 mm, narrowly oblong-elliptical, acute, white or pink. Stamens about as long as perianth-segments; filaments 3·5-4·5 mm, connate into an annulus at base, triangular at base, narrowed above into a subulate filament; anthers yellowish. Capsule c. 3·5 mm. 2n = 16. {\i Steppes and rocky slopes. • S. part of U.S.S.R.} ?Bu Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 109. A. orientale} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 13}): 25 (1853). Bulb c. 1·5 cm in diameter, subglobose; outer tunics membranous. Stem 10-40 cm. Leaves 3-4, up to 40 cm × 5-20 mm, all basal, very narrowly lanceolate to linear, about as long as or longer than the stem. Spathe up to 2 cm, 2- to 4-lobed. Umbel 3-5 cm in diameter, hemispherical, many-flowered; pedicels 1-2·5 cm, almost equal. Perianth stellate, later deflexed; segments 5-9 × 2-2·5 mm, white, with green mid-vein, narrowly lanceolate, obtuse or subacute. Stamens included; filaments 4-5 mm, connate into an annulus at the base, narrowly triangular below, gradually narrowed above into a subulate filament; anthers yellowish. Capsule c. 5 mm.{\i  Doubtfully recorded from S. Jugoslavia }({\i S.E. Makedonija}){\i  but of possible occurrence in E. Aegean region.} ?Ju ?Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. KALOPRASUM C. Koch. Bulbs subglobose, not rhizomatous. Stem about as long as leaves, terete. Leaves basal, with no above-ground sheath. Spathe shorter than pedicels, 2-valved, persistent. Perianth campanulate to stellate; segments erect or deflexed after anthesis. Stamens simple, long-exserted. Ovary with 6-14 ovules in each loculus; stigma entire. Seeds angular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 110. A. caspium} (Pallas) Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 265 (1808). Bulbs 2-4·5 cm in diameter, subglobose; outer tunics membranous. Stem 10-35 cm, stout. Leaves 3-6, 15-25 cm × 0·5-3·5 cm, linear to very narrowly oblong. Spathe 1·2-2·5 cm, much shorter than the umbel, 2-valved, persistent. Umbel 5-20 cm in diameter, globose, hemispherical or fasciculate, lax, many-flowered, up to 10 cm in diameter in fruit; pedicels 30-90 mm, unequal, elongating in fruit. Perianth broadly campanulate; segments 5-10 × 2-3 mm, lilac, tinged with green, the outer lanceolate, the inner narrowly ovate, obtuse or subacute. Stamens long-exserted; filaments c. 11 mm, connate into an annulus at the base; anthers greenish. Capsule c. 5 mm.{\i  Sandy deserts. S.E. Russia}. Rs(E). ({\i S.W. & W.C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 39.     Nectaroscordum}        Lindley
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.T. Stearn. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Bulbous, scapose, perennial herbs, smelling strongly of garlic; bulbs solitary, composed of several scales, tunicate. Leaves basal, linear, with sheathing base, strongly keeled. Flowers in a terminal umbel, at first completely enclosed in a 1-valved spathe. Perianth-segments persistent, free, 3- to 7-veined, the outer 3 oblong, the inner 3 pandurate. Stamens free; anthers dorsifixed, introrse. Ovary semi-inferior, turbinate, 3-locular, with 3 large nectariferous pores on its conical upper surface; ovules numerous. Style gynobasic; stigma entire. Capsule membranous; seeds angled, black.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. siculum} (Ucria) Lindley,{\i  Bot. Reg.}{\b  22}: t. 1913 (1836). Bulb 1·5-3 cm in diameter, subglobose; outer tunics membranous. Leaves 3-4, 30-60 × 1-5 cm. Scape 50-125 cm, terete, covered for the lower 1/3 of its length by an erect sheathing leaf. Spathe 6-7·5 cm, beaked, quickly deciduous. Umbel many-flowered, lax; pedicels 2-7 cm, unequal, curved downwards at anthesis, erect in fruit. Perianth broadly campanulate; segments coriaceous, the outer 14 × 8 mm, obtuse, the inner 16 × 11 mm, abruptly contracted into a cuneate base, slightly apiculate. Stamens included. Capsule 5-7 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Damp or shady woods. S. Europe, eastwards from S. France.} Bu Co Ga It Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b siculum} ({\i Allium siculum} Ucria): Perianth dull greenish-red. •{\i  W. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b bulgaricum} (Janka) Stearn, {\i Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  4}: 104 (1978) ({\i N. bulgaricum} Janka, {\i Allium bulgaricum }(Janka) Prodan, {\i A. meliophilum} Juz., {\i A. dioscoridis} auct., non Sibth. & Sm.): Perianth dull greenish-white tinged with pale pink outside, with green mid-veins, red inside near base. {\i S.E. Europe, from Turkey to Krym}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 40.      Nothoscordum}       Kunth
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.T. Stearn. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Bulbous, scapose perennial herbs, not smelling of onion or garlic. Bulbs composed of several scales, tunicate. Leaves basal, linear, with sheathing bases. Flowers in a terminal umbel at first enclosed within a spathe of 2 bracts connate at base. Perianth-segments connate at base into a short tube, 1-veined. Stamens adnate to lower part of perianth; anthers dorsifixed, introrse. Ovary superior, 3-locular; ovules 4-12 in each loculus. Style terminal; stigma entire. Capsule membranous; seeds angled, black.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. inodorum} (Aiton) Nicholson,{\i  Ill. Dict. Gard.}{\b  3}: 457 (1885) ({\i Allium fragrans} Vent.,{\i  A. odorum} auct. hisp., non L.,
\par

\par
69}
\par