{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. T. striata} Ruiz & Pavón,{\i  Fl. Peruv.}{\b  3}: 72 (1802). Perennial up to 60 cm; rhizome slender, stoloniferous. Leaves up to 5 mm wide, semi-terete. Flowers 1·5-2 mm. Stamens 6, or often 3 by abortion. Fruit 1·5-2 mm, globose, rounded at the base, shortly 3-apiculate, obliquely patent; fruitlets dorsally 3-ribbed. {\i Saltmarshes. Naturalized in W. Portugal.} [Lu.] ({\i S. Africa, America, Australasia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. T. bulbosa} L.,{\i  Mantissa Alt.} 226 (1771). Perennial up to 20 cm or more; stock a fibrous-coated bulb. Leaves up to 4 mm wide, semi-terete. Flowers 1·5-2·5 mm. Stamens 6. Fruit 6-12 mm, ellipsoid-cylindrical, 3-apiculate, ascending or patent. {\i Damp, saline habitats. Mediterranean region and W. Europe, northwards to N.W. France.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa
\par
si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b barrelieri} (Loisel.) Rouy,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  13}: 271 (1912) ({\i T. barrelieri} Loisel.): Flowering in March-May. Pedicels more or less erecto-patent in fruit. 2n = 30, 32. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b laxiflora} (Guss.) Rouy,{\i  op. cit.} 272 (1912) ({\i T. laxiflora }Guss.); Flowering in September-November. Pedicels ascending in fruit, more or less appressed to the rhachis. 2n = 18.{\i  Throughout much of the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp. {\b bulbosa} is confined to southern Africa.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 176.    LILAEACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. S.M. Walters. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aquatic or marsh herbs; stems short. Leaves basal, alternate, linear, sheathing at the base. Flowers hermaphrodite or unisexual, ebracteate, mostly in long-pedunculate spikes but others solitary and axillary at the base of the plant. Stamen 1; anther subsessile, opening by longitudinal slits. Carpel 1, with 1 ovule. Fruit achenial; seed without endosperm; embryo straight.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.      Lilaea}         Humb.& Bonpl.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual. Leaves subterete. Spicate flowers polygamous, the lowest ones female, the upper ones hermaphrodite and male; solitary basal flowers female. Perianth of 1 segment in the hermaphrodite and male flowers, absent in the female flowers. Style short or more or less elongated in the spicate flowers, very much elongated and filiform in the solitary basal flowers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 1. L. scilloides} (Poiret) Hauman, {\i Fac. Fil. Letras Buenos Aires Publ. Inst. Invest. Geogr.}{\b  10}: 26 (1925). Leaves up to 60 cm × 4 mm, obtuse. Spikes many-flowered, dense. Fruit in spicate flowers longitudinally 2-winged and ribbed, in solitary basal flowers unwinged.{\i  Marshes and mud-flats. Naturalized in W. Portugal} ({\i near Aveiro}). [Lu.] ({\i North and South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 177.   POTAMOGETONACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.H. Valentine. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aquatic herbs, submerged or with floating leaves, occasionally subterrestrial. Stems elongated. Leaves alternate or opposite (rarely in whorls of 3), sheathing at the base. Flowers hermaphrodite, ebracteate, in pedunculate spikes. Perianth of 4 unguiculate, sepaloid segments. Stamens 4, adnate at the base to the perianth-segments; anthers sessile, opening by longitudinal slits. Carpels (1-)4, free or shortly connate at the base, 1-ovulate; styles usually short. Fruitlets drupaceous or achenial. Seeds without endosperm; embryo unciform or spiral (coiled more than 1 complete turn).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves all opposite or rarely in whorls of 3; fruitlets
\par
  achenial ................................................................................... {\b 2. Groenlandia}
\par
1 Leaves alternate, or the involucral ones subopposite;
\par
  fruitlets drupaceous ............................................................... {\b 1. Potamogeton}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.       Potamogeton}        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.E. Dandy. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves alternate, or the involucral ones subopposite; sheaths adnate to the leaf-base, ligulate, or free from the leaf-base and stipuliform. Carpels (1-)4, free or shortly connate at the base. Fruitlets drupaceous, with bony endocarp and softer exocarp; embryo unciform or spiral.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Hybridization is frequent within each of the two subgenera, but does not occur between them, their methods of pollination being different. With the exception of {\i P.} × {\i zizii} ({\b 5} ×{\b  6}), which often bears well-formed fruitlets, all the hybrids are sterile, entirely without fruit or with occasional malformed fruitlets. The hybrids frequently form vigorous, persistent clonal populations, and, especially in rivers and canals, may become dispersed over long distances by means of vegetative winter-buds or detached fragments. As the hybrids show varying degrees of intermediacy between the parent species it is not practicable to include them in the key, but some of the more frequent are mentioned in the text and others are included in the index; the distinguishing features of most of them are given by J. E. Dandy in C. A. Stace,{\i  Hybridization and the Flora of the British Isles} 444-459. London. 1975.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The floating leaves which occur in some of the species and hybrids are always petiolate, with an expanded lamina which is usually opaque but occasionally translucent. Some of the floating-leaved species and hybrids can grow subterrestrially in dried-up situations or in {\i Sphagnum}-bogs, in which case the floating leaves become aerial.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\i Potamogeton} species are found in a wide variety of fresh-water habitats - in deep or shallow water, stagnant to fast-flowing; a few species, especially those of Subgen. Coleogeton, can flourish also in brackish water. Some of the species are more or less restricted to base-rich water, but the majority are tolerant of a considerable range of water conditions. The broad-leaved species (Sect. Potamogeton) vary greatly in the size and shape of the
\par

\par
7}
\par