{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Nothoscordum fragrans} (Vent.) Kunth). Bulb c. 1·5 cm in diameter, ovoid; outer tunics membranous. Leaves 20-40 cm × 4-10 mm. Scape 30-60 cm, terete. Spathe shorter than umbel, persistent. Umbel up to 4 cm in diameter, fastigiate, with 10-15 fragrant flowers, lax; pedicels 2-6 cm, unequal. Perianth 10-15 mm, infundibuliform, white above, with pink mid-vein, greenish beneath; segments c. 4 mm wide, oblanceolate, obtuse. Stamens included; filaments 7-10 mm, simple; anthers dark brown. Capsule c. 6·5 mm, obovoid. 2n = 18.{\i  Naturalized locally in cultivated ground in S.W. Europe.} [Az Ga H Lu Si.] ({\i Warm temperate South America; widely naturalized elsewhere.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 41.         Ipheion}      Rafin.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, bulbous, scapose perennial herbs. Leaves linear. Scape 1-flowered; spathes 2, connate below; pedicel not articulated. Perianth rotate-infundibuliform; lobes somewhat longer than the tube. Stamens included, 3 inserted near base of perianth-tube, 3 higher up; anthers dorsifixed, introrse. Stigma small, obscurely 3-lobed. Fruit a loculicidal capsule; seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. I. uniflorum} (R. C. Graham) Rafin.,{\i  Fl. Tellur.}{\b  2}: 12 (1837). Plant smelling of garlic. Bulb c. 25 × 10 mm, narrowly ovoid, white; roots fleshy, contractile. Leaves 20-35 cm × 5-8 mm (including 6-8 cm underground), obtuse, somewhat keeled and channelled, flaccid. Scape 25-35 cm (including pedicel and underground part), slender. Spathes 25-30 mm, scarious. Pedicel 3-5 cm. Perianth-tube 15 mm, obconical, dull purple tinged with green; perianth-lobes 20 × 9-12 mm, imbricate, white or violet-blue; abaxial surface with a dark purple stripe and, in the outer segments, tinged with green.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and locally naturalized in W. Europe.} [Br Ga.] ({\i Argentina, Uruguay}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 42.         Convallaria}     L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J. Ponert. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, scapose, perennial herbs with a creeping, branched rhizome. Leaves arising from the rhizome, but with convolute, sheathing bases which simulate a leafy stem; each such stem consists of c. 5 scales and 1-4 foliage-leaves. Inflorescence racemose; pedicels usually deflexed. Flowers white or pink. Perianth more or less campanulate, the segments usually connate for about 2/3 of their length. Stamens usually 6; anthers attached near the base, introrse. Style simple. Fruit a berry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: J. Ponert,{\i  Biosistematiceskaja Monografija Roda} Convallaria {\i L. s. str.} Leningrad. 1968.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. majalis} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }314 (1753). Stems up to 37 cm, with green or violet scales. Leaf-sheaths 1-24 cm; lamina 3-22 × 0·5-10·5 cm, acute or acuminate, pruinose above. Bracts shorter than pedicels. Flowers fragrant, nodding. Perianth 5-9(-11) × (5-)8-11 mm, white or pink; buds ellipsoid. Fruit red; seeds 2-6. 2n = 38.{\i  Woods, scrub and mountain meadows. Most of Europe except the extreme north and parts of the south. Cultivated for ornament, perfume, and as a medicinal plant.} Al Au Be Br Bu ?Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Polymorphic; plants with violet, patent-deflexed scales and a pink perianth are relatively common in parts of C. & E. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b C. transcaucasica} Utkin ex Grossh., {\i Fl. Kavk.}{\b  1}: 242 (1928), described from the Caucasus, with pyriform or truncate-pyramidal flower-buds, may occur in parts of S.E. Europe; further study is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 43.       Maianthemum}     Weber
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.H. Valentine. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial, with creeping rhizome. Stems erect, with 2 scale leaves at the base and 2 foliage leaves near the apex. Leaves alternate. Inflorescence a terminal raceme. Flowers white; pedicels slender, articulated. Perianth of 4 free, patent segments. Stamens 4, shorter than perianth; anthers dorsifixed, introrse. Ovary 2-locular with 2 ovules in each loculus. Fruit a berry; seeds 1-3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. bifolium} (L.) F. W. Schmidt,{\i  Fl. Boëm.}{\b  4}: 55 (1794). Stem 5-20(-25) cm. Leaves 4-6(-8) × 2·5-5 cm, cordate with wide sinus, ovate, acute. Inflorescence 1-4 cm, with 15-20 flowers. Perianth-segments 2-3 mm. Style equalling ovary. Berry c. 5 mm, red, usually 1-seeded. 2n = 36.{\i  On humus-rich soils in woods and other shady places; somewhat calcifuge. Europe southwards to N. Spain, N. Appennini, S. Carpathians and Krym.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 44.      Smilacina}       Desf.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.H. Valentine. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizomatous perennials with leafy stems. Leaves sessile, amplexicaul. Inflorescence a terminal raceme. Flowers small, white. Perianth-segments 6, patent, stellate, free or connate only at the base. Stamens introrse, inserted at the base of the perianth. Ovary 3-locular with 2 ovules in each loculus. Fruit a berry; seeds 1-2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. stellata} (L.) Desf.,{\i  Ann. Mus. Hist. Nat. }({\i Paris}){\b  9}: 52 (1807). Stems 30-60 cm, unbranched. Inflorescence relatively short and lax, with up to 20 flowers. Perianth-segments c. 5 mm, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate. Berry dark red; remains of style persistent.{\i  Shady places. Cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized in S. Fennoscandia.} [No Su.] ({\i North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b   45.       Streptopus}       Michx
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.H. Valentine. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbaceous, rhizomatous perennials. Stems leafy. Inflorescence 1- to 2-flowered; flowers small, extra-axillary; pedicels slender, strongly recurved near the middle. Perianth campanulate; segments 6, slightly connate at base. Stamens inserted at base of perianth. Style 3-fid. Ovary ovoid, 3-locular. Fruit a many-seeded berry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. amplexifolius} (L.) DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  3}: 174 (1805). Stems 40-100 cm, rather stout below, branched above. Lower leaves 7-12 × 3-6 cm, decreasing somewhat in size from the base, oblong-ovate, cordate, amplexicaul, glabrous. Pedicels up to 5 cm. Perianth-segments up to 1 cm, lanceolate, greenish-white. Filaments very short. Style c. 5 mm, scarcely divided at the apex. Berry red.{\i  Damp woods and scrub. Mountains and hill-country of C. & S. Europe, from C. Germany and S.C. Poland southwards to N. Spain, S. Italy and S.W. Bulgaria.} Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 46.    Polygonatum}        Miller 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By R.A. DeFilipps. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials with stout, creeping rhizome. Stem simple, usually arching. Leaves alternate or verticillate, entire, usually glaucous beneath. Flowers usually hermaphrodite, pendent, greenish- or yellowish-white, solitary to several on axillary peduncles. Perianth tubular to campanulate, with 6 short lobes puberulent at the apex. Stamens 6, included, adnate to the perianth-tube,
\par

\par
70}
\par