{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 anthers basifixed. Ovary superior, 3-locular; placentation axile; style linear. Fruit a small, globose, several-seeded berry.
\par
Width of the perianth is measured at the middle of the tube.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Middle and upper leaves in whorls, linear to narrowly 
\par
  oblong ....................................................................................... {\b 1. verticillatum}
\par
1 Leaves alternate, broadly lanceolate, elliptical, oblong or ovate 
\par
2 Leaves minutely puberulent on the veins beneath
\par
3 Upper part of stem and peduncles sparsely puberulent;
\par
  perianth 10-18(-25) × 4-7 mm ...................................................... {\b 2. latifolium}
\par
3 Stem and peduncles glabrous; perianth 8-12 × 2-3 mm ................ {\b 3. orientale} 
\par
2 Leaves glabrous
\par
4 Peduncles in the lower ½ of the inflorescence with 
\par
  2-6 flowers; flowers not scented; perianth somewhat contracted
\par
   in the middle; stem terete ......................................................... {\b 4. multiflorum}
\par
4 Peduncles usually with 1-2 flowers; flowers scented;
\par
  perianth not contracted in the middle; stem angled ....................... {\b 5. odoratum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. verticillatum} (L.) All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem.}{\b  1}: 131 (1785). Stem 20-80 cm, angled, glabrous, rarely sparsely puberulent. Middle and upper leaves 40-150 × 3-25 mm, in whorls of 3-8, linear, narrowly elliptical, narrowly lanceolate or narrowly oblong, glabrous above, minutely puberulent on the veins beneath, sessile or shortly petiolate. Peduncles with 1-2 flowers, glabrous. Flowers not scented; perianth 5-10 × 1·5-3 mm, somewhat contracted in the middle; filaments sparsely puberulent. Fruit red, becoming dark purple. 2n = 28. {\i Woods, scrub and rocky ground. From Arctic Norway southwards to N. Spain, C. Italy and S.W. Bulgaria and eastwards to} c. 26° {\i E. in Latvia and Romania.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. latifolium} (Jacq.) Desf., {\i Ann. Mus. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Paris}){\b  9}: 50 (1807). Stem 20-100 cm, angled, sparsely puberulent above. Leaves 70-125 × 30-70 mm, alternate, elliptical, lanceolate or ovate, glabrous above, sparsely and minutely puberulent on the veins beneath, shortly petiolate. Peduncles with 1-5 flowers, puberulent. Flowers not scented; perianth 10-18(-25) × 4-7 mm, not contracted in the middle; filaments glabrous or sparsely puberulent. Fruit bluish-black. 2n = 20.{\i  Woods. E.C. & S.E. Europe, extending to N.E. Italy and to} c. 51°{\i  N. in S.C. Russia.} ?Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. orientale} Desf., {\i loc. cit.} (1807) ({\i P. polyanthemum} Link). Like {\b 2} but stem and peduncles glabrous; perianth 8-12 × 2-3 mm.{\i  Mountain woods. Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus, Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. multiflorum} (L.) All., {\i Fl. Pedem.}{\b  1}: 131 (1785). Stem 30-80 cm, terete, glabrous. Leaves 50-150 × 20-75 mm, alternate, elliptical, lanceolate, oblong or ovate, glabrous, sessile or shortly petiolate. Peduncles in lower ½ of inflorescence with 2-6 flowers, glabrous. Flowers not scented; perianth 9-20 × 2-4 mm, somewhat contracted in the middle; filaments sparsely puberulent. Fruit bluish-black. 2n = 18, 32.{\i  Woods and scrub; calcicole. Much of Europe, but absent from parts of the south-west, extreme east, and many islands.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variants which are usually dioecious (var.{\i  broteri }(Guss.) Baker) occur in the Mediterranean region.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The hybrid {\b 4} × {\b 5} ({\b P}. × {\b hybridum} Brügger,{\i  Jahresb. Naturf. Ges. Graubündens} {\b 29}: 160 (1886) ({\i P. intermedium} Boreau, non Dumort.)) is more or less intermediate between the parents and is sometimes fertile. It is the {\i Polygonatum} most often cultivated in gardens, and has been recorded from numerous stations in N. & W. Europe as a garden escape.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. odoratum} (Miller) Druce, {\i Ann. Scott. Nat. Hist.}{\b  1906}: 226 (1906) ({\i P. officinale} All.,{\i  P. pruinosum} Boiss.). Stem 15-65 cm, angled, glabrous. Leaves 30-145 × 11-85 mm, alternate, elliptical, lanceolate, oblong or ovate, glabrous, sessile or shortly petiolate. Peduncles with 1-2(-5) flowers, glabrous. Flowers scented; perianth 12-30 × 4-9 mm, not contracted in the middle; filaments glabrous. Fruit bluish-black. 2n = 20.{\i  Woods and rocky ground; somewhat calcicole. Europe, northwards to} 66° {\i N. in Finland, but absent from most of the islands.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 47.       Paris}       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, rhizomatous perennial herbs. Stem long, erect, bearing at the apex a whorl of (3-)4-8 obovate, acuminate leaves. Flowers solitary. Sepals 4-6, lanceolate, green. Petals 4-6, linear-subulate, yellowish-green. Stamens 6-10; filaments short, flat; anthers linear, about as long as the filaments, with a long connective. Styles 4(-5). Fruit a berry-like capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. quadrifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 367 (1753). Rhizome creeping, covered with scales. Stems 10-40 cm. Leaves 5-16 cm, obovate, cuneate at base, shortly petiolate, with 3-5 prominent veins and reticulate veins between. Sepals and petals 2-3·5 cm. Fruit globose, subglaucous-black, finally dehiscent. 2n = 20. {\i Woods and other damp or shady places. Most of Europe but rare in the Mediterranean region.} Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 48.       Asparagus}       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By B. Valdés. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizomatous perennials with usually fusiform tubers. Stems sometimes overwintering. Cladodes fasciculate or solitary, in the axils of reduced, scarious leaves; leaves usually with a spiny basal spur. Pedicels articulate, usually bracteolate at the base. Perianth campanulate to rotate, the 6 segments shortly connate at the base. Stamens 6, inserted at the base of the perianth-segments; anthers usually about as long as filaments. Fruit a globose berry, with 1-6 seeds.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The length of the spur refers to leaves on the main stem. The number of cladodes in a fascicle refers to those on the primary branches. Size of perianth-segments in dioecious species refers to male plants.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: A. Bozzini,{\i  Caryologia}{\b  12}: 199-264 (1959).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Cladodes more than 5 mm wide, leaf-like .............................. {\b 1. asparagoides} 
\par
1 Cladodes less than 2 mm wide, not leaf-like
\par
2 Spur 5 mm or more, strongly spiny, patent ........................................ {\b 2. albus}
\par
2 Spur less than 5 mm, scarcely spiny, appressed to erectopatent 
\par
3 Cladodes strongly triquetrous, with three acute ribs ................ {\b 6. verticillatus} 
\par
3 Cladodes not triquetrous
\par
4 Cladodes strongly spiny; stems woody
\par
5 Base of pedicels with 0-2 small bracteoles; cladodes in
\par
  fascicles of 1-3 .............................................................................. {\b 5. stipularis}
\par
5 Base of pedicels surrounded by bracteoles; cladodes in 
\par
  fasicles of 3-30(-50)
\par
6 Cladodes subequal, less than 10 mm, in fascicles of
\par
  (5-)10-30(-50) ............................................................................. {\b 3. acutifolius}
\par
6 Cladodes distinctly unequal, usually more than 10 mm,
\par
  in fascicles of 3-7 ........................................................................... {\b 4. aphyllus} 
\par
4 Cladodes not strongly spiny; stems herbaceous
\par
7 Pedicels not more than 3 mm ................................................... {\b 7. bresleranus}
\par
7 Pedicels more than 3 mm
\par

\par
71}
\par