{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 8 Anthers 0·4-0·5 mm, 1/4-1/6 as long as filaments;
\par
  cladodes less than 0·2 mm wide ............................................... {\b 15. tenuifolius}
\par
8 Anthers 0·7-1·6 mm, about as long as filaments;
\par
  cladodes more than 0·2 mm wide
\par
9 Stem and branches smooth to slightly striate
\par
10 Stem flexuous; branches patent to deflexed; cladodes patent ..... {\b 8. persicus}
\par
10 Stem straight; branches and cladodes usually erecto-patent
\par
11 Spur (0·5-)1-3(-4) mm; cladodes usually less than 0·5
\par
   mm wide; pedicels usually articulate near the middle ............. {\b 13. officinalis}
\par
11 Spur c. 0·5 mm; cladodes 0·5-1 mm wide; pedicels 
\par
   articulate in the upper part ............................................................ {\b 12. litoralis}
\par
9  Stem and branches with longitudinal ridges of cartilaginous
\par
   papillae
\par
12 Pedicels distinctly longer than cladodes; flowers mixed
\par
   with the cladodes ................................................................. {\b 14. pseudoscaber}
\par
12 Pedicels shorter than cladodes; flowers often not mixed
\par
   with the cladodes
\par
13 Pedicels not more than ¼ as long as cladodes;
\par
   cladodes 0·7-1 mm wide, cylindrical .................................. {\b 10. kazakstanicus}
\par
13 Pedicels more than ½ as long as cladodes; cladodes
\par
   0·3-0·8 mm wide, somewhat flattened
\par
14 Stem flexuous; cladodes 4·5-10(-20) mm .......................... {\b 9. brachyphyllus}
\par
14 Stem ± straight; cladodes mostly 10-30 mm .......................... {\b 11. maritimus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Myrsiphyllum} (Willd.) Baker. Hermaphrodite. Spur very reduced. Cladodes wide, leaf-like, solitary, unarmed. Perianth campanulate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. asparagoides} (L.) Druce,{\i  Rep. Bot. Exch. Club Brit. Is.}{\b  3}: 414 (1914) ({\i A. medeoloides} (L. fil.) Thunb.). Stem up to 150 cm, twining, smooth to slightly ridged. Branches patent or deflexed. Cladodes (15-)20-30(-35) × (6-)8-15(-20) mm, patent, ovate-lanceolate, acute. Pedicels (4-)5-7(-8·5) mm, articulate in the upper part. Nodes with 1-3(-4) flowers. Perianth-segments (4·5-)5-6(-7) mm. Anthers 1/6-1/3 as long as filaments. Berry 6-8 mm, reddish, with 1-4(-6) seeds.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and naturalized locally in S. Europe}. [Az Lu Si.] ({\i S. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Asparagopsis} (Willd.) Baker. Hermaphrodite. Spur strongly spiny, patent. Cladodes fasciculate, unarmed, deciduous. Perianth rotate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. albus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }314 (1753). Stem up to 90 cm, woody. Stem and branches flexuous, smooth to very slightly striate, white. Spur 5-12(-16) mm. Cladodes 5-25 × 0·5-1·5 mm, in fascicles of 10-20. Pedicels 3-5(-7) mm, articulate below the middle. Nodes with (2-)6-15(-20) flowers. Perianth-segments 2-3 mm. Berry 4-7 mm, black, with 1-2 seeds. 2n = 20.{\i  Hedges and scrub. W. & C. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Bl Co Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Asparagus.} Dioecious. Spur appressed to erectopatent, sometimes absent. Cladodes narrow, fasciculate to solitary, unarmed or spiny. Perianth campanulate to rotate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. acutifolius} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 314 (1753). Stem up to 200 cm, woody, white or grey. Stem and branches longitudinally striate, papillose or almost smooth. Cladodes 2-8(-10) × 0·3-0·5 mm, subequal, in fascicles of (5-)10-30(-50), patent, strongly spiny. Pedicels 3-7(-8) mm, surrounded by bracteoles at the base. Nodes with (1-)2-4 flowers mixed with the cladodes. Perianth-segments 3-4 mm. Berry 4·5-7·5(-10) mm, black, with 1-2 seeds. 2n = 40.{\i  S. Europe, eastwards to Kriti and S.E. Bulgaria.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Widely eaten as a vegetable although not cultivated.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The cladodes are generally shorter in populations from the western than from the eastern part of the Mediterranean region. Plants from coastal areas, mainly from the islands, are sometimes only slightly woody and have thin, scarcely spiny cladodes (var.{\i  gracilis} Baker).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. aphyllus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 314 (1753). Stem up to 100 cm, woody, green. Stem and branches smooth or papillose-scabrid. Cladodes (5-)10-20(-30) mm, distinctly unequal, in fascicles of 3-7, patent, strongly spiny. Pedicels 2·5-5 mm, surrounded by bracteoles at the base. Nodes with 3-6(-9) flowers mixed with the cladodes. Perianth-segments (2·5-)3-4 mm. Berry c. 8 mm, black, with 1-3 seeds. 2n = 40.{\i  Mediterranean region, Portugal and N.W. Spain.} ?Co Cr Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. stipularis} Forskål,{\i  Fl. Aegypt.} 72 (1775) ({\i A. horridus} L. fil.). Stem up to 60 cm, woody. Stem and branches with numerous smooth to papillose ridges. Cladodes (10-)15-30(-60) mm, solitary or in fascicles of 2-3, patent, strongly spiny. Pedicels 1-3(-5) mm, with 0-2 bracteoles at the base. Nodes with 2-6(-8) flowers mixed with the cladodes. Perianth-segments 3·5-4 mm. Berry 5·5-8 mm, with 1-4 seeds. 2n = 20.{\i  Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} Bl Cr Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. verticillatus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 450 (1762). Stem up to 250 cm. Branches patent or deflexed, strongly sulcate, smooth to papillose. Cladodes (10-)20-50(-60) × 0·5-1·2 mm, in fascicles of (1-)10-20(-30), strongly triquetrous, papillose on the margins. Pedicels 1·5-5 mm. Nodes with (1-)2-10(-20) flowers mixed with the cladodes. Perianth-segments 2-3·5 mm. Berry 5·5-8 mm, black, with 1-3 seeds.{\i  S.E. Europe.} Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In populations from the Balkan peninsula the stems, branches and cladodes are covered with longish cartilaginous papillae.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. bresleranus} Schultes in Schultes & Schultes fil., {\i Syst. Veg. }{\b 7}: 323 (1829). Stem up to 50 cm, herbaceous, flexuous. Branches flexuous. Cladodes (5-)10-20 × 0·5-1·5 mm, very unequal, in fascicles of (1-)3(-6), patent, terete, spiny. Pedicels 1-3 mm, articulate below the perianth. Nodes with (1-)2 flowers. Perianth-segments 3·5-5 mm. Berry 6-7 mm, black, with 1-2 seeds.{\i  S.E. Russia.} Rs (E). ({\i S.W. & S.C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. persicus} Baker, {\i Journ. Linn. Soc. London }({\i Bot}.){\b  14}: 603 (1875). Stem up to 200 cm, herbaceous, flexuous, smooth. Branches flexuous, patent or deflexed, smooth. Cladodes 10-40 (-55) × 0·3-0·8 mm, in fascicles of 1-6(-8), flattened to terete, slightly falcate. Pedicels 3-10 mm. Nodes with 1-2(-4) flowers. Berry 5-7 mm, red, with 1-3 seeds. {\i Saline and calcareous soils. S.E. Russia }({\i Volga delta}), {\i W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E). ({\i W.& C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. brachyphyllus} Turcz.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  13}: 78 (1840) ({\i A. pallasii} Miscz., {\i A. trichophyllus} auct. ross., non Bunge). Stem up to 80 cm, striate-papillose. Cladodes 4·5-10(-20) mm, in fascicles of 3-5(-10), ascending, falcate. Pedicels (4-)5-10 mm. Nodes with 2 flowers, usually not mixed with the cladodes. Perianth-segments 4-6 mm. Berry 4·5-7 mm, red. 2n = 40.{\i  Calcareous and saline soils. S. part of U.S.S.R., E. Romania.} Rm Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. kasakstanicus} Iljin in Komarov, {\i Fl. URSS}{\b  4}: 747 (1935). Stem up to 70 cm, herbaceous. Stem and branches longitudinally striate-papillose. Cladodes 20-40(-60) × 0·7-1 mm, in fascicles of 3-6, terete. Pedicels 4-6 mm. Nodes with 2-4 flowers mixed with the cladodes. Perianth-segments 5-6 mm. Berry 6-8 mm,
\par

\par
72}
\par