{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 red, with 3-4 seeds.{\i  Calcareous soils. S.E. part of U.S.S.R., Krym.} Rs (K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. maritimus} (L.) Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 2 (1768) ({\i A. scaber} Brignoli, {\i A. levinae} Klokov). Stem up to 100 cm, herbaceous, erect. Stem and branches longitudinally striate-papillose. Cladodes (5-)10-30(-50) × 0·3-0·8 mm, in fascicles of (3-)4-7(-11), ascending to patent, somewhat flattened. Pedicels (4·5-)6-10(-12) mm. Nodes with (1-)2(-4) flowers usually not mixed with the cladodes. Perianth-segments 4-6 mm. Berry (5-)6-12(-13) mm, red, with 2-6 seeds. 2n = 40.{\i  Sandy soils, mainly near the coast. Mediterranean region and S.E. Europe.} Al ?Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rs (W, K) Sa ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. litoralis} Steven, {\i Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  30}({\b 3}): 92 (1857). Stem up to 60 cm, herbaceous, straight, smooth. Branches patent to ascending, smooth. Spur c. 0·5 mm. Cladodes (5-) 15-30 × 0·5-1 mm, in fascicles of 4-8(-10), flattened. Pedicels 7-12 mm. Nodes with 1-4 flowers usually mixed with the cladodes. Perianth-segments 5-6·5 mm. Berry 5-7 mm, red.{\i  Coastal rocks. • Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Doubtfully distinct from {\b 13}({\b a}); further information is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. A. officinalis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 313 (1753) ({\i A. tenuifolius} auct., non Lam.). Herbaceous. Stem and branches smooth. Spur (0·5-)1-3(-4) mm. Cladodes in fascicles of 4-15(-25), somewhat flattened to filiform, usually appressed. Nodes with (1-)2(-3) flowers. Perianth-segments (4-)4·5-6·5(-10) mm. Berry 6-10 mm, red, with (1-)2-4(-6) seeds.{\i  Most of Europe, northwards to S.E. Ireland and S. Denmark; widely cultivated as a vegetable and naturalized within its native range and further north.} ?Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Si *Su Tu [Fe No Rs (B) Sa].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A very polymorphic species. The following two subspecies can be recognized:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b officinalis} ({\i A. polyphyllus} Steven, {\i A. caspicus} Hohen.): Stem 40-200 cm, erect, with long internodes. Cladodes (5-)10-25(-30) mm. Pedicels (6·5-)10-20(-25) mm. Flowers rarely mixed with the cladodes. 2n = 20. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b prostratus} (Dumort.) Corb., {\i Nouv. Fl. Normand.} 568 (1894): Stem 10-30( 40) cm, decumbent, with short internodes. Cladodes 5-10 mm. Pedicels 2-6(-8) mm. Flowers often mixed with the cladodes. 2n = 40.{\i  Maritime sands and coastal rocks. • Coasts of W. Europe, from N. Spain to S.E. Ireland and N.W. Germany}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. pseudoscaber} Grec.,{\i  Consp. Fl. Roman. }556 (1898). Stem up to 200 cm, herbaceous, erect. Stem and branches longitudinally striate-papillose. Cladodes 5-15(-20) × 0·2-0·5 mm, in fascicles of 10-20(-25), smooth to slightly scabrid. Pedicels (7-)10-26 mm, longer than cladodes. Nodes with 1-2(-4) flowers mixed with cladodes. Perianth-segments 4-6 mm. Berry 7-11 mm, red, with 1-4 seeds.•{\i  From N.E. Jugoslavia to W. Ukraine.} ?Bu Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. A. tenuifolius} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 294 (1783). Stem up to 100 cm, herbaceous, erect. Stem and branches smooth. Cladodes 10-25(-30) × 0·1-0·2 mm, in fascicles of 15-40(-80), filiform, ascending to patent. Pedicels (7-)10-25(-30) mm, articulate below the perianth. Nodes with 1-2 flowers mixed with the cladodes. Perianth-segments (5-)6-8 mm. Anthers 0·4-0·5 mm, 1/6-1/4 as long as filaments. Berry 10-16 mm, red, with 2-6 seeds. 2n = 20. {\i S. & S.C. Europe; some isolated stations in N.C. France.} Au Bu Ga ?Gr He It Ju Rm Rs (?C, W, K) ?Sa ?Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 49.          Ruscus}      L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.F. Yeo. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen, rhizomatous, perennial herbs or shrubs with simple or branched stems of limited growth arising from the axils of rhizome scales. Cauline leaves small, scarious, subtending branches or leaf-like cladodes. Inflorescence a condensed raceme in the axil of a bract borne medially on the cladode. Flowers unisexual, emerging singly; perianth-segments 4-5 mm, free, dull green, with violet spots. Stamens with filaments united into a dark violet column. Ovary unilocular, rarely partly septate; fruit a red berry 10-15 mm; seeds 1-4.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: P. F. Yeo,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  28}: 237-264 (1968).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Cladodes usually not more than 4 cm, spinose at apex;
\par
  stems much-branched .................................................................... {\b 1. aculeatus} 
\par
1 Cladodes usually more than 4 cm, unarmed; stems simple
\par
  or with one lateral branch
\par
2 Bract 1-2 mm wide, lanceolate to linear, often scarious ....... {\b 2. hypophyllum}
\par
2 Bract 3·5-13 mm wide, ovate to lanceolate, herbaceous ....... {\b 3. hypoglossum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. aculeatus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1041 (1753) (incl. {\i R. ponticus} Woronow). Subdioecious. Stems 10-100 cm, with 7-20 branches. Cladodes 1-4(-6) cm, broadly ovate to lanceolate, spinose at apex. Inflorescences adaxial. Staminal column c. 2 mm. 2n = 40. {\i Scrub, woods and sea-cliffs. W., S. & S.C. Europe, northwards to C. England and C. Hungary.} Al Az Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Widely cultivated for ornament. Highly fertile andromonoecious clones occur in cultivation.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b R. hyrcanus} Woronow,{\i  Monit. Jard. Bot. Tiflis}{\b  7}: 33 (1907), with branches at only one node, is reported from one locality in Krym (E. Transcaucasia, N. Iran).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. R. hypophyllum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1041 (1753). Monoecious. Stems 10-70(-100) cm, simple, rarely with one lateral branch, erect. Cladodes (2·2-)5-9(-12·5) × (0·9-)1·2-5·5(-7) cm, ovate, occasionally lanceolate to obovate-lanceolate. Inflorescences adaxial, abaxial or both. Bract 4·5-9(-13) × 1-2 mm, scarious or sometimes herbaceous, with 1-3(-4) veins. Staminal column 2·75-4 mm. {\i Woods. S. & E. Spain; S.E. Sicilia; doubtfully native in S.E. France} ({\i Îles d'Hyères}). *Ga Hs ?It Si. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. R. hypoglossum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1041 (1753). Dioecious. Stems 20-40 cm, simple, suberect or slightly spreading. Cladodes 3-10(-11) × 1-3·3(-5·2) cm, elliptical to obovate-lanceolate, the lower sometimes ovate to broadly ovate. Inflorescences adaxial. Bract 11·5-33 × 3·5-13 mm, herbaceous, with 5-11(-15) veins. Staminal column 2·5-3·5 mm. 2n = 40. {\i Deciduous woods and scrub. S.E. & E.C. Europe, extending westwards to N.W. Italy}. Au Bu Cz Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. microglossus} Bertol., {\i Fl. Ital.}{\b  10}: 401 (1855), is probably a hybrid of garden origin between {\b 2} and {\b 3}. It has apparently been naturalized in S. Italy since the 19th century, and in S.E. France and W. Jugoslavia more recently. It is female, with stems up to 60 cm, cladodes usually obovate-lanceolate to oblanceolate, the inflorescences adaxial or abaxial, and the bract 5·5-15 × 1·5-3 mm, herbaceous, with 3-4 veins.
\par

\par
73}
\par