{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 50.     Smilax}       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By R.A. DeFilipps. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dioecious, perennial, glabrous, often prickly, creeping, climbing or scrambling herbs, often woody below. Leaves alternate, simple, rounded to sagittate at base, reticulately veined between several parallel veins; petiole with 2 tendrils near base. Flowers in umbels or fascicles which are solitary or arranged on an elongated axis. Perianth-segments 6, free, small, white or greenish. Stamens 6, free, deciduous and abortive in female flowers. Ovary superior, 3-locular; stigmas 3, sessile; ovules 1-2 per loculus. Berry 1- to 3-seeded; seeds smooth, shiny.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: S.Ferri, {\i Webbia }{\b 21}: 475-486 (1966). P.Vernet,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr., Mém.}{\b  1966}: 140-146 (1967).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves cordate, hastate or sagittate at base; flowers 
\par
  in fascicles or subsessile umbels arranged along 
\par
  terminal and axillary axes ................................................................. {\b 1. aspera} 
\par
1 Leaves rounded or subcordate at base; flowers in 
\par
  solitary, axillary, long-pedunculate umbels
\par
2 Stems and branches angled, prickly; leaves membranous 
\par
  to subcoriaceous, broadly ovate or orbicular; petiole 
\par
  not thickened towards apex ............................................................. {\b 2. excelsa}
\par
2 Stems terete, the branches indistinctly angled above,
\par
  unarmed; leaves coriaceous, elliptical, lanceolate or 
\par
  ovate; petiole often gradually thickened and rugose in
\par
  distal 1/3-1/2 .............................................................................. {\b 3. canariensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. aspera} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1028 (1753) ({\i S. mauritanica} Poiret, {\i S. nigra} Willd.). Stems up to 15 m, creeping, scrambling or climbing, angled, unarmed or sparsely to densely prickly. Leaves up to 11 × 10 cm (often smaller), usually coriaceous, narrowly to broadly lanceolate, triangular, oblong or ovate-lanceolate (rarely reniform), often abruptly narrowed above the cordate, hastate or sagittate (rarely more or less truncate) base, unarmed or with prickles on petiole, margin and principal veins beneath; petiole not thickened towards apex. Flowers 5-30 in fascicles or subsessile umbels on terminal and axillary axes 2-15(-45) cm. Perianth-segments 2-4 mm. Berry red or black. 2n = 32. {\i S. Europe.} Al Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. excelsa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1029 (1753). Stems up to 20 m, scrambling or climbing, angled, sparsely to densely prickly. Leaves up to 12·5 × 9 cm, membranous or subcoriaceous, broadly ovate or orbicular, the base rounded or subcordate, unarmed or with minute prickles on the margin and midvein beneath; petiole not thickened towards apex. Flowers 4-12 in simple, solitary, axillary umbels; peduncles 7-20 mm. Perianth-segments 4-5(-6) mm. Berry red. {\i E. half of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. canariensis} Brouss. ex Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  4}: 784 (1806). Like {\b 2} but main stems terete, the branches indistinctly angled above, unarmed; leaves coriaceous, elliptical, lanceolate or ovate, unarmed; petiole often gradually rugose-thickened in distal 1/3-1/2. Açores. Az. ({\i Islas Canarias.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 184.     AGAVACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees, shrubs or large, scapose herbs; leaves ensiform, coriaceous, very fibrous, mostly aggregated into dense rosettes. Inflorescence a large terminal panicle; flowers hermaphrodite, regular. Perianth-segments 6, petaloid, free or connate at base. Stamens 6. Ovary superior or inferior, 3-locular. Fruit a loculicidal capsule, rarely indehiscent and more or less succulent; seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A family founded primarily on cytological and anatomical characters, and almost impossible to define in morphological terms; the description above is applicable only to the genera naturalized in Europe. These agree to some extent in habit, but most authors include in the family herbaceous genera such as {\i Polianthes}, in which the leaves are neither large nor coriaceous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves spinose-dentate; flowers erect; stamens exserted ................. {\b 1. Agave}
\par
1 Leaves entire; flowers nodding; stamens included
\par
2 Ovary inferior; anthers large, versatile, well differentiated
\par
  from filament ..................................................................................{\b  2. Furcraea} 
\par
2 Ovary superior; anthers small, scarcely differentiated 
\par
  from filament ...................................................................................... {\b 3. Yucca}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.        Agave}          L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizomatous herbs or short-stemmed shrubs, usually stoloniferous. Flowers tubular, erect. Hypanthial tube half as long to nearly as long as perianth-segments. Stamens and style strongly exserted; filaments tapering gradually from base to apex; anthers large, introrse, versatile. Ovary inferior; style cylindrical; stigma small, 3-lobed. Seeds flat.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 It is probable that other species, in addition to the two described below, are locally naturalized in S.E. France and N.W. Italy, but reliable information is not available.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200   Leaves ± glaucous, with terminal spine 2-3 cm; peduncle
\par
  equalling or shorter than the panicle ........................................... {\b 1. americana}
\par
 Leaves dark green, with terminal spine 4-6(-10) cm;
\par
  peduncle 2-3 times as long as the panicle ................................... {\b 2. atrovirens}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. americana} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 323 (1753). Very robust, stoloniferous herb; stem scarcely developed. Leaves 1-2 m × 15-25 cm, constricted above the broad, sheathing base, glaucous, remotely spinose-dentate, with a stout, blackish terminal spine 2-3 cm long. Scape (including inflorescence) 4-7(-10) m. Peduncle 8-15 cm in diameter, woody at maturity, equal to or shorter than the panicle, bearing triangular, leaf-like bracts. Panicle pyramidal; flowers aggregated in dense clusters at the ends of horizontal branches; leafy buds sometimes present in axils of bracteoles, replacing some or all of the flowers. Flowers (including ovary) 70-90 mm; perianth-segments linear-oblong, obtuse, erect, greenish-yellow. Filaments 70-80 mm, inserted on the hypanthial tube; anthers 30-35 mm. Capsule oblong, trigonous.{\i  Widely naturalized, mainly near the coast, in the Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal and Açores.} [Al Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.] ({\i Mexico}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A rosette requires at least 10 years' growth before flowering, and often much longer. After flowering it dies, but most plants perennate by stolons.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The appearance of leafy buds in the inflorescence appears to be, at least in part, a response to injury to the flowers by frost.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. atrovirens} Karwinski ex Salm-Dyck,{\i  Hort. Dyck.} 302 (1834). Like {\b 1} but leaves up to 40 cm wide, dark green, with
\par

\par
74}
\par