{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 terminal spine 4-6(-10) cm; peduncle 2-3 times as long as the panicle.{\i  Naturalized near the coast in S. & C. Portugal and perhaps elsewhere.} [Lu.] ({\i Mexico}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.        Furcraea}       Vent.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc ({\i Fourcroya} auct.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs or trees; stem erect, simple. Flowers in clusters of 2-3, nodding, campanulate. Hypanthial tube short, sometimes almost obsolete. Stamens and style included; filaments strongly dilated at base; anthers introrse, versatile. Ovary inferior; style trigonous, somewhat dilated at base; stigma very small.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. foetida} (L.) Haw.,{\i  Syn. Pl. Succ.} 73 (1812) ({\i F. gigantea} Vent.). Monocarpic. Stem up to 1 m. Leaves 1-2 m × 10-15 cm, entire, erect to patent, apiculate but scarcely pungent, yellowish-green, persistent for some time after withering. Inflorescence (with peduncle) 6-12 m; peduncle equalling or shorter than panicle. Bracts of peduncle leaf-like, coriaceous, those of panicle brown, scarious. Pedicels 6-12 mm, articulated. Perianth-segments 20-25 mm, lanceolate, greyish-white; ovary with hypanthial tube c. 15 mm. Flowers infertile in Europe; reproduction is effected by leafy bulbils which replace some of the flowers.{\i  Planted for hedges in S. Portugal and naturalized.} [Lu.] ({\i Tropical America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.            Yucca}         L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves usually pungent. Flowers pedicellate, nodding or pendent. Perianth campanulate, white, of 6 free segments. Stamens and style included. Filaments wide, fleshy; anthers small, more or less immersed in apex of filament. Ovary superior; style cylindrical, usually short and thick; stigma shortly 3-lobed. Fruit a capsule or fleshy and berry-like.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: W. Trelease,{\i  Ann. Rep. Missouri Bot. Gard.}{\b  13}: 42-116 (1902). G. Molon, {\i Le Yucche.} Milano. 1914.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Stoloniferous herb, without woody stem above ground;
\par
   leaves with conspicuous filaments shredding from 
\par
   their margins ............................................................................ {\b 1. filamentosa} 
\par
Shrub, with woody stem above ground; leaves with few 
\par
   marginal filaments or none ........................................................... {\b 2. gloriosa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. Y. filamentosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 319 (1753). Shortly stoloniferous, scapose herb, with tufts of suberect, slightly glaucous leaves 45-60 × 4-5 cm, with whitish margins from which white, fibrous filaments are constantly separating. Panicle usually c. 100 cm, with ascending, somewhat flexuous branches. Flowers creamy white; perianth-segments 35-50 × 15-30 mm, oblong-lanceolate. Fruit dry, dehiscent.{\i  Naturalized from gardens in S.E. France and N.W. Italy.} [Ga It.] ({\i E. United States}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. Y. gloriosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 319 (1753). Shrub; stem 50-120(-200) cm, usually branched in older plants. Leaves 50-100 × 5-8 cm, very rigid and with strong, pungent apex, dark green, with reddish-brown margins which are remotely denticulate in young leaves but usually entire at maturity. Peduncle 50-100 cm, with several bract-like leaves. Panicle 100-150 cm; branches patent to ascending. Flowers white, usually tinged with purplish-red; perianth-segments 40-60 mm. Fruit dry but indehiscent, with 6 prominent ribs.{\i  Naturalized on sand-dunes and waste ground in N. & C. Italy.} [It.] ({\i S.E. United States.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b Y. aloifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 319 (1753), also from the S.E. United States, which is like {\b 2} but with taller and usually simple stem, narrower leaves with whitish, denticulate margins, shorter peduncle and succulent fruit, has been recorded as a garden escape from several parts of Italy, but does not appear to be fully naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 185.       AMARYLLIDACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, bulbous, scapose (rarely more or less acaulescent), perennial herbs. Leaves all basal, linear to lorate or oblanceolate, often distichous. Flowers in an umbel (sometimes reduced to a single flower), subtended by a spathe of 1 or more usually scarious valves. Flowers hermaphrodite, regular or slightly zygomorphic. Perianth of 6 petaloid segments, arising from the apex of the ovary, or from a hypanthial tube. Corona sometimes present. Stamens 6. Ovary inferior, 3-locular; stigma capitate or shortly 3-lobed. Fruit a loculicidal or irregularly dehiscent capsule, sometimes with fleshy pericarp and transitional to a berry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: J. G. Baker,{\i  Handbook of the Amaryllideae}. London. 1888.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corona present, in the form of a tube or collar 
\par
2 Lower part of stamens adnate to corona, the upper part
\par
  widely exserted from it ............................................................. {\b 7. Pancratium} 
\par
2 Stamens free from corona, and usually included in it or
\par
  in hypanthial tube ........................................................................ {\b 6. Narcissus}
\par
1 Corona absent, or represented by inconspicuous scales 
\par
3 Flowers yellow
\par
4 Hypanthial tube at least 5 mm; leaves at least 5 mm wide ...... {\b 2. Sternbergia}
\par
4 Hypanthial tube c. 2 mm; leaves c. 1 mm wide .......................... {\b 6. Narcissus}
\par
3 Flowers white or pink
\par
5 Flowers stellate, erect .................................................................. {\b 5. Lapiedra}
\par
5 Flowers campanulate, nodding or inclined
\par
6 Perianth-segments 50-80 mm .................................................... {\b 1. Amaryllis}
\par
6 Perianth-segments not more than 25 mm
\par
7 Penanth-segments all alike ........................................................ {\b 3. Leucojum}
\par
7 Outer perianth-segments ± acute, the inner much shorter
\par
  and emarginate ............................................................................ {\b 4. Galanthus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.        Amaryllis}      L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Umbel of 4-8(-12) flowers; spathe 2-valved; each flower subtended by a linear bracteole. Flowers campanulate, bright pink, fragrant, inclined or somewhat nodding, usually slightly zygomorphic. Hypanthial tube present; corona absent. Filaments much longer than anthers. Fruit subglobose, dehiscing irregularly; pericarp somewhat fleshy; seeds rather few.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. bella-donna} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 293 (1753). Bulb c. 10 cm in diameter. Leaves 30-45 cm × 15-30 mm, appearing after anthesis. Peduncle 30-60 cm, stout. Pedicels 2-4 cm. Hypanthial tube c. 10 mm, broadly infundibuliform. Perianth-segments 50-80 mm, obovate-cuneate, erecto-patent. Flowering in autumn.{\i  Widely cultivated for ornament; a frequent garden escape in Portugal and the Açores, and locally naturalized.} [Az Lu.] ({\i South Africa.})
\par

\par
75}
\par