{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.       Sternbergia}    Waldst. & Kit.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers solitary, or in umbels of 2(-3); spathe 1-valved, tubular below. Flowers campanulate to stellate, yellow, erect. Hypanthial tube present; corona absent. Filaments much longer than anthers. Fruit subglobose, intermediate between a capsule and berry; seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Scape 1-2 cm, mostly underground; hypanthial tube nearly 
\par
  as long as perianth-segments .................................................. {\b 1. colchiciflora} 
\par
Scape usually at least 4 cm at anthesis; hypanthial tube 
\par
  less than ¼ as long as perianth-segments ............................................ {\b 2. lutea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. colchiciflora} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung. }{\b 2}: 172 (1803-1804). Bulb 1-2 cm in diameter. Leaves 4-10 cm × 2-5 mm, linear, obtuse, very minutely denticulate or fimbriate, appearing after anthesis. Scape 1-2 cm at anthesis, concealed by the tunics of the bulb and mostly underground, elongating to 4-6 cm in fruit. Spathe 2·5-5 cm. Hypanthial tube 25-30 mm, slender. Perianth-segments 30-40 × 2-5 mm, linear to narrowly oblanceolate, erect or connivent, later patent. Fruit 8-10 mm in diameter. Flowering in autumn. 2n = 20, 26.{\i  Dry, stony ground. S. Europe, extending northwards to Hungary.} Bu Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, K) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. lutea} (L.) Ker-Gawler ex Sprengel,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 57 (1825) ({\i Oporanthus luteus} (L.) Herbert). Like {\b 1} but leaves up to 15 mm wide, subentire to minutely crenulate, appearing before or during anthesis; scape 4-10 cm at anthesis, the upper part not concealed; hypanthial tube (2-)5-8 mm, obconical; perianth-segments 4-15 mm wide, linear to oblong-elliptical. Stony slopes and dry scrub.{\i  Mediterranean region}. Al Bl Cr Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b lutea}: Leaves 4-15 mm wide, usually entire or obscurely crenulate. Perianth-segments 7-15 mm wide. 2n = 22. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sicula} (Tineo ex Guss.) D.A. Webb, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 76}: 358 (1978) ({\i S.sicula }Tineo ex Guss.): Leaves 3-5 mm wide, minutely but distinctly crenulate. Perianth-segments 4-8 mm wide. 2n = 18. {\i S. Italy and Sicilia; S. Greece and Aegean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.       Leucojum}           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Umbel of 1-5(-7) flowers; spathe 1- or 2-valved. Flowers white or pale pink, campanulate, nodding. Hypanthial tube and corona absent. Perianth-segments all more or less alike. Filaments usually much shorter than anthers; anthers not apiculate. Capsule pyriform to subglobose, erect; pericarp somewhat fleshy; seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: F. C. Stern,{\i  Snowdrops and Snowflakes}. London. 1956.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves 5-25 mm wide; scape stout, with central cavity 
\par
  (sometimes small)
\par
2 Scape usually exceeding the leaves; flowers usually 
\par
  solitary; seeds whitish, with strophiole ........................................... {\b 7. vernum}
\par
2 Scape usually not exceeding the leaves; umbel of (1-)2-
\par
  5(-7) flowers; seeds black, without strophiole ............................. {\b 8. aestivum}
\par
1 Leaves not more than 3 mm wide, often filiform; scape 
\par
  slender, solid
\par
3 Flowering in August to November;
\par
  leaves appearing after or towards the end of anthesis
\par
4 Perianth white; epigynous disc prominent, 6-lobed;
\par
  seeds with strophiole ................................................................ {\b 6. valentinum}
\par
4 Perianth pink, at least at the base; epigynous disc 
\par
  inconspicuous, entire; seeds without strophiole
\par
5 Longer pedicels 15-25 mm; spathe 1-valved, umbel often
\par
  with 2-3 flowers .......................................................................... {\b 1. autumnale}
\par
5 Longer pedicels 2-5 mm; spathe 2-valved; flowers 
\par
  usually solitary ................................................................................ {\b 2. roseum}
\par
3 Flowering in January to April; leaves usually well 
\par
  developed at anthesis
\par
6 Seeds with strophiole ................................................................. {\b 5. nicaeense}
\par
6 Seeds without strophiole
\par
7 Pedicels not exceeding the spathe; perianth-segments
\par
  8-11 mm, not apiculate; style shorter than stamens ................. {\b 3. longifolium}
\par
7 Longest pedicel usually exceeding the spathe; perianth
\par
  segments 12-25 mm, the outer 3 apiculate; style 
\par
  slightly exceeding stamens ................................................... {\b 4. trichophyllum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. autumnale} L. {\i Sp. Pl.} 289 (1753). Bulb 8-15 mm in diameter. Leaves 12-16 cm, filiform, appearing during or just after anthesis. Scape 7-15(-25) cm, very slender. Umbel of 1-3 flowers; spathe 10-20 mm, 1-valved; longer pedicels 15-25 mm, the longest usually exceeding the spathe. Perianth-segments 9-14 mm, white, tinged with pink at the base, rarely pink throughout, the outer 3 apiculate or 3-dentate. Style filiform, slightly exceeding the stamens. Seeds black, without strophiole. Flowering in autumn. 2n = 14.{\i  Portugal, W. & C. Spain; Sardegna, Sicilia.} ?Cr Hs Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. roseum} F. Martin,{\i  Biblioth. Phys.-Econ.} ser. 2, {\b 1}: 344 (1804). Bulb 10-15 mm in diameter. Leaves 2-2·5 cm, narrowly linear, developed after anthesis. Scape 4-12 cm, filiform. Flowers solitary (very rarely 2-3); spathe 5-10 mm, 2-valved; pedicels 1-5 mm. Perianth-segments 5-9 mm, pink, acute to somewhat apiculate. Style filiform, considerably exceeding the stamens. Seeds black, without strophiole. Flowering in autumn. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry pastures and rocky ground. • Corse, Sardegna}. Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. longifolium} (Gay ex M. J. Roemer) Gren. in Gren. & Godron,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  3}: 252 (1855). Bulb 7-10 mm in diameter. Leaves 12-25 cm × 1-2·5 mm, narrowly linear, well-developed at anthesis. Scape 15-27 cm, fairly slender. Umbel of 1-4 flowers; spathe 15-25 mm, 2-valved; longest pedicel usually exceeding the spathe. Perianth-segments 8-11 mm, white, not apiculate. Style filiform, shorter than the stamens. Seeds without strophiole. Flowering in spring. 2n = 16.{\i  Rocky ground and dry slopes. • Corse}. Co.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. trichophyllum} Schousboe, {\i Vextr. Marokko} 154 (1800) (incl.{\i  L. grandiflorum} DC.). Bulb 10-20 mm in diameter. Leaves 4-12(-20) cm, narrowly linear, developed before anthesis. Scape 8-30 cm, slender. Umbel of 2-4 flowers; spathe 15-30 mm, 2-valved; pedicels up to 60 mm, the longest usually exceeding the spathe. Perianth-segments 12-20(-25) mm, white, sometimes tinged with pink, the outer 3 apiculate. Style filiform, slightly exceeding the stamens. Seeds without strophiole. Flowering in spring. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry, sandy ground. S.W. & S.C. Spain, S. & C. Portugal. }Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. nicaeense} Ardoino,{\i  Fl. Alp. Marit.} 371 (1867) ({\i L. hiemale} DC. pro parte). Bulb 15-20 mm in diameter. Leaves 10-30 cm × 1·5-2·5 mm, narrowly linear, developed before anthesis. Scape 5-18 cm, slender. Flowers usually solitary, rarely 2-3; spathe 15-25 mm, 2-valved; pedicels 10-18 mm, not exceeding the spathe. Perianth-segments 8-12 mm, white, the outer 3 apiculate. Epigynous disc prominent, 6-lobed. Style filiform, slightly exceeding the stamens. Seeds 2-3 mm, black, with strophiole. Flowering in spring. 2n = 18. •{\i  S.E. France }({\i from Nice to the Italian frontier}). Ga ?It.
\par

\par
76}
\par