{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. valentinum} Pau,{\i  Bol. Soc. Arag. Ci. Nat.}{\b  13}: 42 (1914). Like {\b 5} but flowering in late summer or autumn; spathe sometimes 1-valved; leaves filiform, developing after anthesis; perianth-segments 11-14 mm. 2n = 16. •{\i  E. Spain }({\i N. of Valencia}); {\i N.W. Greece} ({\i Ionioi Nisoi}). Gr Hs ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Resembles {\b 1} in time of flowering and general habit, and previously confused with it; very distinct, however, in structure of epigynous disc and seed. Perhaps overlooked elsewhere in Mediterranean region; similar plants have been reported from Sicilia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. L. vernum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 289 (1753). Bulb 15-30 mm in diameter. Leaves 10-25 cm × 5-25 mm, lorate, appearing during anthesis. Scape 12-35 cm, usually exceeding the leaves, stout, with a small central cavity and 2 narrow wings. Flowers usually solitary, rarely 2; spathe 25-40 mm, 1-valved, convolute below, about equalling the pedicel. Perianth-segments 15-25 mm, white with a green or yellow spot just below the thickened apex. Style clavate, slightly exceeding the stamens. Seeds c. 7 mm, whitish, with strophiole. Flowering in spring. 2n = 20, 22.{\i  Damp or shady places. • C. Europe, extending locally to Belgium, the Pyrenees, N. Italy and C. Jugoslavia; cultivated for ornament and occasionally naturalized.} Au Be Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W) [Br Da Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. L. aestivum} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 975 (1759). Bulb 25-40 mm in diameter. Leaves up to 10 cm × 5-20 mm, broadly linear. Scape 35-60 cm, equalling the leaves or slightly shorter, stout, hollow, compressed, 2-winged. Umbel of (1-)2-5(-7) flowers; spathe 30-50 mm, 1-valved; pedicels 25-70 mm, the longest equalling or exceeding the spathe. Perianth-segments white, with a green spot just below the thickened apex. Style slightly clavate usually exceeding the stamens. Seeds 5-7 mm, black, without strophiole; testa spongy.{\i  Marshes and wet meadows. From Ireland, the Netherlands and Czechoslovakia southwards to Sardegna, Greece and Krym.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Tu [Da Hs].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Widely cultivated for ornament, and naturalized both within and outside its native range.
\par

\par
 ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b aestivum}: Robust. Leaves 7-20 mm wide. Wings of scape with hyaline, remotely denticulate margin. Umbel of (2-)3-5(-7) flowers. Spathe 7-11 mm wide. Perianth-segments 13-22 mm. Flowering in late spring. 2n = 22, 24.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except the Mediterranean islands}.
\par
 ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pulchellum} (Salisb.) Briq.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Corse}{\b  1}: 323 (1910) ({\i S. pulchellum} Salisb.): Less robust. Leaves 5-12 mm wide. Wings of scape entire, without hyaline margin. Umbel of (1-)2-4 flowers. Spathe 4-6 mm wide. Perianth-segments 8-14 mm. Flowering 3-4 weeks earlier than subsp. ({\b a}). 2n = 22. {\i W. Mediterranean region.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.        Galanthus}       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 2, the base enclosed in a tubular, membranous sheath. Flowers solitary, white, nodding. Spathe apparently 1-valved (actually of 2 connate valves). Hypanthial tube and corona absent. Outer perianth-segments acute to subobtuse, with short claw, erecto-patent; inner segments 1/3 to 1/2 as long as outer, deeply emarginate, cuneate, erect, with a green patch near the apex and sometimes also at the base. Filaments much shorter than anthers; anthers apiculate. Capsule ellipsoid to subglobose. Seeds with strophiole.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The vernation of the leaves is an important taxonomic character; it can be deduced in all but fully mature leaves from an inspection of the basal part still enclosed in the sheath. The colour of the leaves (glaucous or not) is said to be correlated with a difference in the shape of the epidermal cells, those of glaucous leaves being rhombic and of bright green leaves narrowly rectangular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: Z. T. Artiushenko, {\i Bot. Zur.}{\b  50}: 1430-1447 (1965);{\b  51}: 1437-1451 (1966). D. Delipavlov,{\i  Naucni Trud. Agron. Fak. Plovdiv}{\b  17}: 205-209 (1968);{\i  Izv. Bot. Inst.} ({\i Sofia}) {\b 21}: 161-168 (1971). P. von Gottlieb-Tannenhain,{\i  Abh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  2}({\b 4}): 1-95 (1904). F. C. Stern,{\i  Snowdrops and Snowflakes.} London. 1956.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves bright, shining green, not glaucous (Kikladhes) .................. {\b 4. ikariae}
\par
1 Leaves glaucous
\par
2 Leaves with replicate margins in bud ............................................ {\b 2. plicatus}
\par
2 Leaves flat or with involute margins in bud
\par
3 Leaves flat in bud; inner perianth-segments with green
\par
  patch only at apex ............................................................................ {\b 1. nivalis}
\par
3 Leaves with involute margins in bud; inner perianth
\par
  segments with green patch at base as well as apex ......................... {\b 3. elwesii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. nivalis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 288 (1753). Bulb 10-20 mm in diameter. Leaves 5-13 cm × 2·5-7 mm during anthesis, up to 25 cm at maturity, flat and parallel in bud, linear to lorate, glaucous. Scape 10-25(-40) cm. Spathe 22-30 mm, about equalling pedicel. Outer perianth-segments 12-35 × 4-11 mm, oblong-lanceolate to elliptical; inner segments 6-11 mm, without green patch at base.{\i  Deciduous woodland and shady streamsides. • From N.C. France and White Russia southwards to the Pyrenees Sicilia and S. Greece. Cultivated for ornament and widely naturalized; the northern limit of its native range is therefore uncertain.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, ?K, E) Si Tu [Be Br Ho No Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A record from S. Spain (Sierra Nevada) requires confirmation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable; a full account of the variation is given by A. Trotter,{\i  Ann. Bot.} ({\i Roma}) {\b 13}: 185-236 (1915). Many cultivars exist and some are naturalized, notably cv. 'Scharlokii' ({\i G. scharlokii} Caspary,{\i  G. nivalis} subsp.{\i  scharlokii} auct.), in which the spathe-valves are separate instead of connate and are much longer than usual. Variants from S. & S.C. Europe in which all parts, and especially the perianth, are larger than usual have been distinguished under various names, notably{\b  G. imperati} Bertol.,{\i  Fl. Ital.}{\b  4}: 5 (1839) ({\i G. nivalis} subsp. {\i imperati} (Bertol.) Baker), but they are connected by numerous intermediates to the smaller, typical plant.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Autumn-flowering variants are known from the E. & C. Mediterranean region, and as this character shows some (though imperfect) correlation with larger perianth, two subspecies may be recognized as follows:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nivalis}: Flowering in January to April; leaves appearing just before or during anthesis. Outer perianth-segments 12-25(-30) × 4-8(-11) mm. 2n = 24.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except S. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b reginae-olgae} (Orph.) Gottl.-Tann., {\i Abh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  2}({\b 4}): 32 (1904) (incl.{\i  G. corcyrensis} (G. Beck) F. C. Stern): Flowering in October to December; leaves appearing after (more rarely during) anthesis. Outer perianth-segments 20-35 × 6-11 mm.{\i  S.W. part of Balkan peninsula; Sicilia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. G. plicatus} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3}: 255 (1819). Bulb 10-30 mm in diameter. Leaves 5-12 cm × 4-10 mm at anthesis,
\par

\par
77}
\par