{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 up to 30 cm × 25 mm at maturity, flat and parallel in bud except for sharply replicate margins, which remain more or less revolute at maturity, linear-lorate to narrowly oblanceolate, glaucous, with a depressed, paler band on the upper surface. Scape 12-25 cm. Spathe 25-35 mm, often 2-fid at apex, shorter or longer than pedicel. Outer perianth-segments 14-28 × 4-10 mm; inner segments 7-11 mm, without a distinct green patch at the base, but with apical patch sometimes prolonged so as to cover most of the segment. Flowering in spring. 2n = 24.{\i  Woodland and scrub. From E. Romania to Krym.} Rm Rs (W, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b G. byzantinus} Baker, {\i Gard. Chron.} ser. 3, {\b 13}: 226 (1893), which differs only in the presence of a distinct green patch at the base of each inner perianth-segment, and sometimes in being less robust, has been reported from Turkey-in-Europe, but apparently in error. It is native to N.W. Anatolia, and is probably best treated as a subspecies of {\b 2}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. G. elwesii} Hooker fil.,{\i  Bot. Mag. }{\b 101}: t. 6166 (1875). Bulb 10-20 mm in diameter. Leaves with incurved margins in bud, somewhat keeled towards the base, lorate to oblong, glaucous. Scape 8-27 cm. Spathe 25-40 mm, longer than pedicel. Outer perianth-segments 15-28 mm; inner segments 8-13 mm, with green patches at both apex and base. Flowering in spring. 2n = 24, 48. {\i Woods, scrub and rocky pastures. S.E. Europe, from C. Jugoslavia and S.W. Ukraine southwards to E. Greece.} Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b elwesii}: Leaves 6-13 cm × 7-13 mm at anthesis, up to 20 cm × 20 mm at maturity, the larger partly enveloping the smaller, cucullate at apex, twisted or straight. Outer perianth-segments 11-15 mm wide, very strongly convex.{\i  From S. Bulgaria northwards}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b minor} D.A. Webb,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 312 (1978) ({\i G.graecus} auct., ? an Orph. ex Boiss.): Leaves 3-8 cm × 4-8 mm at anthesis, up to 13 cm × 12 mm at maturity, with margins apposed in bud (neither leaf enveloping the other), scarcely cucullate at apex, more or less twisted at maturity. Outer perianth-segments 7-11 mm wide, flatter than in subsp. ({\b a}).{\i  Bulgaria and N. Aegean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Typical plants of the two subspecies are very distinct, but intermediates occur commonly almost throughout Bulgaria, and in parts of N. Greece. They are often referred to {\b G. maximus} Velen.,{\i  Fl. Bulg.} 540 (1891), and have been variously treated by later authors ({\i G. elwesii} var.{\i  maximus }(Velen.) G. Beck, {\i G. graecus} var. {\i maximus} (Velen.) Hayek, {\i G. nivalis} var.{\i  maximus} (Velen.) Stoj. & Stefanov). The original description of G. maximus, however, suggests that it may represent merely a minor variant of subsp. ({\b a}). {\b G. graecus} Orph. ex Boiss., {\i Fl. Or.}{\b  5}: 145 (1882) ({\i G. nivalis} subsp.{\i  graecus} (Orph. ex Boiss.) Gottl.Tann.), described from the E. Aegean region, outside the limits of Europe, appears to be intermediate between the two subspecies, though closer to subsp. ({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. G. ikariae} Baker, {\i Gard. Chron.} ser. 3, {\b 13}: 506 (1893). Like {\b 3}({\b a}) but leaves recurved at apex, not cucullate, bright shining green; inner perianth-segments without the basal green patch but with apical patch often extending to below the middle.{\i  Kikladhes} ({\i Andros, Tinos}). Gr. ({\i Ikaria;} ?{\i Caucasian region.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.        Lapiedra}        Lag.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Umbel of 4-9 flowers; spathe 2-valved. Flowers greenish-white, erect, stellate. Hypanthial tube and corona absent. Filaments as long as anthers or somewhat shorter. Capsule depressed-globose; perianth dry; seeds few.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. martinezii} Lag.,{\i  Gen. Sp. Nov.} 14 (1816). Bulb up to 5 cm in diameter. Leaves up to 25 cm × 10 mm, appearing after anthesis, broadly linear, with a longitudinal pale band on upper surface. Scape up to 20 cm. Spathe 15-30 mm; pedicels 10-20 mm. Perianth-segments 8-12 mm, white, with a green stripe on outer surface, patent at anthesis, erect and persistent in fruit. Capsule 7-12 mm in diameter; seeds c. 5 mm, black. Flowering in late summer. 2n = 22.{\i  Crevices of calcareous rocks. S. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 6.         Narcissus}       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers solitary or in umbels of 2-15, yellow, white or bicoloured (rarely green), sometimes fragrant. Spathe 1-valved, usually scarious; bracteoles small or absent. Hypanthial tube present. Corona free from the stamens, usually conspicuous, rarely reduced to a small rim or scales. Capsule ellipsoid to subglobose; pericarp dry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  This genus exhibits, perhaps more acutely than any other, the taxonomic difficulties which arise from long-established cultivation, hybridization and selection, and subsequent escape and naturalization. For many populations, especially in S. France and N.W. Italy, it is impossible to say with confidence whether they are native or naturalized; and nearly all the early binomials are based on cultivated plants of which the origin was only guessed at. This not only gives rise to nomenclatural problems, but it means also that the geographical background for specific delimitation is confused and defective.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Cytological investigation has helped greatly in establishing the hybrid nature of taxa formerly regarded as independent species. Of the innumerable hybrids in cultivation a large number have become naturalized, at least temporarily, in a few localities (especially in places where plants of the genus are grown on a commercial scale). Only those hybrids which are long-established, widespread, not too variable, and of agreed parentage are included below.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: F. W. Burbidge,{\i  The Narcissus: its History and Culture}. London. 1875. H. W. Pugsley,{\i  Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc.}{\b  58}: 17-93 (1933). E. A. Bowles, {\i A handbook of Narcissus}. London. 1934. A. Fernandes,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot}. ser. 2, {\b 25}: 113-190 (1951); Daff. {\i Tulip Year Book }{\b 33}: 37-66 (1967); {\i V. Simposio de Flora Europaea, Trabajos y Comunicaciones} 245-284. Sevilla. 1969.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowering in autumn (September to November)
\par
2 Perianth green ........................................................................ {\b 16. viridiflorus} 
\par
2 Perianth yellow or white
\par
3 Perianth yellow; corona rudimentary, consisting of a 
\par
  low rim or 6 small scales; hypanthial tube 1-2 mm ........................ {\b 1. humilis}
\par
3 Perianth white; corona small, but forming a distinct 
\par
  collar; hypanthial tube at least 10 mm
\par
4 Leaves 2-4·5 mm wide, present during anthesis; flowers
\par
  in umbels of (2-)3-7 ........................................................................ {\b 6. elegans}
\par
4 Leaves c. 1 mm wide, not present during anthesis;
\par
  flowers solitary or in umbels of 2-3 ............................................. {\b 2. serotinus}
\par
1 Flowering in winter, spring or early summer (January to June)
\par
5 Perianth and corona white or very pale cream
\par
6 Perianth-segments sharply deflexed .......................................... {\b 17. triandrus}
\par
6 Perianth-segments patent or erecto-patent
\par
7 Flowers solitary; corona at least as long as perianth
\par
8 Leaves at least 5 mm wide; corona cylindrical .............. {\b 23. pseudonarcissus}
\par
8 Leaves not more than 1·5 mm wide; corona broadly
\par
  infundibuliform ....................................................................... {\b 21. cantabricus}
\par

\par
78}
\par