{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 7 Flowers in umbels of 2-15; corona much shorter than perianth
\par
9 Leaves 8-15 mm wide; flowers 20-40 mm in diameter ........... {\b 4. papyraceus}
\par
9 Leaves 3-6 mm wide; flowers 15-20 mm in diameter .................... {\b 5. dubius}
\par
5 Corona pale yellow to orange; perianth white or yellow
\par
10 Corona not more than 7·5 mm long
\par
11 Perianth white or very pale cream
\par
12 Flowers solitary; margin of corona red or scarious .................... {\b 7. poeticus}
\par
12 Flowers usually in umbels of 2 or more; margin of 
\par
   corona similar to the remainder
\par
13 Flowers usually 2; hypanthial tube 20-25 mm ................ {\b 29}. × {\b medioluteus}
\par
13 Flowers usually 3-15; hypanthial tube 12-18 mm ........................ {\b 3. tazetta}
\par
11 Perianth pale to deep yellow
\par
14 Hypanthial tube broadly obconical, about as long as 
\par
   corona; filaments curved .................................................... {\b 18. bulbocodium}
\par
14 Hypanthial tube cylindrical or narrowly infundibuliform,
\par
   considerably longer than corona; filaments straight
\par
15 Leaves at least 5 mm wide
\par
16 Scape terete; leaves subcylindrical, deeply canaliculate
\par
   on adaxial side ................................................................... {\b 30}. ×{\b  intermedius}
\par
16 Scape compressed, 2-edged; leaves ± flat, not deeply
\par
   canaliculate ...................................................................................... {\b 3. tazetta}
\par
15 Leaves not more than 4·5 mm wide
\par
17 Perianth-segments sharply deflexed
\par
18 Perianth-segments at least 10 mm, usually at least as
\par
   long as hypanthial tube .............................................................. {\b 17. triandrus}
\par
18 Perianth-segments not more than 8 mm, much shorter 
\par
   than hypanthial tube ................................................... ({\b 8-11}).{\b  jonquilla} group
\par
17 Perianth-segments patent or slightly deflexed, shorter
\par
   than hypanthial tube
\par
19 Leaves smooth and rounded on abaxial surface, usually 
\par
   dark green .................................................................. ({\b 8-11}).{\b  jonquilla }group
\par
19 Leaves with 2 keels on abaxial surface, ± glaucous
\par
   .................................................................................. ({\b 12-15}).{\b  rupicola} group
\par
10 Corona at least 8 mm long
\par
20 Perianth-segments sharply deflexed
\par
21 Stamens ± equal in length .................................................. {\b 26. cyclamineus}
\par
21 Stamens unequal, 3 much longer than the other 3 ................... {\b 17. triandrus}
\par
20 Perianth-segments patent or suberect
\par
22 Filaments curved, more than twice as long as anthers
\par
23 Pedicel (3-)5-25 mm; scape erect ..................................... {\b 18. bulbocodium}
\par
23 Pedicel absent; scape decumbent to ascending ................ {\b 19. hedraeanthus}
\par
22 Filaments straight, not more than twice as long as anthers
\par
24 Hypanthial tube narrowly obconical or infundibuliform,
\par
   its length 3-4 times its greatest width
\par
25 Flowers concolorous; pedicels 20-30 mm ............................. {\b 28}. × {\b odorus}
\par
25 Corona considerably deeper in colour than perianth;
\par
   pedicels 12-15 mm ........................................................ {\b 27}. × {\b incomparabilis}
\par
24 Hypanthial tube broadly obconical, its length not more
\par
   than 1½ times its greatest width
\par
26 Perianth-segments less than 15 mm; corona somewhat constricted
\par
   near the middle ........................................................................ {\b 25. asturiensis}
\par
26 Perianth-segments at least 15 mm; corona not constricted
\par
   near the middle
\par
27 Spathe 60-100 mm; pedicel 40-90 mm ............................. {\b 21. longispathus}
\par
27 Spathe not more than 60(-65) mm; pedicel not more
\par
   than 35 mm
\par
28 Hypanthial tube 12-25 mm .......................................... {\b 22. pseudonarcissus}
\par
28 Hypanthial tube 8-15 mm
\par
29 Corona 16-25 mm ........................................................................ {\b 24. minor}
\par
29 Corona 35-40 mm ...................................................................... {\b 23. bicolor}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. TAPEINANTHUS (Herbert) Traub. Flowering in autumn. Leaves filiform, not present at anthesis. Flowers usually solitary, yellow, concolorous. Hypanthial tube very short, almost obsolete. Corona very short, often rudimentary. Filaments straight, much longer than anthers. Anthers dorsifixed, widely exserted.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. humilis} (Cav.) Traub, {\i Plant Life}{\b  25}: 46 (1969) ({\i Carregnoa humilis} (Cav.) Gay, {\i Braxireon humile} (Cav.) Rafin.). Bulb 8-15 × 7-12 mm. Leaves up to 20 cm × 1 mm, 1 (rarely 2) from each bulb, but often none from a bulb which has flowered, appearing in spring. Scape 7-20 cm, slender. Spathe 12-20 mm, hyaline, tubular below. Flowers solitary (very rarely 2), erect, yellow, concolorous. Pedicel 6-12 mm. Hypanthial tube not more than 2 mm. Perianth-segments 10 × 2-3 mm, oblong-lanceolate. Corona consisting of a low rim or 6 small scales not more than 1 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Grassland and open woods. S.W. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. SEROTINI Parl. Flowering in autumn. Leaves filiform, not present at anthesis. Flowers usually solitary, bicoloured. Hypanthial tube slender, cylindrical. Corona short. Filaments straight, shorter than anthers or only slightly longer; anthers dorsifixed, included.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. N. serotinus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 290 (1753). Bulb 15-25 × 12-20 mm. Leaves 10-20 cm × 1 mm, cylindrical, somewhat glaucous, 1-2 on non-flowering bulbs, usually absent from a bulb which has flowered, appearing in spring. Scape 10-25 cm, slender. Flowers solitary, less often 2(-3), erect, fragrant. Spathe 15-35 mm, hyaline, tubular in lower half. Pedicel 7-20(-30) mm. Hypanthial tube 12-20 mm. Perianth-segments 10-16 × 3-7 mm, oblong-lanceolate, patent, white. Corona 1-1·5 × 3-4 mm, 6-lobed, orange. Flowering in autumn. 2n = 10, 20, 30.{\i  Stony hillsides and other dry places. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Bl Co Cr Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. TAZEITAE DC. (Sect. Hermione (Salisb.) Sprengel). Flowering in spring, rarely in autumn. Leaves flat or canaliculate. Flowers in umbels, concolorous or bicoloured. Hypanthial tube cylindrical. Corona fairly short. Filaments straight, much shorter than anthers; anthers dorsifixed, included, or the upper whorl slightly exserted.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. N. tazetta} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 290 (1753). Bulb up to 50 × 35 mm. Leaves 20-50 cm × 5-25 mm. Scape 20-45 cm, stout. Flowers in umbels of (2-)3-15, fragrant. Spathe 30-50 mm, scarious. Pedicels unequal, the longest 25-75 mm. Hypanthial tube 12-18 mm. Perianth-segments 8-22 mm, patent, usually broadly ovate and contiguous or imbricate, more rarely narrower. Corona 3-6 × 6-11 mm, about twice as wide as high, yellow or orange. Upper whorl of stamens exserted from hypanthial tube, at least in part, but included in corona. {\i Meadows, pastures and cultivated fields. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very polymorphic, but as the plant has been cultivated for centuries, and as many populations are derived from cultivated plants, it seems probable that some of this polymorphism originated in horticultural selection. Apart from the variation in colour of perianth and corona, on which are founded the subspecies recognized below, there is variation in size of flower, colour and width of leaves, shape of scape in cross-section and other characters, but these show so little correlation that if they are taken into account in defining species or subspecies the number of taxa becomes unmanageably large.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perianth pure white; corona bright to deep yellow .............. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b tazetta}
\par
1 Perianth cream-coloured or yellow
\par
2 Perianth cream-coloured or very pale yellow; corona 
\par
  medium to bright yellow ..................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b italicus}
\par

\par
79}
\par