{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 2 Perianth bright or golden-yellow; corona deep yellow to
\par
  orange .................................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b aureus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tazetta} (incl. subsp.{\i  patulus} (Loisel.) Baker):{\i  W. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b italicus} (Ker-Gawler) Baker, {\i Handb. Amaryll.} 8 (1888) ({\i N. italicus} Ker-Gawler,{\i  N. tazetta} subsp.{\i  lacticolor} (Haw.) Baker): 2n = 22. {\i N. & E. parts of Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b aureus} (Loisel.) Baker,{\i  op. cit.} 9 (1888) ({\i N. aureus} Loisel.): 2n = 22. {\i S.E. France, N.W. Italy, Sardegna; naturalized elsewhere}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  N. corcyrensis} (Herbert) Nyman, {\i Syll.} 365 (1855) ({\i N. tazetta} subsp. {\i corcyrensis} (Herbert) Baker), described from N.W. Greece (Kerkira), has flowers like those of subsp. ({\b b}), but solitary, and with narrow, deflexed perianth-segments. It is perhaps a hybrid between {\b 2} and {\b 3}({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. N. papyraceus} Ker-Gawler,{\i  Bot. Mag. }{\b 24}: t. 947 (1806). Like {\b 3}({\b a}) but flowers up to 20 in the umbel; hypanthial tube 10-20 mm; perianth-segments 8-18 mm; corona pure white. {\i Mediterranean region and S.W. Europe.} Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Si [Co].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers 20-25 mm in diameter; scape compressed, 2-edged
  ........................................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b panizzianus}
\par
1 Flowers 25-40 mm in diameter 2 Leaves glaucous; scape
\par
  compressed, 2-edged; corona usually crenulate ............. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b papyraceus} 
\par
2 Leaves not glaucous; scape almost terete; corona usually
\par
  entire ............................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b polyanthus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b papyraceus}:{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b polyanthus} (Loisel.) Ascherson & Graebner, {\i Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  3}: 390 (1906) ({\i N. polyanthus} Loisel.): •{\i  S. France; naturalized in Spain and Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b panizzianus} (Parl.) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} ed. 2, 148 (1894): 2n = 22. •{\i  S.E. France and N. Italy; Portugal and S.W. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  It would perhaps be more logical to include {\b 4} under {\b 3} as another subspecies, since its only constant difference is in the white corona; but as this distinction is well-marked and without intermediate states, the arrangement given here seems to be of more practical value.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. N. dubius} Gouan,{\i  Obs. Bot. }22 (1773). Leaves 12-25 cm × 3-5 mm, flat, glaucous. Scape 10-20 cm, strongly compressed. Flowers in umbels of 2-6. Spathe 25-40 mm, scarious. Pedicels 20-45 mm. Hypanthial tube c. 12 mm, cylindrical to narrowly infundibuliform. Perianth-segments 6-8 mm, broadly elliptical, imbricate, white. Corona 3-4 × 5-6 mm, white. 2n = 50. •{\i  S. France, N.E. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  An allopolyploid, derived from {\b 4}({\b a}) and {\b 9}, but containing two genomes of the former and four of the latter. As it is fertile and genetically isolated from its parents it is best treated as an independent species in Sect. {\i Tazettae}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. N. elegans} (Haw.) Spach, {\i Hist. Vég.} ({\i Phan}.) {\b 12}: 452 (1841). Bulb up to 35 × 30 mm. Leaves 8-25 cm × 2-4·5 mm, canaliculate, glaucous, appearing before or with the flowers. Scape 15-35 cm. Flowers in umbels of (2-)3-7, fragrant. Spathe 20-40 mm, scarious. Pedicels up to 45 mm, unequal. Hypanthial tube 11-16 mm, green. Perianth-segments 12-20 × 3-6 mm narrowly oblong to elliptical, not imbricate, somewhat deflexed, white. Corona 1-2 × 3-4 mm, yellowish- or brownish-green. Stamens included. Flowering in autumn.{\i  W. & S. Italy, Sicilia. }*Bl It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. NARCISSUS. Flowering in spring or early summer. Leaves flat, usually fairly wide. Flowers solitary, bicoloured. Hypanthial tube cylindrical, slender. Perianth-segments patent or slightly deflexed. Corona small. Filaments much shorter than anthers; anthers dorsifixed, partly exserted, or the lower whorl included.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. N. poeticus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 289 (1753). Bulb 17-40 × 12-35 mm. Leaves 20-40 cm × 5-13 mm, flat, more or less glaucous. Scape 20-50 cm, compressed. Spathe 30-50 mm, scarious. Pedicel 10-45 mm. Hypanthial tube 20-30 mm. Perianth-segments 15-30 × 6-22 mm, ovate-orbicular to oblanceolate-cuneate, white or pale cream. Corona 1-2·5 × 8-14 mm, discoid to very shortly cylindrical, yellow, with red or scarious margin, crenulate.{\i  Mountain meadows. • From E.C. France southwards to C. Spain, S. Italy and N.W. Greece}. Al Au Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W) [Be Br Cz Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable, especially in width of perianth-segments, height of corona, and relative position of the two whorls of stamens. It is often divided into two or more species, but the reticulate nature of the variation makes these difficult to define. Two fairly distinct subspecies may be recognized:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b poeticus}: Leaves 6-10(-12) mm wide. Perianth-segments usually 20-25 mm, obovate-suborbicular, imbricate, without distinct claw. Corona more or less discoid, c. 14 mm in diameter. Lower whorl of stamens included. 2n = 14.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except E.C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b radiiflorus} (Salisb.) Baker,{\i  Handb. Amaryll.} 12 (1888) (subsp.{\i  angustifolius} Hegi, {\i N. radiiflorus} Salisb.): Leaves 5-8 mm wide. Perianth-segments 22-30 mm, narrowly obovate-cuneate, with more or less distinct claw, scarcely imbricate. Corona 2-2·5 × 8-10 mm, shortly cylindrical. All stamens partly exserted. 2n = 14.{\i  S.C. Europe and W. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants on the borders of Switzerland and Italy, intermediate in most respects between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}) have been named{\i  N. verbanensis} (Herbert) Pugsley,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 53}, {\i Suppl.}{\b  2}: 35 (1915). Plants from N. Greece (Pindhos Oros), like subsp. ({\b a}) but with rather smaller flowers, often wider leaves, and corona up to 2 mm long, have been named{\b  N. hellenicus} Pugsley,{\i  op. cit.} 36 (1915) ({\i N. poeticus} subsp.{\i  hellenicus} (Pugsley) Hayek). These latter require further investigation, but are probably best treated as belonging to subsp. ({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. JONQUILLAE DC. (incl. Sect. {\i Apodanthi} A. Fernandes). Flowering in spring, rarely in autumn. Leaves narrow. Flowers solitary or in umbels of 2-5(-8), more or less concolorous, yellow (rarely green). Hypanthial tube cylindrical to narrowly infundibuliform, slender. Perianth-segments patent or deflexed, usually wide, often imbricate. Corona small to fairly large, usually wider than long. Filaments much shorter than anthers; anthers dorsifixed, included, or the upper whorl partly exserted.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 8-11}). {\b N. jonquilla }group. Bulb 10-30 × 10-25 mm. Leaves 1-4 mm wide, dark green, rarely somewhat glaucous, subcylindrical, canaliculate. Spathe 15-50 mm, scarious. Flowers solitary, or in umbels of 2-5(-8), 10-35 mm in diameter, fragrant, bright or deep yellow. Pedicels 10-50 mm. Perianth-segments 4-15 mm, broadly elliptical, patent or deflexed. Corona 3-7 × 4·5-17 mm, usually considerably wider than long, usually crenulate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A confusing group, still requiring critical examination. It seems probable that at least some of the taxa here treated as species would be better regarded as subspecies, as populations with mixed or intermediate characters are very frequent. The information at present available, however, seems insufficient to justify changes in nomenclature;
\par

\par
80}
\par