{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers 22-32 mm in diameter; hypanthial tube (17-)20-30 mm {\b 8. jonquilla}
\par
1 Flowers 12-24 mm in diameter; hypanthial tube 8-18(-20) mm
\par
2 Longest pedicel longer than spathe at anthesis ..................... {\b 10. willkommii}
\par
2 All pedicels shorter than spathe at anthesis
\par
3 Leaves usually shorter than scape; hypanthial tube straight;
\par
  corona more than 9 mm wide ....................................................... {\b 9. requienii}
\par
3 Leaves usually longer than scape; hypanthial tube 
\par
  usually curved; corona less than 9 mm wide............................. {\b 11. gaditanus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. N. jonquilla} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 290 (1753). Leaves 2-4 mm wide. Flowers 22-32 mm in diameter, in umbels of 2-5. Pedicels 15-50 mm at anthesis, shorter or longer than the spathe. Hypanthial tube (17-)20-30 mm, straight. Perianth-segments 10-15 mm, patent. Corona 3-5 × 9-15 mm. 2n = 14. {\i Meadows and damp places. • C. & S. Spain, S. & E. Portugal; widely cultivated for its perfume, and naturalized elsewhere in S.Europe.} Hs Lu [Ga It Ju.]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. N. requienii} M. J. Roemer,{\i  Syn. Monogr.}{\b  4}: 236 (1847) ({\i N. juncifolius} auct., non Salisb., nec Lag.,{\i  N. pallens} Freyn ex Willk.). Leaves 1-2 mm wide. Flowers 16-22 mm in diameter, solitary or in pairs. Pedicels 11-22 mm at anthesis, shorter than spathe. Hypanthial tube 12-18(-20) mm, straight. Perianth-segments 7-10 mm, patent. Corona 4-6 × 10-17 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Rocky hillsides and meadows. • S. France, S. & E. Spain.} ?Co Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants recently reported from Sardegna are like {\b 9} but with leaves up to 4·5 mm wide and corona not more than 7 mm wide. They require further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. N. willkommii} (Samp.) A. Fernandes,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2, {\b 40}: 213 (1966) ({\i N. jonquilloides} Willk., non Willd. ex Schultes fil.). Leaves 2-3 mm wide, somewhat glaucous, erect. Flowers 14-19 mm in diameter, in umbels of 2-3. Pedicels 20-45 mm at anthesis, the longest exceeding the spathe. Hypanthial tube 11-15 mm, straight. Perianth-segments 6-9 mm, patent. Corona 4-5 × 7-11 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Damp grassland. • S. Portugal, S.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. N. gaditanus} Boiss. & Reuter in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov}.{\b  3}({\b 4}): 96 (1859) (incl.{\i  N. minutiflorus} Willk.). Leaves 1-2 mm wide, usually procumbent. Flowers 10-20 mm in diameter, in umbels of 2-5(-8), rarely solitary. Pedicels 13-35 mm at anthesis, usually shorter than spathe. Hypanthial tube 8-17 mm, usually curved. Perianth-segments 4-9 mm, patent or deflexed. Corona 2·5-7 × 4·5-8 mm. 2n = 14, 21. •{\i  S. Portugal, S. Spain. }Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  N. fernandesii} G. Pedro,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2, {\b 21}: 60 (1947), is known from two populations in S.C. Portugal; somewhat similar plants are found in S.W. Spain. It is in most characters intermediate between {\b 10} and {\b 11}; its taxonomic status is obscure.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 12-15}). {\b N. rupicola} group. Bulb 15-22 × 8-18 mm. Leaves 8-30 cm × 1·5-5 mm, more or less glaucous, canaliculate and with 2 keels on the convex surface, or rarely 4-angled. Spathe 15-35 mm, scarious, tubular below, open above. Flowers solitary or in umbels of 2-5, 13-30 mm in diameter, seldom strongly fragrant, deep yellow, concolorous. Pedicels 1-15 mm. Hypanthial tube 10-25 mm, narrowly cylindrical. Perianth-segments 7-14 × 5-11 mm, patent or slightly deflexed. Corona 2-8 × 5-10 mm, entire or lobed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A group of four closely related taxa whose diagnostic characters, though rather slight, seem, in contrast to those of the preceding group, to be sufficiently clear-cut for specific separation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers solitary; spathe tubular for ¾ of its length;
\par
  pedicel not more than 3 mm, often absent ................................... {\b 12. rupicola} 
\par
1 Flowers 1-4; spathe tubular for only 1/4-1/3 of its length;
\par
  pedicel 6-15 mm
\par
2 Leaves 4-angled, ± procumbent, usually minutely scabrid;
\par
  flowers 12-17 mm in diameter ................................................. {\b 15. scaberulus}
\par
2 Leaves canaliculate, with 2 dorsal keels, ± erect,
\par
  smooth; flowers 17-33 mm in diameter
\par
3 Corona almost as long as wide; scape with (1-)2-4 flowers ..... {\b 14. calcicola}
\par
3 Corona 1¾-2 times as wide as long; flowers solitary,
\par
  rarely in pairs ....................................................................... {\b 13. cuatrecasasii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. N. rupicola} Dufour in Schultes & Schultes fil.,{\i  Syst. Veg. }{\b 7}: 958 (1830). Leaves 1·5-3 mm wide, erect to decumbent, with 2 dorsal keels; margin smooth. Spathe 20-35 mm, tubular for c. ¾ of its length. Flowers 15-30 mm in diameter, solitary. Pedicel absent, rarely up to 3 mm. Hypanthial tube (13-)18-25 mm. Perianth-segments 7-13 × 5-10 mm. Corona 2-5 × 7-10 mm, at least twice as wide as long, subentire to conspicuously 6-lobed. All stamens included. 2n = 14.{\i  Rock-crevices and stony mountain pastures; calcifuge. • C. Spain, N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. N. cuatrecasasii} Casas, Laínz & Ruiz Rejón, {\i Cuad. Ci. Biol. Granada}{\b  2}: 4 (1973) ({\i N. rupicola }subsp. {\i pedunculatus} (Cuatrec.) Laínz ex Meikle). Leaves 2·5-4·5 mm wide, erect, with 2 dorsal keels; margin smooth. Spathe 20-25 mm, tubular for c. ¼ of its length. Flowers 22-30 mm in diameter, solitary (rarely in pairs). Pedicel (6-)9-12 mm. Hypanthial tube (10-)12-15 mm. Perianth-segments 9-12 × 7-11 mm. Corona 4-6 × 8-10 mm, 1¾-2 times as wide as long; margin entire or crenulate. Upper whorl of stamens slightly exserted. 2n = 14.{\i  Rock crevices; calcicole. • Mountains of C. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. N. calcicola} Mendonca, {\i Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2, {\b 6}: 318 (1930). Leaves 2-5 mm wide, erect, with 2 dorsal keels; margins smooth. Spathe 16-25 mm, tubular for c. ¼ of its length. Flowers 17-25 (-33) mm in diameter, in umbels of (1-)2-5. Pedicels 6-15 mm. Hypanthial tube 13-18 mm. Perianth-segments 7-10(-14) × 5-8 mm. Corona 4-8 × 6-9 mm, only slightly wider than long; margin obscurely crenulate. Upper whorl of stamens exserted. 2n = 14.{\i  Crevices of limestone rocks. • W.C. Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. N. scaberulus} Henriq., {\i Bol. Soc. Brot.}{\b  6}: 45 (1888). Leaves 1-3·5 mm wide, usually decumbent, with 2 dorsal keels; margin usually minutely scabrid. Spathe 15-20 mm, tubular for c. ¼ of its length. Flowers 12-17 mm in diameter, solitary or in umbels of 2-3. Pedicels 8-15 mm. Hypanthial tube 12-17 mm. Perianth-segments 4·5-7 × 3-5 mm. Corona 2-5 × 5-7 mm, usually 1½-2 times as wide as long; margin entire or crenulate. Upper whorl of stamens exserted. 2n = 14.{\i  Rocky places. • N.C. Portugal }({\i Mondego valley}). Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. N. viridiflorus} Schousboe, {\i Vextr. Marokko} 157 (1800). Bulb 22-30 × 17-30 mm. Leaves up to 30 cm × 4 mm, cylindrical, hollow, glaucous, appearing shortly after the flowers. Scape 15-40 cm. Flowers in umbels of 2-5, dull green, concolorous, somewhat fetid. Spathe 20-50 mm. Pedicels unequal, up to 70 mm. Hypanthial tube 10-15 mm, narrowly infundibuliform. Perianth-segments 10-16 × 2-3·5 mm, linear-oblong, acute, patent or somewhat deflexed. Corona 1 × 3-5 mm, deeply 6-lobed. Stamens included. Flowering in autumn.{\i  Damp places. • S.W. Spain} ({\i Gibraltar region}). Hs. ({\i Morocco.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. GANYMEDES Salisb. ex Schultes & Schultes fil. Flowering in spring. Leaves flat or subcylindrical, fairly narrow. Flowers solitary or in umbels of 2-6, concolorous. Hypanthial tube infundibuliform. Perianth-segments narrow, sharply deflexed. Corona medium-sized, obconical-campanulate to subcylindrical,
\par

\par
81}
\par