{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 about as wide as long or slightly wider. Filaments straight, very unequal, those of one whorl about as long as anthers, deeply included in hypanthial tube, those of the other whorl much longer than the anthers, exserted. Anthers dorsifixed. Plants heterostylic.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. N. triandrus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 416 (1762). Bulb 12-20 × 8-17 mm. Leaves 15-30 cm × 1·5-3 mm, dark green. Scape about equalling leaves. Flowers drooping, white to bright yellow. Spathe 15-40 mm. Pedicels 8-40 mm. Hypanthial tube 10-20 mm. Perianth-segments 10-22(-30) mm, lanceolate to linear-oblong. Corona 5-15(-25) × 7-25 mm.{\i  Hedges, woods and rocky pastures. • Spain and Portugal; N.W. France.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable, but the variation is insufficient to justify the numerous segregate species that have been described. Plants of this section have long been cultivated, and several of the described taxa are known only from gardens. The characters which seem to show the best correlation with each other and with geographical range are colour of flower, number of flowers on a stem, and size of floral parts, especially the corona. On this basis 3 somewhat ill-defined subspecies may be recognized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers usually solitary, more rarely in umbels of 2-3,
\par
  pale cream to bright yellow; hypanthial tube 10-16 mm;
\par
  perianth-segments 10-18 mm; corona 5-12 mm .............. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b pallidulus}
\par
1 Flowers often in umbels of 2-3(-6), less often solitary,
\par
  white to very pale yellow; hypanthial tube 12-20 mm;
\par
  perianth-segments 15-22(-30) mm; corona 10-15(-25) mm
\par
2 Corona 10-15 mm ............................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b triandrus}
\par
2 Corona 15-25 mm ................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b capax}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pallidulus} (Graells) D. A. Webb,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 303 (1978) ({\i N. pallidulus} Graells; incl.{\i  N. concolor }(Haw.) Link): 2n = 14.{\i  Portugal, C., S. & E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b triandrus} (incl.{\i  N. cernuus }Salisb.,{\i  N. pulchellus} sensu Willk., ? an Salisb.): 2n = 14.{\i  N. Spain, N. Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b capax} (Salisb.) D.A. Webb, {\i loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i Queltia capax} Salisb.,{\i  N. capax} (Salisb.) Schultes & Schultes fil.): 2n = 14.{\i  N.W. France} ({\i Îles de Glénans, dépt. Finistère}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. BULBOCODII DC. Flowering in winter or spring. Leaves narrow, semicylindrical. Flowers solitary, concolorous. Hypanthial tube broadly obconical. Perianth-segments narrow, erecto-patent. Corona large, obconical or broadly infundibuliform. Filaments curved, ascending distally, much longer than anthers. Anthers dorsifixed, widely exserted from hypanthial tube and sometimes from corona.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. N. bulbocodium} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 289 (1753). Bulb 15-20 × 10-15 mm, whitish or pale brown. Leaves up to 45 cm, but usually much less, 1-1·5(-3) mm wide, dark green, 2-4(-7) from each bulb. Scape erect, usually slightly longer than leaves. Flowers more or less horizontal, pale yellow to deep orange-yellow. Spathe 17-35 mm. Pedicel (3-)5-25 mm. Hypanthial tube 4-25 mm. Perianth-segments 6-15 × 1·5-5 mm, linear to narrowly triangular, acute or mucronate. Corona 7-25 × 9-35 mm. Stamens usually included in corona but sometimes exserted.{\i  Scrub, rocky ground and mountain pastures. Spain and Portugal, S.W. France.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable, especially in size and colour of flower. These characters vary continuously and show little correlation with geographical distribution or chromosome number. On the basis of other characters two subspecies may be distinguished:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b bulbocodium} ({\i N. nivalis }Graells,{\i  N. graellsii} Graells, {\i N. tenuifolius }Salisb., {\i N. aureus} DC., non Loisel.): Leaves usually more or less erect. Hypanthial tube and perianth usually tinged with green. Corona regularly obconical, not narrowed at margin. 2n = 14, 21, 28, 35, 42, 49, 56.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b obesus} (Salisb.) Maire in Jahandiez & Maire, {\i Cat. Pl. Maroc}{\b  1}: 138 (1931) ({\i N. obesus} Salisb.): Leaves very narrow, mostly procumbent or arcuate-deflexed. Flowers only slightly tinged with green. Corona slightly narrowed at margin. 2n = 26, 39.{\i  W. & S. Portugal, S.W. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. N. hedraeanthus} (Webb & Heldr.) Colmeiro,{\i  Enum. Pl. Penins. Hisp.-Lusit.}{\b  5}: 80 (1889). Bulb c. 15 × 10 mm, dark brown. Leaves solitary, 6-12 cm × 1 mm, dark green, more or less erect. Scape decumbent or ascending, usually shorter than leaves. Flowers directed obliquely upwards, pale yellow, only slightly tinged with green. Spathe 12-20 mm. Pedicel absent. Hypanthial tube 10-15 mm. Perianth-segments 8-13 × 3-4·5 mm, oblong, obtuse. Corona c. 10 × 15 mm, regularly obconical. Stamens at full anthesis widely exserted from corona. 2n = 14.{\i  Mountain meadows and rocky ground. • S.E. & S.C. Spain. }Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. N. cantabricus} DC. in Redouté,{\i  Liliacées}{\b  8}: sub t. 486 (1815) ({\i N. clusii} Dunal). Bulb 15-25 × 12-20 mm, dark brown to black. Leaves usually solitary, 15-30 cm × 1-1·5 mm. Scape 10-25 cm, erect. Flowers horizontal, white. Spathe 20-30 mm. Pedicel 3-9 mm. Hypanthial tube 12-20 mm. Perianth-segments 8-12 × 2-4·5 mm, linear-lanceolate. Corona 12-18 × 20-35 mm, broadly infundibuliform, with conspicuously expanded and recurved margin. Stamens slightly shorter than corona. 2n = 14.{\i  Scrub. S. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. PSEUDONARCISSI DC. (Sect . {\i Ajax} (Salisb. ex Haw.) Dumort.). Flowering in spring or early summer. Leaves flat, usually fairly wide. Flowers usually solitary, rarely in umbels of 2-4. Hypanthial tube broadly obconical. Perianth-segments usually patent to erecto-patent, rarely deflexed, fairly narrow. Corona large, more or less cylindrical, at least as long as wide. Filaments straight, as long as anthers or up to twice as long. Anthers subbasifixed (rarely dorsifixed), exserted from hypanthial tube but usually concealed within the corona.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. N. longispathus} Pugsley, {\i Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc.}{\b  58}: 54 (1933). Bulb c. 30 mm. Leaves 40-60 cm or more, 10-15 mm wide. Scape 30-175 cm. Spathe 60-100 mm, green. Flowers solitary or in pairs, directed obliquely upwards. Pedicel 40-90 mm. Hypanthial tube 10-15 mm. Perianth-segments 25-32 mm, medium yellow, patent, not or only slightly twisted. Corona 25-30 mm, slightly deeper in colour than perianth, expanded at apex, crenate. 2n = 14.{\i  In or near mountain streams. • S.E. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Cazorla}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Distinct in its very long spathe and pedicel. The height of the plant seems to vary greatly in accordance with water supply and perhaps other factors.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. N. pseudonarcissus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 289 (1753). Bulb 20-50 mm. Leaves 8-50 cm × 5-15 mm, usually glaucous. Scape 12-50(-90) cm. Spathe 20-60 mm, scarious. Flowers solitary, or rarely in umbels of 2-4, horizontal, drooping or suberect, concolorous or bicoloured. Hypanthial tube 15-25 mm. Perianth-segments 18-40(-55) mm, white to deep yellow, patent to erecto-patent, sometimes twisted. Corona 15-45 mm, white to deep yellow; margin subentire to fimbriate or 6-lobed.{\i  Woods, meadows and rocky ground. • W. Europe, northwards to N. England; long cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized elsewhere.} Br Ga Ge He Ho Hs Lu [Al Au Bu Cz It Ju Rm].
\par

\par
82}
\par