{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  Every author has given a different circumscription to this species, which lies at the centre of the most difficult section of the genus. Even Pugsley, who recognized 27 other species within the section{\i  Pseudonarcissi}, admitted the great variability of {\i N. pseudonarcissus}, and it is clear that if all his variants are taken into account the separation of many of his other species becomes impossible. Fernandes (1951) included 19 of Pugsley's species under{\i  N. pseudonarcissus} (leaving only 3 other species in the section); but in 1969 he restored 16 of these to specific rank. An intermediate treatment is attempted here, giving to{\i  N. pseudonarcissus} a moderately wide circumscription and recognizing 7 subspecies within it, as well as 5 other species in the section.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corona white to medium yellow
\par
2 Pedicel 10-25 mm; corona white to very pale yellow ... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b moschatus}
\par
2 Pedicel 3-10 mm; corona pale to medium yellow
\par
3 Corona 30-40 mm, distinctly expanded and usually lobed
\par
  at margin ...................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b pallidiflorus}
\par
3 Corona 20-35 mm, scarcely expanded at margin and usually
\par
  only slightly lobed .................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b pseudonarcissus}
\par
1 Corona deep golden-yellow
\par
4 Perianth-segments less than 20 mm
\par
5 Perianth-segments twisted; corona expanded at margin ........ ({\b e}) subsp. {\b major}
\par
5 Perianth-segments not twisted; corona not expanded at
\par
  margin ............................................................................ ({\b g}) subsp. {\b nevadensis}
\par
4 Perianth-segments at least 20 mm
\par
6 Perianth-segments whitish to medium yellow, paler than corona
\par
7 Pedicel 8-15(-25) mm; corona distinctly expanded at
\par
  margin; flowers horizontal or directed upwards ................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b nobilis}
\par
7 Pedicel 3-12 mm; corona scarcely expanded at margin;
\par
  flowers horizontal or drooping .............................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b pseudonarcissus}
\par
6 Perianth-segments deep golden-yellow, almost the same
\par
  colour as the corona
\par
8 Leaves not more than 15 cm; perianth-segments not
\par
  twisted ................................................................................ ({\b f}) subsp. {\b portensis}
\par
8 Leaves at least 20 cm; perianth-segments twisted ................. ({\b e}) subsp. {\b major}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pseudonarcissus}: Leaves 12-35 cm × 6-12 mm. Flowers horizontal or drooping. Pedicel 3-12 mm. Perianth-segments 20-35 mm, whitish to medium yellow, more or less twisted. Corona 20-35 mm, pale to deep yellow, usually somewhat deeper in colour than the perianth; margin not markedly expanded or lobed.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except Portugal and S. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pallidiflorus} (Pugsley) A. Fernandes,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2,{\b  25}: 182 (1951): Leaves 15-30 cm × 5-12 mm. Flowers horizontal or drooping. Pedicel 3-10 mm. Perianth-segments 30-40 mm, cream-coloured to pale yellow, more or less twisted. Corona 30-40 mm, pale to medium yellow, slightly deeper in colour than perianth; margin expanded and usually recurved. {\i Pyrenees, Cordillera Cantábrica.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b moschatus} (L.) Baker,{\i  Handb. Amaryll.} 4 (1888) ({\i N. moschatus} L.): Leaves 10-40 cm × 5-12 mm. Flowers horizontal or drooping, concolorous or nearly so. Pedicel 10-25 mm. Perianth-segments 20-35 mm, white to cream-coloured, twisted. Corona 25-40 mm, white to very pale yellow; margin scarcely expanded.{\i  Pyrenees, Cordillera Cantábrica.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b nobilis} (Haw.) A. Fernandes,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2, {\b 25}: 182 (1951): Leaves 15-50 cm × 8-15 mm. Flowers horizontal or directed upwards. Pedicel 8-15(-25) mm. Perianth-segments 30-40(-55) mm, pale yellow, usually twisted. Corona 30-40(-45) mm, deep yellow; margin expanded. 2n = 28.{\i  N. Portugal, N.W. & N.C. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b major} (Curtis) Baker, {\i Handb. Amaryll.} 4 (1888) ({\i N. major} Curtis): Leaves 20-50 cm × 5-15 mm. Flowers horizontal to suberect, concolorous or nearly so. Pedicel 8-30 mm. Perianth-segments 18-40 mm, medium to deep yellow twisted. Corona 20-40 mm, deep yellow; margin more or less expanded. {\i Spain, Portugal, S. France; naturalized further north}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b portensis} (Pugsley) A. Fernandes,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2, {\b 25}: 183 (1951): Leaves 8-12 cm × 5-7 mm, considerably shorter than scape. Flowers horizontal or slightly drooping, concolorous, deep yellow. Pedicel 5-15 mm. Perianth-segments 20-30 mm, not twisted. Corona 25-35 mm, somewhat obconical but not expanded at margin.{\i  N. Portugal, N.W. & C. Spain.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b g}) Subsp. {\b nevadensis} (Pugsley) A. Fernandes,{\i  loc. cit.} (1951): Leaves 12-30 × 5-10 mm. Flowers horizontal to suberect, often in umbels of 2-4. Pedicel 20-35 mm. Perianth-segments 15-20 mm, pale yellow, not twisted. Corona 15-25 mm, medium to bright yellow; margin slightly expanded. {\i S. Spain }({\i Sierra Nevada}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  N. obvallaris} Salisb., {\i Prodr.} 221 (1796) ({\i N. pseudonarcissus} subsp. {\i obvallaris} (Salisb.) A. Fernandes), is a variant intermediate between subspp. ({\b e}) and ({\b f}) (but closer to the former), which probably arose in cultivation. It is naturalized in Britain (S.W. Wales).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. N. bicolor} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 415 (1762). Bulb 25-35 mm. Leaves 30-35 cm × 10-14 mm. Scape 30-40 cm. Spathe 25-40 mm, scarious. Flowers solitary, horizontal. Pedicel 15-35 mm. Hypanthial tube 8-12 mm. Perianth-segments 35-40 mm, cream-coloured to pale yellow, erecto-patent, not twisted. Corona 35-40 mm, deep yellow; margin scarcely expanded, entire or slightly crenulate.{\i  Mountain meadows. • Pyrenees and Corbières.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Described from a cultivated plant; the wild populations have been separated as {\b N. abscissus} (Haw.) Schultes & Schultes fil.{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  7}: 941 (1830), but the differences are slight.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. N. minor} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 415 (1762). Bulb 20-30 mm. Leaves 8-20(-25) cm × 3-10 mm, glaucous. Scape 8-25 cm. Spathe 25-40 mm, scarious. Flowers solitary, horizontal or drooping. Pedicel 3-20 mm. Hypanthial tube 9-15 mm. Perianth-segments 16-22 mm, very pale to deep yellow, erectopatent, sometimes twisted. Corona 16-25 mm, deep yellow margin variously lobed or dentate. 2n = 14. {\i Mountain grassland and open scrub. • Pyrenees and N. Spain; naturalized in S.E. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The circumscription and distribution of this species are subject to some doubt. Records from N. Portugal and N.W. Spain appear to be referable to {\b 25}, or perhaps in some cases to hybrids between {\b 22} and {\b 25}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. N. asturiensis} (Jordan) Pugsley, {\i Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc. }{\b 58}: 40 (1933). Bulb 15-20 mm. Leaves 5-15 cm × 2-6 mm, glaucous. Scape 7-10(-20) cm. Spathe 15-22(-28) mm, greenish at anthesis, scarious later. Flowers solitary, usually drooping, concolorous, medium yellow. Pedicel 3-10 mm. Hypanthial tube 5-9 mm. Perianth-segments 7-14 mm, erecto-patent, not twisted. Corona 8-16 mm, constricted in the middle and expanded towards the apex; margin somewhat lobed or laciniate. 2n = 14, 15. •{\i  N. Portugal, N.W. & N.C. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b N. lagoi} Merino,{\i  Fl. Galic.}{\b  3}: 615 (1909), described from a single gathering near Lugo (N.W. Spain), has very small flowers rather like those of {\b 25}, but much larger leaves and longer scape. 
\par

\par
83}
\par