{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 It is probably a variant of {\b 25}, or a hybrid between {\b 25} and some variant of {\b 22} or {\b 24}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. N. cyclamineus} DC. in Redouté, Liliacées {\b 8}: sub t. 486 (1815). Bulb c. 15 mm. Leaves 15-30 cm × 4-6 mm, bright green. Scape 15-20(-30) cm. Spathe c. 20 mm, green at anthesis, scarious later. Flowers solitary, drooping or pendent, concolorous, deep yellow. Pedicel 15-25 mm. Hypanthial tube 2-3 mm. Perianth-segments c. 20 mm, strongly deflexed so as to lie almost parallel to pedicel. Corona c. 20 mm, narrow; margin subentire to crenate-serrate, slightly expanded. Anthers dorsifixed. 2n = 14. {\i River-banks and damp mountain pastures. • N.W. Portugal, N.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  INTERSECTIONAL HYBRIDS
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. N}. × {\b incomparabilis} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed 8., no. 3 (1768) ({\i N. poeticus }×{\i  pseudonarcissus}). Bulb 25-30 mm. Leaves 17-35 cm × 8-12 mm, somewhat glaucous, nearly flat. Scape 17-40 mm, compressed. Spathe c. 35 mm. Flowers solitary, scarcely fragrant. Hypanthial tube 20-25 mm, narrowly obconical or narrowly infundibuliform. Perianth-segments 25-30 × 12-16 mm, narrowly obovate, pale yellow, patent. Corona 13-22 × 17-20 mm, deep orange-yellow; margin undulate and lobulate.{\i  Meadows. • Probably native in S. & S.C. France; widely cultivated and naturalized elsewhere.} Ga [Au He Hs It Ju].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. N}. ×{\b  odorus} L., {\i Cent. Pl.}{\b  2}: 14 (1756) ({\i N. jonquilla} × {\i pseudonarcissus}). Bulb 25-30 mm. Leaves 35-50 cm × 6-8 mm, strongly keeled, bright green. Scape 25-40 cm, more or less terete. Spathe 50-70 mm, scarious. Flowers 1-4, concolorous, bright yellow, usually fragrant. Pedicel 20-30 mm. Hypanthial tube c. 20 mm, narrowly infundibuliform. Perianth-segments c. 25 × 13 mm. Corona 13-18 × 17-20 mm, lobed or subentire. {\i Of garden origin; naturalized in S. Europe.} [Ga ?Hs It.]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. N}. × {\b  medioluteus} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 4 (1768) ({\i N. biflorus} Curtis; {\i N. poeticus} ×{\i  tazetta}). Bulb 60 × 45 mm. Leaves 45-70 cm × 7-10 mm, flat, glaucous. Scape 25-60 cm, compressed. Spathe 35-45 mm, scarious. Flowers (1-)2(-3), fragrant. Pedicel 25-35 mm. Hypanthial tube 20-25 mm, cylindrical, expanded at the mouth. Perianth-segments 18-22 mm, suborbicular, white. Corona 3-5 × 9-12 mm, bright yellow. 2n = 24. •{\i  Native in S. France; cultivated elsewhere for ornament and widely naturalized.} Ga [Br Hb He Hs It Ju Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. N}. × {\b intermedius} Loisel.{\i  Fl. Gall.} 191 (1806) ({\i N. jonquilla} ×{\i  tazetta}). Leaves 30-45 cm × 5-8 mm, deeply canaliculate, bright green. Scape 25-40 cm, more or less terete. Spathe 30-40 mm, scarious. Flowers in umbels of 3-6, fragrant. Pedicels 20-40 mm. Hypanthial tube 14-20 mm, cylindrical-trigonous, slender. Perianth-segments 10-14 mm, ovate, bright yellow. Corona 3-4 × 6-7 mm, slightly deeper in colour than perianth. •{\i  W. Mediterranean region; perhaps native in parts of S.W. France and N.E. Spain, elsewhere an escape from cultivation.} *Ga *Hs [Bl It].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 7.      Pancratium}        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Umbel of 3-15 flowers; spathe 2-valved; some or all of the flowers subtended by linear bracteoles. Flowers white, fragrant, erect to inclined. Hypanthial tube present. Corona conspicuous, adnate to lower part of filaments. Capsule subglobose, obscurely trigonous; pericarp dry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Flowers 10-15 cm; perianth-segments shorter than hypanthial
\par
  tube and less than twice as long as corona ................................. {\b 1. maritimum} 
\par
Flowers 6-9 cm; perianth-segments longer than hypanthial
\par
  tube and more than twice as long as corona .................................. {\b 2. illyricum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. maritimum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 291 (1753). Bulb very large, deeply sunk, tapered to a long neck. Leaves up to 50 cm × 20 mm, lorate, glaucous, appearing before anthesis. Scape stout, compressed. Spathe 4-7 cm. Pedicels 5-10 mm, shorter than ovary. Hypanthial tube 60-80 mm, very slender. Perianth-segments 30-50 mm, linear-lanceolate, erecto-patent to patent. Corona c. 2/3 as long as perianth-segments; margin with 12 triangular teeth. Free part of filament about equalling anther. Flowering in mid-summer. 2n = 22.{\i  Maritime sands. S. Europe, extending northwards to} 47° 30' {\i in W. France.} Al ?Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. illyricum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 291 (1753). Like {\b 1} but leaves up to 30 mm wide; pedicels 10-15 mm, about equalling ovary; hypanthial tube 15-25 mm, stouter; corona less than half as long as perianth-segments, deeply cleft into 6 bidentate lobes; free part of filament much longer than anther; flowering in late spring. 2n = 22.{\i  Rocky ground, mainly near the sea. • Islands of W. Mediterranean region }({\i Corse, Sardegna, Capraia}). Co It Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Records from Malta and the mainland of Italy appear to be referable to {\b 1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 186.     DIOSCOREACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. V.H. Heywood. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dioecious perennial herbs with subterranean tubers. Leaves cordate or rarely truncate at base, entire. Flowers small, in axillary clusters, spikes or racemes; sometimes the female flowers solitary. Perianth persistent, the male campanulate, 6-lobed, the female deeply lobed or with 6 minute segments, greenish to whitish. Ovary superior, 3-locular, with 2 ovules in each loculus; styles 3. Fruit a capsule or berry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Fruit a berry; seeds globose, unwinged ........................................... {\b 3. Tamus}
\par
1 Fruit a capsule; seeds flat
\par
2 Stem twining; leaf-veins branched seeds winged ...................... {\b 1. Dioscorea}
\par
2 Stem straight; leaf-veins unbranched; seeds unwinged ............... {\b 2. Borderea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.       Dioscorea}        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Tuber cylindrical. Stem twining. Leaves alternate or subopposite. Flowers in lax spikes of fasciculate clusters. Perianth of male flowers campanulate; stamens 6, inserted at base of perianth. Perianth of female flowers deeply 6-lobed; styles short, with 2-fid stigmas. Fruit a 3-winged capsule. Seeds flat, winged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. balcanica} Kosanin,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  64}: 37 (1914). Stems up to 60 cm, spreading or ascending, unbranched, twining dextrally. Leaves up to 7 × 6 cm, acute, with 9 curved, branched veins, long-petiolate. Flowers c. 2 mm, greenish. Fruiting spike up to 7 cm, pendent. Capsule 2-2·5 cm in diameter. Seeds with
\par

\par
84}
\par