{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 suborbicular, membranous wings.{\i  Scrub. • S.W. Jugoslavia, N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.      Borderea}       Miégeville
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Dioscorea} but tuber napiform; stem not twining, leaf-veins unbranched; seeds unwinged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200   Leaves not narrowing below the apex, not translucent;
\par
  capsule 12-20 × 12-15 mm .......................................................... {\b 1. pyrenaica} 
\par
 Leaves narrowing below the apex, translucent; capsule
\par
  8-9 × 6-7 mm ................................................................................ {\b 2. chouardii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. pyrenaica} Miégeville, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  13}: 374 (1866) ({\i Dioscorea pyrenaica} Bubani & Bord. ex Gren.). Stem up to 20 cm, branched above, angled-striate. Leaves 2-2·5 × 2 cm, broadly cordate-ovate, not narrowing below the acute or obtuse apex, dark green, not translucent, with 5-7 curved, unbranched veins, long-petiolate. Male racemes 3-6 cm. Female racemes very short, 1- to 3-flowered. Capsule 12-20 × 12-15 mm, the valves subrectangular; seeds lenticular. 2n = 24.{\i  Limestone rocks and screes. • C. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. chouardii} (Gaussen) Heslot, {\i Compt.-Rend. Acad. Sci.} ({\i Paris}) {\b 237}: 434 (1953). Like {\b 1} but leaves narrowing below the mucronate apex, very shiny, translucent; capsule 8-9 × 6-7 mm, subcuneate at base, the valves oblong-orbicular. 2n = 24.{\i  Limestone rock-crevices. • C. Pyrenees }({\i valley of the R. Noguera Ribagorzana}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.        Tamus}           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Tuber large, cylindrical to ovoid, often irregular. Stem twining. Leaves alternate. Flowers in axillary racemes. Perianth of male flowers urceolate-campanulate, with 6 subequal lobes; stamens 6, inserted at base of perianth. Perianth of female flowers with 6 minute, narrow segments. Fruit a berry. Seeds globose, unwinged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. communis} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }1028 (1753). Stem up to 4 m longitudinally striate, sometimes branched, glabrous twining sinistrally. Leaves 8-15(-20) × 4-11(-16) cm, broadly ovate, long-acuminate, dark shining green, with 3-9 curved and branched veins, long-petiolate. Flowers 3-6 mm in diameter, greenish-yellow. Berry 10-12 mm in diameter, red, rarely yellowish. 2n = 48.{\i  Woods and hedgerows. S., S.C. & W. Europe, northwards to N. England.} Al Az Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [Hb].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants with the leaves hastate-trilobed, the lateral lobes orbicular and the terminal lanceolate, occur in various parts of the range; they have been called {\b T. cretica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1028 (1753), but are not worth more than varietal status.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 187.       PONTEDERIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.H. Valentine. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial, rhizomatous, aquatic herbs. Leaves petiolate. Inflorescence a spike or raceme, subtended by a spathe-like bract. Flowers hermaphrodite, more or less zygomorphic, usually ephemeral. Perianth-segments 6, petaloid, connate at least at the base. Stamens 3 or 6. Ovary superior, 3-locular, or 1-locular by abortion, 1- to many-seeded. Fruit a capsule, tightly invested by the persistent perianth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Penanth divided almost to the base; flowers distinctly 
\par
  pedicellate ................................................................................ {\b 4. Monochoria}
\par
1 Penanth with a distinct tube, at least half as long as 
\par
  the lobes; flowers sessile
\par
2 Stamens 3 ............................................................................... {\b 2. Heteranthera}
\par
2 Stamens 6
\par
3 Plant rooted in the substratum; petioles not inflated;
\par
  perianth 2-lipped ........................................................................ {\b 1. Pontederia}
\par
3 Plant usually floating; petioles inflated at the base;
\par
  penanth not 2-lipped .................................................................... {\b 3. Eichornia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.       Pontederia}       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.H. Valentine. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome stout, creeping. Leaves mostly basal. Stem erect, with a single cauline leaf in addition to the spathe. Inflorescence a spike; flowers numerous, small, violet-blue. Perianth with a distinct tube; limb 2-lipped, with both lips 3-lobed. Stamens 6, 3 inserted at base of upper lip of perianth, the other 3 lower down on the tube. Ovary 1-locular. Fruit 1-seeded; perianth indurated in fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. cordata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 288 (1753). Stem 30-100 cm. Leaves 5-25 × 4-15 cm, erect, long-petiolate, narrowly deltate-ovate, cordate. Spike dense, glandular-pubescent. Flowers trimorphic. Perianth c. 8 mm across. Anthers blue. Stigma 3- to 6-partite. Capsule 6-10 mm.{\i  Occasionally planted in wild situations in W. Europe, and naturalized on lake-margins and in drains in N. Italy and S. Switzerland}. [He It.] ({\i E. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.       Heteranthera}       Ruiz & Pavón 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome creeping and rooting at the nodes. Inflorescence a small, inconspicuous spike, emerging from the sheathing petiole of a leaf. Flowers pale blue or white, small. Perianth nearly regular, with a long, slender tube and 6 subequal lobes. Stamens 3, unequal. Ovary 3-locular; capsule many-seeded.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. reniformis} Ruiz & Pavón,{\i  Fl. Peruv. }{\b 1}: 43 (1798). Leaves up to 3 × 3·5 cm, mostly reniform, but a few sometimes ovate-cordate; petiole up to 10 cm. Spike 2- to 5-flowered. Perianth-tube c. 8 mm; lobes shorter, oblong. Posterior stamen with a large, greenish anther, the other two with smaller, yellow anthers. Stigma capitate.{\i  Naturalized as a weed in rice-fields in N. Italy}. [It.] ({\i North and South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.        Eichornia}            Kunth
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome fairly stout, horizontal. Inflorescence a conspicuous spike. Flowers violet-blue, large. Perianth nearly regular, with a slender tube equalling or somewhat shorter than the lobes, of which the dorsal is slightly larger than the others. Stamens 6; filaments curved, 3 short and 3 long. Ovary 3-locular; capsule many-seeded.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. crassipes} (C.F.P. Mart.) Solms-Laub. in A. & C. DC. {\i Monogr. Phan.}{\b  4}: 527 (1883). Plant usually floating. Leaves
\par

\par
85}
\par