{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 aerial, arising in tufts, up to 8 × 8 cm, rhombic to suborbicular; petiole variable in length, the shorter ones much inflated in the lower half, and all consisting largely of spongy aerenchyma. Spike c. 15 cm, with 8-12 flowers 5-7 cm across. Anthers yellow, variably tinged with blue. Stigma capitate, coarsely papillose.{\i  Naturalized in W.C. Portugal.} [Lu.] ({\i Brazil; extensively naturalized elsewhere in the tropics and subtropics.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.     Monochoria}        C. Presl
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome short, vertical or oblique. Inflorescence a raceme, sometimes with the axis very short so as to become almost an umbel. Flowers blue, fairly large. Perianth-tube very short, almost obsolete; segments subequal. Stamens 6, one larger than the other 5. Ovary 3-locular; capsule many-seeded.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. korsakowii} Regel & Maack, {\i Mém. Acad. Sci. Petersb.} ser. 7,{\b  4}({\b 4}): 155 (1861). Leaves 6-12 × 4-9 cm, cordate-ovate; petiole up to 40 cm. Perianth 2-3·5 cm across; segments elliptic-oblong, blue with a median yellow stripe. Anther of larger stamen blue, of the others yellow. Stigma capitate.{\i  Naturalized in rice-fields in S. part of U.S.S.R.} [Rs (W, K, E).] ({\i Temperate E. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Doubtfully distinct from {\i M. vaginalis} (Burm. fil.) C. Presl from S.E. Asia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 188.       IRIDACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.H. Valentine. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbaceous perennials, usually with a bulb, corm or rhizome. Leaves usually equitant, ensiform, occasionally linear. Inflorescence terminal, 1- to many-flowered. Perianth petaloid, 6-partite, radially or bilaterally symmetrical, usually with a hypanthial tube. Stamens 3, opposite the outer perianth-segments. Ovary inferior, usually 3-locular and with many ovules. Style 3-lobed, branches entire or divided, sometimes petaloid. Fruit a capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Style-branches petaloid
\par
2 Stock with long, digitate root-tubers; ovary unilocular ..... {\b 2. Hermodactylus}
\par
2 Stock a corm, bulb or rhizome; ovary trilocular
\par
3 Stock a rhizome or bulb; hypanthial tube present ................................. {\b 3. Iris}
\par
3 Stock a corm; hypanthial tube absent ...................................... {\b 4. Gynandriris}
\par
1 Style-branches not petaloid
\par
4 Inflorescence not spicate
\par
5 Stock a slender rhizome; stem compressed, winged ............. {\b 1. Sisyrinchium}
\par
5 Stock a corm; stem neither compressed nor winged
\par
6 Hypanthial tube not more than 1 cm; ovary above ground,
\par
  enclosed in a green bract and a bracteole; leaves 
\par
  subterete, 4-grooved ...................................................................... {\b 8. Romulea}
\par
6 Hypanthial tube more than 1·5 cm; ovary below ground, enclosed 
\par
  in a membranous bract and sometimes also a bracteole; 
\par
  leaves flat or canaliculate with a white stripe .................................. {\b 7. Crocus}
\par
4 Inflorescence spicate
\par
7 Stem zig-zag; style-branches deeply divided ................................. {\b 6. Freesia}
\par
7 Stem straight; style-branches undivided
\par
8 Hypanthial tube straight ....................................................................... {\b 5. Ixia}
\par
8 Hypanthial tube bent or curved
\par
9 Flowers orange or yellow: stigmas filiform .................................. {\b 9. Tritonia}
\par
9 Flowers pink or purple; stigmas obovate to obcordate ............ {\b 10. Gladiolus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.       Sisyrinchium}        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By R. Ingram. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stock a short, slender rhizome. Plant glabrous. Leaves equitant, isobilateral, mostly basal, linear-ensiform. Stem compressed and winged. Flowers actinomorphic, in umbel-like cymes of 2-6, subtended by a 2-valved, herbaceous spathe. Perianth-segments all similar. Stamens inserted at the top of the very short hypanthial tube. Style-branches undivided.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: R. Ingram, {\i Watsonia}{\b  6}: 283-289 (1967).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers yellow; capsule 9-12 mm ......................................... {\b 3. californicum} 
\par
1 Flowers blue; capsule c. 5 mm
\par
2 Stem usually bearing 2-3 inflorescences; flowers 15-20
\par
  mm in diameter, light blue; fruiting pedicels arcuate 
\par
  or nodding clearly exceeding the shorter spathe-valve ............ {\b 1. bermudiana} 
\par
2 Stem usually bearing a single inflorescence; flowers 
\par
  25-35 mm in diameter, violet-blue; fruiting pedicels 
\par
  erect, scarcely exceeding the shorter spathe-valve .................... {\b 2. montanum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. bermudiana} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 954 (1753) ({\i S. angustifolium} Miller). Leaves 7-15 cm × 1-5 mm. Stems 15-45 cm, ascending to suberect, narrowly winged, usually bearing 2 terminal inflorescences and sometimes a third lower down, each peduncle subtended by a leaf-like bract. Spathe-valves usually subequal. Flowers 15-20 mm in diameter, light blue; perianth-segments obovate-cuneate, apiculate. Filaments connate almost throughout their length, equalling or shorter than the style. Capsule c. 5 mm, globose-trigonous, blackish-purple when ripe. Fruiting pedicels arcuate or nodding, clearly exceeding the inner spathe-valve. 2n = 64, 88.{\i  Damp grassland and lake-shores. W. & N. Ireland.} Hb [Ga]. ({\i E. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Possibly naturalized elsewhere in W. Europe, but reliable information is lacking.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants which have been cut or grazed early in the season may produce stems with a single inflorescence; in such plants the spathe-valves are more unequal, as in {\b 2}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. montanum} E.L. Greene, {\i Pittonia}{\b  4}: 33 (1899) ({\i S. angustifolium} Miller pro parte, {\i S. bermudiana} sensu Coste, non L.). Like {\b 1} but stems more stiffly erect, usually bearing only 1 inflorescence; outer valve of spathe usually c. 1½ times as long as inner; flowers 25-35 mm in diameter, violet-blue; filament-tube always equalling the style; fruiting pedicels erect, scarcely exceeding the inner spathe-valve. 2n = 96.{\i  Dry grassland and disturbed ground. Widely naturalized, mainly in C. Europe.} [Au Br Cz Ga Ge He It No Rm Rs (C, W).] ({\i E. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The plant found in Europe is var. {\i crebrum} Fernald.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Occasional plants develop 2 inflorescences, with subequal spathe-valves, as in {\b 1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. californicum} (Ker-Gawler) Aiton fil. in Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.} ed. 2, {\b 4}: 135 (1812). Plant glaucous. Leaves 12-30 × 3-6 mm. Stem 15-50 cm, broadly winged, erect, bearing a single inflorescence. Spathe-valves distinctly unequal, the longer 3-4·5 cm.
\par

\par
86}
\par