{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr11\min25}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr11\min26}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1062}{\nofchars6056}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 Flowers 25-30 mm in diameter, bright yellow; perianth-segments elliptic-oblong, acute. Filaments connate only at base. Capsule 9-12 mm, ellipsoid-trigonous, blackish-purple when ripe. Fruiting pedicels erect, shorter than the shorter spathe-valve.}{\i\fs28  Wet grassland. Naturalized in Ireland}{\fs28 . [Hb.] (}{\i\fs28 Oregon, California}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 2.  Hermodactylus}{\fs28     Miller
\par }{\fs24  By A.O. Chater. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Like}{\i\fs28  Iris}{\fs28  but stock with long, digitate tubers; leaves quadrangular in section; flowers solitary; ovary 1-locular.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. H. tuberosus}{\fs28  (L.) Miller, }{\i\fs28 Gard. Dict.}{\fs28  ed. 8 (1768) (}{\i\fs28 Iris tuberosa}{\fs28  L.). Stock with 2-4 tubers. Stems 20-40 cm, slender, erect. Leaves exceeding stems, 1\'b75-3(-5) mm wide. Flowers yellowish-green except for dark brownish-violet limb of falls; pedicel 10-50 mm; spathes 1-2, equalling or exceeding flower, herbaceous. Hypanthial tube c. 5 mm, infundibuliform. Falls 40-50 mm; limb shorter than claw, ovate-orbicular to obovate-oblong, patent. Standards 20-25 mm, linear-oblanceolate, mucronate or cuspidate. Ovary with a very slender sterile upper portion 6-8 mm. }{\i\fs28 Dry, usually rocky places. Mediterranean region, eastwards from S.E. France.}{\fs28  Al ?Co Cr Ga Gr It Ju Si [Br].
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 3.        Iris }{\fs28        L.
\par  (incl. }{\i\fs28 Xiphion}{\fs28  Miller)
\par }{\fs24 D.A. Webb & A.O. Chater. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Stock a rhizome or bulb. Plant usually caulescent. Leaves equitant, mostly basal. Flowers actinomorphic, usually large, in cymose inflorescences (rarely solitary). Perianth-segments dimorphic, the outer (}{\i\fs28 falls}{\fs28 ) patent or deflexed, the inner (}{\i\fs28 standards}{\fs28 ) erect (rarely patent), often smaller than the outer. Style divided above into 3 conspicuous petaloid branches, each of which overlies a stamen and the claw of one of the falls, and bears a stigma in the form of a membranous flap on the lower surface, near the apex. Ovary 3-locular, surmounted by a distinct (though sometimes very short) hypanthial tube.
\par 
\par  In some species the upper part of the ovary is sterile, and forms a narrow, solid or 3-locular beak, persistent in fruit. This can be confused with the hypanthial tube, but the latter is tubular, with a single cavity, containing the style, and usually differs somewhat in colour or texture.
\par 
\par  Measurements of the stem are taken from ground-level to the base of the ovary of the terminal flower.
\par 
\par  Many of the species described below, as well as others from Asia and North America, are cultivated in gardens. The majority of garden irises, however, especially within Sect.}{\i\fs28  Iris}{\fs28 , are hybrids, of which}{\i\fs28  I. germanica}{\fs28  probably represents the most widespread and oldest established. The parentage of these hybrids is often difficult to determine; the majority appear to be derived from }{\b\fs28 13}{\fs28 ,}{\b\fs28 14}{\fs28 ,}{\b\fs28 18}{\fs28 ,}{\b\fs28 19}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 22}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par  Literature: W. R. Dykes, }{\i\fs28 The genus}{\fs28  Iris. Cambridge. 1913. G. M. Lawrence,}{\i\fs28  Gentes Herb.}{\b\fs28  8}{\fs28 : 346-371 (1953). J. Mitra }{\i\fs28 Bot. Gaz.}{\b\fs28  117}{\fs28 : 265-293 (1956) (karyology).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Stock a bulb; leaves not isobilateral
\par 2 Roots fleshy, persistent in dormant season; lower leaves
\par   10-30 mm wide; standards patent, less than \'bd as long 
\par   as falls; flowering in winter ....................................................... }{\b\fs28 24. planifolia}{\fs28 
\par 2 Roots fibrous (rarely a few fleshy, but not persistent 
\par   in dormant season); lower leaves not more than 8 mm wide;
\par   standards \'b1 erect; flowering in spring or summer (Sect. }{\i\fs28 Xiphion}{\fs28 )
\par 3 Hypanthial tube not more than 7 mm
\par 4 Standards 7-10 \'d7 0\'b73-0\'b75 mm ...................................................... }{\b\fs28 30. serotina}{\fs28 
\par 4 Standards at least 40 \'d7 15 mm
\par 5 Claw of falls 25-30 mm wide, shorter than or equalling
\par   the limb ......................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 25. latifolia}{\fs28 
\par 5 Claw of falls not more than 10 mm wide, 1\'bd-2 times 
\par   as long as the limb ....................................................................... }{\b\fs28 26. xiphium}{\fs28 
\par 3 Hypanthial tube at least 12 mm
\par 6 Falls sparsely bearded; pedicel not more than 15 mm ............... }{\b\fs28 29. boissieri}{\fs28 
\par 6 Falls glabrous; pedicel usually more than 15 mm
\par 7 Flowers yellow; hypanthial tube 35-50 mm .................................. }{\b\fs28 28. juncea}{\fs28 
\par 7 Flowers purple; hypanthial tube 12-25 mm ................................. }{\b\fs28 27. filifolia}{\fs28 
\par 1 Stock a rhizome; leaves isobilateral
\par 8 Falls glabrous, or puberulent with unicellular hairs 
\par   (Sect. }{\i\fs28 Spathula}{\fs28 )
\par 9  Hypanthial tube 50-200 mm
\par 10 Leaves rigid, with base long-persistent after withering,
\par    very fibrous and dark brown; style-branches glabrous ............... }{\b\fs28 2. tenuifolia}{\fs28 
\par 10 Leaves flexuous, often persistent after withering, but
\par    pale brown and not fibrous; margins of style-branches
\par    yellow-glandular-puberulent .................................................. }{\b\fs28 3. unguicularis}{\fs28 
\par 9  Hypanthial tube not more than 20 mm
\par 11 Stem strongly compressed, 2-winged; flowers with fruity
\par    fragrance ..................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 9. graminea}{\fs28 
\par 11 Stem cylindrical or slightly compressed, not winged;
\par    flowers without fruity fragrance
\par 12 Upper part of ovary sterile, forming a narrow beak 12-40 mm
\par 13 Stem 30-90 cm; basal leaves 6-20 mm wide, somewhat fetid ....... }{\b\fs28 8. spuria}{\fs28 
\par 13 Stem not more than 35 cm; basal leaves 2-6 mm wide, not fetid
\par 14 Stem at least 10 cm; spathes herbaceous; outer perianth-
\par    segments 35-45 mm ................................................................... }{\b\fs28 10. sintenisii}{\fs28 
\par 14 Stem 1-4 cm; spathes membranous; outer perianth-
\par    segments 45-55 mm ..................................................................... }{\b\fs28 11. pontica}{\fs28 
\par 12 Upper part of ovary fertile, not narrowed
\par 15 Stem not more than 20 cm ........................................................ }{\b\fs28 4. ruthenica}{\fs28 
\par 15 Stem at least 30 cm
\par 16 Stem hollow; basal leaves usually less than 10 mm wide ............ }{\b\fs28 1. sibirica}{\fs28 
\par 16 Stem solid; basal leaves usually more than 10 mm wide
\par 17 Leaves evergreen, fetid; seeds scarlet, persisting in 
\par    capsule after dehiscence ......................................................... }{\b\fs28 5. foetidissima}{\fs28 
\par 17 Leaves not evergreen, not fetid; seeds brown, shed 
\par    soon after dehiscence of capsule 
\par 18 Flowers yellow; leaves with conspicuous midrib ................ }{\b\fs28 6. pseudacorus}{\fs28  
\par 18 Flowers purple; leaves without conspicuous midrib ................ }{\b\fs28 7. versicolor}{\fs28 
\par 8  Falls with a beard of multicellular hairs
\par 19 Stem simple or absent
\par 20 Both spathes acutely keeled
\par 21 Hypanthial tube about as long as perianth-segments ........... }{\b\fs28 17. suaveolens}{\fs28 
\par 21 Hypanthial tube much shorter than perianth-segments .... }{\b\fs28 16. reichenbachii}{\fs28 
\par 20 Spathes rounded, or the outer slightly keeled
\par 22 Rhizome slender, emitting slender stolons which are 
\par    often tuberous at apex; hypanthial tube 5-10 mm;
\par    seeds with an aril ......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 12. humilis}{\fs28 
\par 22 Rhizome stout, of \'b1 uniform diameter throughout;
\par    hypanthial tube 25-90 mm; seeds without an aril
\par 23 Stem not more than 1 cm; plant leafless in winter ...................... }{\b\fs28 13. pumila}{\fs28 
\par 23 Stem at least 3 cm; plant with leaves present through 
\par    the winter
\par 24 Spathes narrow, closely investing the whole of the 
\par    hypanthial tube and partly concealed by the leaves;
\par    hypanthial tube 50-75 mm ................................................. }{\b\fs28 15. pseudopumila}{\fs28 
\par 24 Spathes ovate to oblong, not investing the upper part
\par    of the hypanthial tube and not concealed by the
\par    leaves; hypanthial tube 20-50 mm ............................................. }{\b\fs28 14. lutescens}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 87}
\par }