{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 19 Stem branched (sometimes from ground-level)
\par
25 Spathes entirely scanous at anthesis ............................................ {\b 23. pallida}
\par
25 Spathes herbaceous at anthesis, at least in lower part
\par
26 Spathes entirely herbaceous, except for a very narrow
\par
   scanous margin
\par
27 Stem branched below middle; flowers violet to purple .............. {\b 18. aphylla}
\par
27 Stem branched only in upper half; flowers predominantly
\par
   white or yellow, but the falls with violet or reddish-
\par
   brown veins ............................................................................... {\b 19. variegata}
\par
26 Spathes scanous in upper half
\par
28 Lower flowers ± sessile, enclosed by subtending bract
\par
   up to anthesis .............................................................................. {\b 22. albicans}
\par
28 Lower flowers on distinct branches, well-exserted from
\par
   subtending bract before anthesis
\par
29 Stem usually with 4 flowers, the 2 uppermost very close
\par
   together; spathes 35-55 mm, scarcely exceeding the 
\par
   hypanthial tube; perianth-segments 40-60 mm wide ............... {\b 20. germanica}
\par
29 Stem usually with 3 flowers, the uppermost well 
\par
   separated from the others; spathes 55-65 mm, clearly
\par
   exceeding the hypanthial tube; perianth-segments not 
\par
   more than 45 mm wide ................................................................ {\b 21. marsica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Iris}. Stock a rhizome. Stem usually solid. Leaves isobilateral.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. SPATHULA Tausch (incl. Sect. {\i Apogon} Baker). Rhizome usually slender, of uniform diameter. Stems simple or branched. Falls glabrous, or puberulent with unicellular hairs. Seeds with an aril.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. I. sibirica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 39 (1753). Stems 50-120 cm, hollow, somewhat compressed, with usually 3 small cauline leaves. Basal leaves 25-80 cm × (2-)4-10 mm. Flowers 1-3(-5), violet-blue, rarely white; pedicels up to 100 mm; spathes 30-50 mm, brown and scarious at anthesis. Hypanthial tube 4-7 mm. Falls 30-50 mm; limb obovate to orbicular. Standards 25-45 × 12-20 mm; limb narrowly elliptical. Capsule 3-4 cm, obtusely trigonous to subcylindrical. Seeds flat. 2n = 28.{\i  Damp grassland. C. & E. Europe; Italy; one station in W. France.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) [Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. I. tenuifolia} Pallas, {\i Reise}{\b  3}: 714 (1776). Densely caespitose. Stems up to 6(-15) cm, concealed by persistent, dark brown, fibrous leaf-bases. Leaves 20-40 cm × 3-5 mm, rigid. Flowers 1-2, lilac to violet-blue, fragrant; pedicels very short; spathes 70-100 mm, more or less herbaceous. Hypanthial tube 50-80 mm, filiform. Falls 40-60 mm; limb broadly elliptical, scarcely distinct from claw. Standards slightly shorter than falls. Style-branches narrow. Capsule 2·4-4·5 cm, oblong, obtusely trigonous. Seeds cubical, rugose, dark brown.{\i  Sandy steppes and semi-deserts. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E). ({\i Temperate Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. I. unguicularis} Poiret, {\i Voy. Barb.}{\b  2}: 86 (1789). Stems very short or absent; dead leaves persistent, pale brown, eventually detaching in their entire,y and not leaving fibrous bases. Leaves 10-50 cm × 1-5 mm, flexuous. Flowers solitary, fragrant; pedicel short; spathes 60-130 mm, mainly herbaceous. Falls with purple apex, the remainder whitish, with purple veins; standards lilac. Hypanthial tube 60-200 mm, very slender. Falls 45-55 × 12-25 mm; limb oblong-elliptical. Standards 45-55 × 7-10 mm, oblanceolate. Style-branches yellow-glandular-puberulent above near the margins. Seeds few, globose to cuneate, finely rugose. {\i Banks and stony places. S. & W. Greece, S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr. ({\i E. Mediterranean region, N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable. The plants of N. Africa, which include the type of the species, are larger in all their parts, with leaves up to 10 mm wide and perianth segments up to 80 mm, with most of the limb of the falls uniformly lilac. Among the European populations those from Kriti differ most markedly from the type, and would be entitled to subspecific or perhaps even specific status as{\b  I. cretensis} Janka,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  18}: 382 (1868) ({\i I. cretica} Herbert ex Baker, {\i I. humilis} subsp.{\i  cretensis} (Janka) Nyman), were it not for the existence of intermediate and variable populations in the rest of the European range and in Anatolia and Syria. For detailed information on this complex see W. Schulze, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  112}: 331-343 (1965).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. I. ruthenica} Ker-Gawler,{\i  Bot. Mag.}{\b  28}: t. 1123 (1808). Stems 3-10(-20) cm, with c. 2 small leaves. Basal leaves 10-30 cm × 4-6 mm. Flowers solitary, violet, the falls white with violet veins; pedicels c. 10 mm; spathes 30-50 mm, membranous, pale green with pink margins. Hypanthial tube 8-10 mm. Falls 45-50 × 15-18 mm, oblong-obovate; limb not distinct from claw. Standards 40-45 × 7-8 mm, oblong-lanceolate. Capsule 10-20 mm, ovoid to subglobose. Seeds globose, shining brown, with a large, white aril.{\i  Meadows and open woodland. C. & E. Romania.} Rm ?Rs (E). ({\i Temperate C. & E. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b I. triflora} Balbis, {\i Mém. Acad. Sci.} ({\i Turin}){\b  10-11}: 6 (1804) ({\i I. ensata} auct., non Thunb.,{\i  Xiphion triflorum} (Balbis) Cesati), from C. & E. Asia, has been reported as naturalized in N.W. Italy. It differs from {\b 4} chiefly in its much shorter hypanthial tube (c. 2 mm) and its cylindrical capsule 5-8 cm, with 6 longitudinal ridges.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. I. foetidissima} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 39 (1753). Stems 30-90 cm, somewhat compressed, with a single longitudinal ridge, bearing 3-4 leaves. Basal leaves 30-70 cm × 10-25 mm, dark green, evergreen, fetid. Flowers 1-5, dull violet more or less tinged with dull yellow, rarely clear yellow; pedicels 20-100 mm; spathes 50-100 mm, herbaceous. Hypanthial tube c. 10 mm, stout. Falls 30-50 × 10-20 mm, oblong-obovate to oblanceolate. Standards 25-40 × 5-9 mm, oblanceolate. Style-branches pale yellow. Capsule 4-7 cm, oblong-ellipsoid. Seeds 5-7 mm, globose, orange-scarlet, long-persistent in dehisced capsule. 2n = 40. {\i S. & W. Europe, northwards to England and eastwards to N.E. Italy; cultivated for ornament and naturalized elsewhere.} Az Br Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si [Hb He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. I. pseudacorus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 38 (1753) (incl.{\i  I. monnieri} auct. aeg., non DC.). Stems 60-120 cm, slightly compressed, bearing several leaves. Basal leaves 50-90 cm × 10-30 mm, rather glaucous, with conspicuous midrib. Flowers 4-12, yellow, the lower on long, suberect peduncles; pedicels 20-50 mm; spathes 40-100 mm, herbaceous, with membranous margins. Hypanthial tube 10-15 mm, narrowly infundibuliform. Falls 50-75 × 20-30 mm; limb broadly ovate. Standards 20-30 × 4-8 mm, linear-oblong, shorter and narrower than the style-branches. Capsule 40-80 mm, cylindrical, with a short beak. Seeds dark brown, smooth. 2n = 24, 30, 32, 34, 40. {\i Wet places. Most of Europe.} All except Az Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. I. versicolor} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 39 (1753). Stems 50-100 cm, bearing 2-3 leaves. Basal leaves 35-60 cm × 8-25 mm, often pinkish at the base. Flowers 2-9, lilac-purple, the lower on long, ascending peduncles; pedicels 25-55 mm; spathes 30-80 mm, more or less herbaceous. Hypanthial tube 7-10 mm, stout. Falls 40-60 × 15-27 mm; limb broadly elliptical to suborbicular, about as long as the claw. Standards 25-40 × 8-12 mm, oblanceolate. Capsule 3·5-5 cm, oblong, obtusely trigonous. Seeds flat, pale brown.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and naturalized on lake-shores and riverbanks in Britain.} [Br ?Ge.] ({\i E. North America}.)
\par

\par
88}
\par