{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. I. spuria} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 39 (1753). Stems 30-90 cm, bearing several leaves. Basal leaves 25-90 cm × 6-20 mm, somewhat fetid. Flowers (1-)2-4; pedicels 5-20 mm; spathes 40-80(-120) mm, herbaceous, but often with membranous apex or margins. Hypanthial tube 7-10 mm, campanulate; sterile beak of ovary up to 40 mm. Falls 30-80 × 10-30 mm; limb elliptical to orbicular, shorter than the claw. Standards 30-60 × 8-20 mm, narrowly obovate. Capsule 2·5-4 cm (excluding beak), with 6 conspicuous longitudinal ridges. Seeds angular, brown, with loose, membranous testa.{\i  Wet places, on calcareous or saline soils. From S. Sweden to C. Spain, N.E. Greece and S. Ukraine.} Au *Br Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hs Hu Rm Rs (W) Su [It].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable. The taxa here treated as subspecies have been variously regarded as varieties or as separate species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A fifth, subspecies subsp. {\b notha} (Bieb.) Ascherson & Graebner, {\i Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  3}: 496 (1906) ({\i I. notha }Bieb.), described from the Caucasus, has been doubtfully reported from S.E. Russia. It resembles subsp. ({\b a}) in most characters, but is larger in all its parts.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers violet, at least in part 
\par
2 Upper cauline leaves shorter than internodes;
\par
  falls usually more than 45 mm ............................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b spuria}
\par
2 Upper cauline leaves longer than internodes;
\par
  falls usually less than 45 mm ............................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b maritima}
\par
1 Flowers yellow or white, without any violet tint 
\par
3 Basal leaves 7-12 mm wide; falls usually less than 
\par
  60 mm, yellow .................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b halophila} 
\par
3 Basal leaves 10-20 mm wide; falls usually more than 
\par
  60 mm, white with yellow centre ................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b ochroleuca}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b spuria}: Stems (50-)60-80 cm. Basal leaves 8-12 mm wide. Upper cauline leaves shorter than internodes. Spathes membranous at apex. Falls 45-60 mm, lilac, with violet veins and yellow central stripe. 2n = 22. •{\i  C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden and} ({\i doubtfully native}) {\i E. England}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b maritima} P. Fourn., {\i Quatre Fl. Fr.} 190 (1935) ({\i I. maritima} Lam., non Miller): Stems 30-40(-50) cm. Basal leaves 6-8(-10) mm wide. Upper cauline leaves longer than internodes. Spathes entirely herbaceous. Falls 30-45 mm, cream, with violet-blue veins.{\i  S.W. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b balophila} (Pallas) D.A. Webb & Chater,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 315 (1978) ({\i I. halophila} Pallas): Stems 40-90 cm. Basal leaves 7-12 mm wide. Upper cauline leaves longer than internodes. Spathes with membranous apex and margins. Falls 40-60 mm, pale yellow with deeper veins, patent. 2n = 20.{\i  From S. Romania to E. Ukraine}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b ochroleuca} (L.) Dykes,{\i  Gen. Iris} 63 (1913) ({\i I. ochroleuca} L.): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but basal leaves 10-20 mm wide; falls 60-80 mm, white, with yellow centre, deflexed.{\i  N.E. Greece} ({\i near Alexandropoulos}). ({\i Anatolia and E. Mediterranean region}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. I. graminea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 39 (1753). Stems (10-)20-40 cm, strongly compressed and 2-winged, with 1-3 leaves, the uppermost exceeding the inflorescence. Basal leaves 35-100 cm × 5-15 mm. Flowers (1-)2, with a strong, fruity fragrance; pedicels 10-50 mm; spathes unequal, the lowest usually leaf-like and up to 250 mm, the others 40-70 mm, partly or wholly scarious. Hypanthial tube 2-5 mm, campanulate; ovary with somewhat narrowed sterile upper portion up to 5 mm. Falls 30-50 × 12-15 mm; limb ovate-orbicular, violet with white veins; claw dull pink, as wide as limb. Standards 25-40 × 8-12 mm, oblanceolate, purple. Style-branches pink with purple apex. Capsule 2·5-5 cm, broadly ellipsoid, beaked, with 6 conspicuous longitudinal ridges. Seeds pale brown, with loose, membranous testa. 2n = 34. {\i Grassland and open scrub. C. & S. Europe, westwards to S.W. France, and extending eastwards to C. Ukraine. }Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. I. sintenisii} Janka, {\i Term. Füz. }{\b 1}: 244 (1877). Like {\b 9} but stems cylindrical or slightly compressed, not winged; basal leaves 20-50 cm × 1·5-5 mm; spathes 40-70 mm, all alike, keeled; falls 8-12 mm wide; flowers violet-blue, not fragrant; sterile upper portion of ovary 12-22 mm, very slender.{\i  S.E. Europe, from S. Albania to Moldavia; S. Italy.} Al Bu Gr It Ju Rm Rs (W) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sintenisii}: Leaves 3-5(-6) mm wide, with 6-10 prominent veins, smooth. Spathe not inflated; veins inconspicuous. 2n = 16, 18. {\i Dry grassland and open scrub. Throughout the range of the species except the extreme north-east}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b brandzae} (Prodan) D. A. Webb & Chater, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 315 (1978) ({\i I. brandzae} Prodan): Leaves 1·5-3·5 mm wide, with 2-5 prominent veins, scabrid. Spathe usually strongly inflated; veins conspicuous. 2n = 10. {\i Wet, saline soils. N. & E. Romania, Moldavia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The plants from Italy are said to be distinct in their very long, pale green leaves and green, herbaceous spathes; they have been named{\b  I. lorea} Janka,{\i  Term. Füz.}{\b  1}: 245 (1877) ({\i Xiphion gramineum} subsp. {\i loreum} (Janka) Arcangeli), but do not seem to merit more than varietal status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. I. pontica} Zapal.,{\i  Consp. Fl. Galic.}{\b  1}: 191 (1906) ({\i I. humilis} Bieb., non Georgi). Stems 1-4 cm, bearing 2-3 long leaves. Basal leaves 10-45 cm × 2-5 mm. Flowers solitary, purplish, variegated with white, yellow, or brown; pedicel 4-7 mm; spathes 40-70 mm, membranous. Hypanthial tube 8-13 mm, infundibuliform; sterile upper portion of ovary 18-25 mm slender. Falls 45-55 × 15-18 mm; limb obovate-orbicular; claw spathulate, as wide as the limb. Standards 35-50 × 8-12 mm oblanceolate. Capsule 1·5-2·5 cm (excluding beak), ellipsoid with 6 inconspicuous longitudinal ridges. Seeds brownish, with loose, membranous testa.{\i  Dry grassland. C. Romania, Moldavia, W. Ukraine.} Rm Rs (W). ({\i S.W. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. REGELIA Lynch. Rhizome slender, stolon-like, but expanded at apex. Stems simple. Falls with a beard of multicellular hairs. Seeds with a conspicuous, whitish, circular aril.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. I. humilis} Georgi, {\i Bemerk. Reise}{\b  1}: 196 (1775) ({\i I. flavissima} Pallas, {\i I. arenaria }Waldst. & Kit.). Stems 5-12 cm, slender, erect or ascending. Leaves 5-17 cm × 1·5-6(-8) mm. Flowers 1-2, the falls yellowish-white with purple veins, the standards purple with darker veins; pedicels c. 6 mm; spathes 20-35 mm, scarious at least above. Hypanthial tube 5-10 mm, infundibuliform. Falls 30-35 mm, suborbicular, with a distinct claw. Standards 27-33 mm, oblanceolate, with a short claw. Withered perianth spirally coiled. Seeds globose or pyriform, brown. 2n = 22.{\i  From C. Czechoslovakia to S.E. Russia.} Au Cz Hu ?Ju Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. IRIS (Sect. {\i Pogiris }Tausch, Sect. {\i Pogoniris} (Spach) Baker). Rhizome stout, of uniform diameter. Stems simple or branched. Falls with a beard of multicellular hairs. Seeds without an aril.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. I. pumila} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 38 (1753). Plant leafless in winter. Stems not more than 1 cm. Leaves 3-15 cm × 4-17 mm, straight or somewhat falcate. Flowers solitary, yellow, blue or purple, sessile; spathes 50-100 mm, scarious above, rounded or very slightly keeled on the back. Hypanthial tube 40-90 mm, slender.
\par

\par
89}
\par