{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 free from the leaf-base, forming an intrafoliar stipule. Flowers wind-pollinated above the water surface. Carpels 1-4, free or shortly connate at the base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. POTAMOGETON. Rhizome creeping, often producing winter-buds; stems terete. Leaves submerged or floating, mostly convex-sided or some reduced to narrowly linear phyllodes; stipules open. Spikes many-flowered, cylindrical, dense. Carpels 4, free. Fruitlets short-beaked; embryo unciform.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. natans} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }126 (1753). Floating leaves up to 12·5 × 7 cm, ovate to elliptical or lanceolate, cuneate to subcordate at the base, opaque; petiole often longer than the lamina, with a discoloured flexible joint immediately below the lamina. Submerged leaves less than 3 mm wide, reduced to narrowly linear, obtuse, opaque phyllodes, often disappearing early. Stipules large, closely veined, often fibrous-persistent. Fruitlets 3-4 mm. 2n = 52. {\i Almost throughout Europe.} All except Az Bl ?Cr Sb ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b P}. × {\b fluitans} Roth, {\i Tent. Fl. Germ.}{\b  1}: 72 (1788) ({\i P. sterilis} Hagström) ({\b 1} × {\b 5}) and {\b P}. × {\b sparganifolius} Laest. ex Fries, {\i Nov. Fl. Suec. Mantissa}{\b  1}: 9 (1832) ({\b 1} ×{\b  6}) are the most frequent hybrids of {\b 1}, from which they differ in their laminate (not phyllodal) submerged leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. polygonifolius} Pourret, {\i Mém. Acad. Sci. Toulouse}{\b  3}: 325 (1788). Floating leaves up to 9 × 4 cm, ovate to lanceolate, cuneate to subcordate at the base, opaque; petiole shorter or longer than the lamina. Submerged leaves up to 20 × 3 cm, petiolate, lanceolate, obtuse at the apex, entire, often disappearing early. Stipules membranous, with well-separated, slender veins. Fruitlets 2-2·5 mm, red or reddish-brown. 2n = 26. {\i Usually in acid waters; often subterrestrial in Sphagnum-bogs. W. & C. Europe, extending eastwards to S.W. Finland and Bulgaria.} ?Au Az Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge ?Gr Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu No Po ?Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. coloratus} Hornem.,{\i  Fl. Dan.}{\b  9}({\b 25}): 4 (1813). Floating leaves up to 10 × 5 cm, ovate to lanceolate, cuneate to subcordate at the base, translucent; petiole not longer than the lamina. Submerged leaves up to 18 cm, petiolate, similar to the floating leaves but narrower, obtuse, entire. Stipules membranous, with well-separated, slender veins. Fruitlets 1·5-1·75 mm, greenish. 2n = 26.{\i  Usually in calcareous waters. W. & C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden.} Au Be Bl Br Co Cz Da Ga Ge ?Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju ?Lu Po Rm Sa Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. nodosus} Poiret in Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot., Suppl.}{\b  4}: 535 (1816) ({\i P. fluitans} Roth pro parte). Floating leaves up to 15 × 6 cm, elliptical or ovate-elliptical, cuneate or obtuse at the base, opaque; petiole shorter or longer than the lamina. Submerged leaves up to 20 × 4 cm, petiolate, lanceolate or elliptic-lanceolate, obtuse, at first very minutely and fugaciously denticulate, often disappearing early. Stipules large and conspicuous. Fruitlets 3-4 mm. {\i Europe, northwards to the Netherlands and Estonia.} Al Au Az Br Bu Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. lucens} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }126 (1753). Leaves all submerged, up to 20 × 6 cm, short- or long-petiolate, elliptical or obovate-elliptical to narrowly elliptic-oblong, cuneate at the base, acute or acuminate or cuspidate, more or less distinctly serrulate, with regularly ascending secondary veins (occasional leaves reduced to phyllodes). Stipules large and conspicuous, herbaceous. Peduncles thickened upwards. Fruitlets 3·5-4 mm. 2n = 52. {\i Base-rich water. Most of Europe.} All except Co Fa Is Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b P}. × {\b zizii} Koch ex Roth,{\i  Enum.} 531 (1827) ({\b 5} × {\b 6}) and{\b  P}. × {\b salicifolius} Wolfg. in Schultes & Schultes fil.,{\i  Mantissa}{\b  3}: 355 (1827) ({\i P. decipiens} Nolte ex Koch) ({\b 5} × {\b 9}) are two of the most frequent {\i Potamogeton} hybrids and {\i P}. × {\i zizii} is the only one known to produce well-formed fruits. Both these hybrids in some of their forms can be confused with{\b  5}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. gramineus} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }127 (1753). Floating leaves (if present) up to 7 × 3 cm, elliptical or ovate-elliptical, cuneate or rounded at the base, opaque; petiole often longer than the lamina. Submerged leaves (at least the lower) up to 8 × 3 cm, sessile, narrowly elliptic-oblong to narrowly elliptical or oblanceolate-oblong, cuneate at the base, acute or acuminate, minutely denticulate at least when young, with regularly ascending secondary veins (occasional leaves more or less reduced to phyllodes). Stipules conspicuous, herbaceous. Peduncles thickened upwards. Fruitlets 2-3 mm. 2n = 52.{\i  Much of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region.} Au Be Br Bu ?Co Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b P}. ×{\b  nitens} Weber, {\i Suppl. Fl. Holsat.} 5 (1787) ({\b 6} ×{\b  9}) is a frequent and widespread hybrid which often closely resembles {\b 6}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. alpinus} Balbis, {\i Mém. Acad. Sci.} ({\i Turin}) {\b 10}-{\b 11} ({\i Phys. Math.}{\b  1}): 329 (1804). Plant often tinged with red. Floating leaves (if present) up to 8 × 2 cm, elliptical to oblanceolate, cuneate at the base, opaque; petiole shorter than the lamina. Submerged leaves up to 15 × 2 cm, sessile, lanceolate or linear-lanceolate to elliptic-oblong, cuneate to rounded at the base and sometimes slightly amplexicaul, rounded or obtuse at the apex, entire; secondary veins mostly horizontal. Stipules large and conspicuous. Fruitlets 2·5-3 mm, with a sharp dorsal keel. 2n = 26, 52. {\i Much of Europe, but rare in the south.} Au Be Br ?Bu ?Co Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. P. praelongus} Wulfen, {\i Arch. Bot. }({\i Roemer}){\b  3}: 331 (1805). Leaves up to 20 × 4·5 cm, all submerged, sessile, lanceolate to ovate-oblong, rounded to cuneate at the base (at least the lower semi-amplexicaul), rounded or obtuse at the apex and markedly cucullate, entire. Stipules large and conspicuous, more or less fibrous-persistent. Fruitlets 4-5 mm, with a sharp dorsal keel. 2n = 52.{\i  N. & C. Europe, extending southwards to S. France, C. Bulgaria and C. Ukraine}. Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Is ?It Ju No Po Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  P}. × {\b undulatus} Wolfg. in Schultes & Schultes fil.,{\i  Mantissa}{\b  3}: 360 (1827) ({\b 8} × {\b 19}) is known from several countries and can be confused with {\b 8}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. P. perfoliatus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 126 (1753). Leaves up to 10 × 6 cm, all submerged, sessile, ovate or orbicular-ovate to lanceolate, cordate and amplexicaul at the base, obtuse or rounded at the apex and often somewhat cucullate, minutely denticulate at least when young. Stipules small, membranous, evanescent. Fruitlets 3-3·5 mm. 2n = 52.{\i  Throughout Europe except for some of the islands. }All except Az Bl Co Cr Sa Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  P}. ×{\b  cooperi} (Fryer) Fryer,{\i  Rep. Bot. Exch. Club Brit. Is. }{\b 1895}: 497 (1897) ({\i P. cymatodes} Ascherson & Graebner) ({\b 9} × {\b 19}) is a fairly frequent hybrid which can be confused with {\b 9}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. GRAMINIFOLII Fries. Rhizome creeping or more usually absent, with perennation by cauline winter-buds; stems compressed or very slender. Leaves submerged or the upper some
\par

\par
9}
\par