{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 Falls 35-60 × 12-20 mm, oblong-cuneate. Standards 40-80 × 15-23 mm, oblong, with a distinct claw. Seeds globose, pale brown.{\i  E.C. & S.E. Europe, extending northwards to} c. 54° {\i N. in C. Russia.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) [Ge].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pumila}: Leaves up to 15 cm × 17 mm, straight or very slightly falcate. 2n = 32. {\i Throughout the range of the species except Greece and Macedonia}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b attica} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  3}: 119 (1932): Leaves not more than 8 cm × 9 mm, strongly falcate. 2n = 14, 16. •{\i  Greece and Macedonia.}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Some plants from E. Russia differ from subsp. ({\b a}) in their shorter hypanthial tube and more scarious spathes. These differences are probably due to introgression from I. scariosa Willd. ex Link, a related species of W. & C. Asia.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. I. lutescens} Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  3}: 297 (1789). Plant with leaves present through the winter. Stems 3-35 cm. Leaves 5-30(-35) cm × 5-25 mm, more or less straight. Flowers 1-2, violet, sometimes variegated with yellow or entirely yellow or rarely whitish; pedicels very short; spathes herbaceous, sometimes scarious or purplish towards apex, ovate to oblong, not investing the upper part of the hypanthial tube and not concealed by the leaves. Hypanthial tube 20-50 mm. Falls 50-75 × 20-35 mm, oblong-lanceolate, without a distinct claw. Standards 55-75 × 20-40 mm, with broadly elliptical limb and short claw. Seeds pyriform, rugose, brown.{\i  Dry places. • W. Mediterranean region, C. Portugal.} ?Cr Ga Hs It Lu [He Si].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b lutescens} ({\i I. pumila} auct., non L.; incl. {\i I. chamaeiris} Bertol.): Stems usually less than 20 cm. Flowers violet or yellow, rarely whitish; beard of falls yellow; spathes 30-55 mm. Hypanthial tube 20-35 mm. 2n = 40.{\i  Italy, S. France, N.E. Spain.}
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b subbiflora} (Brot.) D.A. Webb & Chater, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  76}: 316 (1978) ({\i I. subbiflora} Brot.): Stems usually more than 20 cm. Flowers deep violet; beard mainly violet, yellow only near the claw; spathes 45-80 mm. Hypanthial tube 35-50 mm.{\i  Portugal, S.W. Spain}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Recorded from N.W. Africa, but probably only as an escape from gardens.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. I. pseudopumila} Tineo,{\i  Cat. Pl. Horti Panorm. }283 (1827). Like {\b 14}({\b a}) but leaves not more than 15 mm wide; flowers solitary; spathes up to 120 mm, narrower, closely investing the whole of the hypanthial tube and partly concealed by the leaves; hypanthial tube 50-75 mm. 2n = 16. •{\i  S.E. Italy, Sicilia, W. Jugoslavia.} It Ju Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Intermediate in many characters between {\b 13} and {\b 14}; its chromosome number, however, suggests that it is more closely related to {\b 13}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. I. reichenbachii} Heuffel, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  8}: 206 (1858) (incl.{\i  I. balkana} Janka, {\i I. bosniaca} G. Beck,{\i  I. skorpilii} Velen.). Stems 4-30 cm, slender. Leaves 8-35 cm × (3-)5-15 mm. Flowers 1-2, violet to brownish-purple, or greenish-yellow, sometimes with violet veins; pedicels very short; spathes 32-55 mm, navicular, keeled, herbaceous, with scarious apex and narrow scarious margin. Hypanthial tube 15-25(-35) mm, much shorter than the perianth-segments. Falls 40-60 × 15-30 mm, obovate-cuneate, without a distinct claw. Standards 40-60 × 25-30 mm, with broadly elliptical limb and short claw. Seeds pyriform, rugose, brown. 2n = 24, 48.{\i  Rocky and grassy places, mainly in the mountains. • From C. Jugoslavia and S.W. Romania southwards to E.C. Greece.} Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. I. suaveolens} Boiss. & Reuter in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 13}): 15 (1853) (incl. {\i I. rubromarginata} Baker). Like {\b 16} but stems 1-6(-17) cm; leaves not more than 22 cm × 10 mm; hypanthial tube (25-)35-50(-65) mm, about as long as the perianth-segments; falls 30-55 mm; seeds subglobose, reddish-brown. 2n = 24.{\i  Dry, rocky or grassy places. C. & N.E. parts of Balkan peninsula, extending to S.E. Romania.} Bu Gr Ju Rm Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. I. aphylla} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 38 (1753). Plant leafless in winter. Stems 15-30(-70) cm, slender, branched usually below the middle and often from the base. Leaves 15-40 cm × 6-22 mm, the lower usually falcate. Flowers (1-)3-5, violet to purple; pedicels very short; spathes 30-60 mm, ovate to oblong, herbaceous, often purplish at apex. Hypanthial tube 14-22 mm. Falls 40-65 × 20-25 mm, narrowly obovate. Standards 40-65 × 22-30 mm, with broadly elliptical limb and short claw. Seeds globose to pyriform, rugose, dark reddish-brown. 2n = 24, 40, 48.{\i  E.C. Europe and S. half of U.S.S.R., extending westwards very locally to C. Germany and S.W. Alps, and southwards to Albania.} Al Cz Ga Ge Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Variable, especially in length of stem, colour of flowers and length of hypanthial tube relative to ovary. Several variants have been described as subspecies.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Hybrids between {\b 18} and {\b 13} ({\b I}. × {\b binata} Schur, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 10}: 354 (1860)) occur, especially in C. Romania; they resemble {\b 13} in most characters but have a distinct stem.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. I. variegata} L., {\b Sp. Pl}. 38 (1753). Stems 15-40(-55) cm, usually branched in upper half. Leaves 12-30 cm × 7-28 mm, more or less falcate, deep green. Flowers (2-)3-6, the falls yellowish-white, with conspicuous deep violet to brownish-red veins, the standards and style-branches yellow; pedicels very short; spathes 30-55 mm, inflated, herbaceous, sometimes tinged with purple and scarious only at extreme apex. Hypanthial tube 18-25 mm. Falls 45-60 × 15-20 mm, oblong-lanceolate, without a distinct claw. Seeds more or less pyriform, greyish-brown. 2n = 24. •{\i  C. & S.E. Europe, from S.C. Germany and W. Ukraine to S. Jugoslavia.} Au Bu Cz Ge Hu Ju Rm Rs (W) [He It].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Records for E. Ukraine and S.E. Russia require confirmation.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   A wide range of nothomorphs of the hybrid {\b 19} × {\b 23} ({\b I}. × {\b lurida} Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew. }{\b 1}: 68 (1789)) is in cultivation and some of them have become naturalized in Romania and elsewhere.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   A plant whose origin is given with some doubt as S. Jugoslavia has been described as {\b I. reginae} I. & M. Horvat, {\i Period. Biol.} ({\i Zagreb}) ser. 2, B,{\b  1}: 18 (1947). It differs from {\b 19} in its longer hypanthial tube (25-30 mm), and in its standards which, like the falls, are white veined with violet; it has 2n = 24.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. I. germanica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 38 (1753). Stems 40-90 cm, stout, with branches at least 5 cm long in the upper half, the lower flowers well-exserted from the subtending bract even in bud. Leaves 30-70 cm × 20-35 mm, somewhat glaucous, more or less straight. Flowers (3-)4(-5), bluish-violet, or white tinged with blue; pedicels very short; spathes 35-55 mm, scarcely exceeding the hypanthial tube, scarious in the upper 1/2-2/3, often tinged with purple. Hypanthial tube 17-25 mm. Falls 55-90 × 40-60 mm, cuneate-obovate, without a distinct claw. Standards 55-90 × 45-60 mm, broadly elliptical, with a short, wide claw. Seeds pyriform, rugose, reddish-brown. 2n = 36, 44, 48. {\i Dry, rocky or grassy places. Widely cultivated for ornament and for the perfume extracted from its rhizome and naturalized in most of Europe except the north; of unknown and probably hybrid origin but perhaps native in the E. Mediterranean region.} [Al Au Az Be Bl Br
\par
\par 90}
\par