{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Bu Co Cr Cz Da Ga Ge *Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Var. {\i florentina} Dykes ({\i I. florentina }auct., vix L.), with whitish flowers, is cultivated for perfume, especially in Italy; none of the morphological characters used to distinguish it from {\b 20} appear to be constant. Many records of var. {\i florentina} are, however, referable to {\b 22}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. I. marsica} I. Ricci & Colasante, {\i Ann. Bot.} ({\i Roma}) {\b 32}: 218 (1975). Like {\b 20} but leaves up to 50 mm wide, somewhat falcate; flowers 3(-4); spathes 55-65 mm, clearly exceeding the hypanthial tube; hypanthial tube up to 35 mm; falls 20-40 mm wide; standards 23-45 mm wide. 2n = 40. {\i Calcareous rocky hillsides, }1100-1700 {\i m. • C. Appennini} ({\i S.E. of Avezzano}). It.
\par

\par
 The relationship of this species to other taxa in the section is obscure. Its morphology allies it most closely to{\b  20} (though in some features it resembles {\b 23}({\b b})), and its occurrence in an apparently native station in C. Italy is difficult to reconcile with the generally assumed eastern origin of {\b 20}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. I. albicans} Lange, {\i Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kjøbenhavn }{\b 1860}: 76 (1861). Like {\b 20} but flowers pure white, the lower subsessile on the main axis and enclosed by the subtending bract up to anthesis. {\i Originally planted in Moslem cemeteries in S. Europe and locally naturalized.} [Cr Ga Hs ?Ju Lu.] (?{\i S. Arabia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. I. pallida} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 3}: 294 (1789). Stems 15-120 cm, usually branched in the upper half. Leaves 20-60 cm × 10-40 mm. Flowers 2-6, lilac to violet; pedicels very short; spathes 20-35 mm, entirely scarious at anthesis. Hypanthial tube 8-11 mm. Falls 50-75 × 30-50 mm, obovate-cuneate, without a distinct claw. Standards 50-75 × 30-45 mm, obovate-elliptical, with a short claw. 2n = 24. •{\i  N. Italy, W. Jugoslavia; naturalized elsewhere in S. Europe. }It Ju [*Al Bl Ga Rm Sa Si].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pallida}: Leaves glaucous, thick, finely ribbed, some of them usually persisting through the winter. Flowers 3-6, lilac; spathes silvery-white. Seeds c. 10 × 7 mm, angled, reddish-brown. {\i Probably native only in W.C. Jugoslavia; naturalized elsewhere}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cengialti} (Ambrosi) Foster,{\i  Gard. Chron.} ser. 2, {\b 25}: 555 (1886) ({\i I. cengialti }Ambrosi): Leaves scarcely glaucous, thin, strongly ribbed, usually all withering in winter. Flowers usually 2, violet; spathes brownish. Seeds c. 5 × 3 mm, ovoid, greyish-brown.{\i  N.E. Italy, westwards to Lago di Garda}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In N.W. Jugoslavia plants are usually intermediate in character between the two subspecies. They have been described as {\b I. illyrica} Tommasini, {\i Veg. Isola Veglia} 63 (1875) ({\i I. germanica} subsp.{\i  illyrica} (Tommasini) Nyman).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Xiphion }(Miller) Spach. Stock a bulb. Stem simple, hollow. Leaves not isobilateral.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. JUNO (Tratt. ex Roemer & Schultes) Bentham. Roots fleshy, persistent in the dormant season. Leaves conduplicate. Standards patent, less than ½ as long as falls. Seeds without an aril.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 24. I. planifolia} (Miller) Fiori & Paol., {\i Fl. Anal. Ital.}{\b  1}: 227 (1896) ({\i Costia scorpioides} (Desf.) Willk.). Bulb cylindrical, invested by numerous membranous leaf-bases. Stem very short and subterranean. Leaves 10-30 cm × 10-30 mm, numerous, undulate, more or less recurved. Flowers 1(-3), blue to violet, rarely white; pedicel very short at anthesis, elongating in fruit; spathes c. 100 mm, more or less hidden by the leaves. Hypanthial tube 100-200 mm, whitish. Falls 50-80 × 20-30 mm. Standards 20-25 × 7-10 mm. Style-branches almost as long as the falls. Seeds ovoid or pyriform, rugose, dark reddish-brown. Flowering in winter. 2n = 24. {\i Mediterranean region, S. & C. Portugal.} Cr Gr Hs Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. XIPHION. Roots fibrous (rarely a few fleshy, but not persistent in dormant season). Stems simple, hollow. Leaves linear, canaliculate. Standards suberect, at least ½ as long as falls. Seeds without an aril.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. I. latifolia} (Miller) Voss in Siebert & Voss, {\i Vilmorin's Blumengärtnerei}{\b  1}: 982 (1895) ({\i I. xiphioides} Ehrh.). Plant leafless in winter. Bulb ovoid, invested by thin, more or less fibrous leaf bases. Stem 25-50 cm. Lower leaves 25-65 cm × 5-8 mm, whitish on the concave surface, the upper shorter and wider and merging gradually into the spathes. Flowers 2(-3), violet-blue, the falls with a yellowish centre; pedicels 25-70 mm; spathes 75-100 mm, herbaceous, inflated. Hypanthial tube c. 5 mm. Falls 60-75 × 30-35 mm; limb ovate-oblong, not sharply delimited from claw; claw 25-30 mm wide, obovate, shorter than or equalling the limb. Standards 40-60 × 15-20 mm, oblanceolate. Seeds globose, rugose, dark reddish-brown.{\i  Damp, grassy places. • Pyrenees, Cordillera Cantábrica. }Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 26. I. xiphium} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 40 (1753). Plant with leaves present through the winter. Bulb ovoid, invested by thin, membranous leaf-bases. Stem 25-50(-80) cm. Lower leaves 20-70 cm × (1-) 3-5 mm, glaucous, the upper shorter and wider and merging gradually into the spathes. Flowers 1(-2), usually violet, with a yellow or orange centre to the falls, rarely mostly yellow; pedicels up to 120 mm; spathes 60-100 mm, herbaceous. Hypanthial tube 1-3 mm. Falls 45-65 × 18-25 mm, glabrous; limb suborbicular; claw 7-10 mm wide, narrowly oblong, distinctly longer than the limb, concealed by the style-branches. Standards 45-65 × 15-20 mm, oblanceolate. Seeds compressed, semicircular, yellowish-brown. Flowering in early (rarely mid-) summer. 2n = 34.{\i  S.W. Europe, extending eastwards to} 13° 30' {\i E. in W.C. Italy.} Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from Portugal with yellow flowers have been called {\b I. lusitanica} Ker-Gawler, {\i Bot. Mag.}{\b  18}: t. 679 (1803); yellow flowered variants occur elsewhere in the range of the species, and it is not clear whether in Portugal this character is correlated with any other.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. I. filifolia} Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 602 (1842). Like {\b 26} but leaves 0·5-3 mm wide; flowers usually 2, dark reddish-purple, with a conspicuous orange patch on the falls; pedicels not more than 70 mm; hypanthial tube 12-20(-32) mm.{\i  Dry, rocky places. S.W. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Records from Spain of{\b  I. tingitana} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Pugillus} 113 (1852) (incl.{\i  I. fontanesii }Godron), appear to be erroneous; it differs from {\b 27} chiefly in the much narrower and more acute standards, and is endemic to Morocco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. I. juncea} Poiret,{\i  Voy. Barb.}{\b  2}: 85 (1789). Like {\b 26} but bulb invested by coriaceous leaf-bases becoming fibrous above; lower leaves 1-3 mm wide; flowers entirely yellow; pedicels not more than 30 mm; spathes with scarious margin or apex; hypanthial tube 35-50 mm, very slender; standards 30-45 × 5-12 mm; seeds dark brown.{\i  S.W. Spain; Sicilia.} Hs Si [It]. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. I. boissieri} Henriq.,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot. }{\b 3}: 183 (1885). Like {\b 26} but leaves yellowish-green; flowers deep purple; pedicels not more than 15 mm; spathes sometimes with scarious margin or apex; hypanthial tube (25-)30-45 mm; yellow stripe on falls
\par

\par
91}
\par