{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 sparsely bearded; standards 25-35 mm, obovate; seeds globose or pyriform, rarely somewhat compressed, dark reddish-brown. 2n = 36. •{\i  N.W. Spain, N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. I. serotina} Willk. in Willk. & Lange,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Hisp. }{\b 1}: 141 (1861). Bulb ovoid, invested by membranous leaf-bases. Stem 40-60 cm. Lower leaves 30-60 cm × 2-6 mm, the upper shorter and wider and merging gradually into the spathes. Flowers 2-3, bluish-violet, with deeper violet veins and yellowish centre to the falls; pedicels 50-60 mm; spathes 60-90 mm, herbaceous, with a narrow scarious margin. Hypanthial tube 5-7 mm. Falls 35-45 × 12-20 mm, glabrous; limb ovate-orbicular; claw c. 6 mm wide, somewhat longer than limb. Standards 7-14 × 1-2 mm, greenish. Seeds semicircular, compressed, yellowish. Flowering in late summer. Pinus-{\i woods and dry grassland. Mountains of S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Distinct from all other species in Sect.{\i  Xiphion} in its very small standards; it has for this reason been referred by some authors to Sect.{\i  Juno}, but the characters of the bulbs and roots and the erect position of the standards make it clear that it belongs to Sect. {\i Xiphion}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.        Gynandriris}       Parl.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Iris }but stock a corm; stamens closely adherent to style-branches, though not truly adnate; hypanthial tube absent, the perianth-segments inserted on the slender, sterile, terminal beak of the ovary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A mainly South African genus, with one European representative. The latter has often been included in {\i Iris}, mainly because the sterile beak of the ovary has been mistaken for a hypanthial tube. The genus is more closely related to{\i  Moraea}, which is also centred in South Africa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. sisyrinchium} (L.) Parl., {\i Nuovi Gen. Sp. Monocot.} 52 (1854) ({\i Iris sisyrinchium} L.). Corm 15-30 mm in diameter, globose, surrounded by numerous tunics, the outer coarsely fibrous. Plant 10-30(-45) cm. Leaves 1-2, with long, sheathing base, the free portion 10-50 cm × 1·5-5 mm, flexuous, procumbent or ascending, convolute when dry. Flowers fugitive, in 1-4 compact cymes, each with 1-6 flowers. Spathes 4-6 cm, scarious. Perianth violet-blue to purple, the falls with a white or yellow patch. Falls c. 30 × 10 mm, with elliptic-obovate limb; standards c. 25 × 5 mm, with slender, canaliculate claw and lanceolate limb. Style-branches suberect, deeply 2-fid. Beak of ovary 20-30 mm, very slender. Capsule (excluding beak) 20 × 4 mm. Seeds 1·5 mm, pyriform, brown. 2n = 24.{\i  Dry places, especially near the coast. Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} Bl Co Cr Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.        Ixia}      L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.H. Valentine. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stock a corm. Leaves linear or lanceolate, the basal 2-6, the cauline fewer, shorter. Inflorescence a spike; bracts numerous. Hypanthial tube straight, slender; perianth campanulate or salver-shaped, actinomorphic, its segments equal, obtuse. Stamens straight, shorter than the perianth-segments. Style straight, exserted; style-branches short, curved, undivided. Capsule small.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Hypanthial tube 5-8 mm, not widening above; flowers orange ...... {\b 1. maculata}
\par
Hypanthial tube 40-70 mm, widening above; flowers creamy white 
  ...................................................................................................... {\b 2. paniculata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. I. maculata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1664 (1763). Stem 20-50 cm, simple. Leaves 5-8, 10-35 × 0·2-0·7 cm. Spike 4- to many-flowered, capitate, dense. Bracts reddish-brown. Flowers orange or orange-yellow, the centre dark, with a stellate yellow pattern in the middle; hypanthial tube 5-8 mm- perianth-segments 1·5-3 × 0·8-1·2 cm, patent. Stamens usually connate at base.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and naturalized in S.E. France} ({\i Var}). [Ga.] ({\i Cape of Good Hope.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. I. paniculata} Delaroche, {\i Descr. Pl. Nov.} 26 (1766). Stem 30-100 cm, usually branched. Leaves 15-60 × 0·3-1·2 cm. Spike 4-14 cm, 5- to 18-flowered, more or less dense. Bracts pale brown. Flowers pale to deep cream; hypanthial tube 40-70 mm, infundibuliform; perianth-segments 1·5-2·5 × 0·3-0·8 cm. Stamens free.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized on the western margin of Europe.} [Az Br Hs ?Lu.] ({\i Cape of Good Hope}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 6.     Freesia}   Ecklon ex Klatt 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.H. Valentine. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stock a corm. Stem leafy, branched. Spike secund; flowers usually horizontal; bracts short, 2- to 3-toothed at apex. Flowers zygomorphic, scented; hypanthial tube straight, infundibuliform; perianth-segments short, oblong, unequal, not spreading; stamens included. Style filiform, its branches deeply divided. Capsule verrucose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. refracta} (Jacq.) Ecklon ex Klatt,{\i  Linnaea }{\b 34}: 673 (1866). Stem c. 45 cm, zig-zag. Leaves 5 or 6, linear-lanceolate. Bracts scarious. Flowers 3-4 cm, white or yellow with a few violet lines, 2-lipped; perianth-segments c. 1 cm.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and naturalized in S.E. France.} [Ga.] ({\i South Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 7.       Crocus}        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By B.F. Mathew. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Corm usually symmetrical, enclosed by several tunics of variable texture and colour. Cataphylls up to 5, sheathing the aerial shoot. Leaves appearing with or after the flowers. Leaves all basal, flat or canaliculate on the upper surface; lower surface usually strongly keeled, usually with 2 grooves. Scape absent. Flower one to several, each on a short, subterranean pedicel which is sometimes subtended by a membranous, sheathing prophyll. Bract membranous; bracteole similar or reduced or absent. Perianth regular; tube long and narrow, glabrous or with a ring of hairs in the throat at the insertion of the filaments; segments usually subequal. Anthers usually extrorse. Style 3-lobed to multifid. Ovary subterranean. Capsule cylindrical or ellipsoid, maturing at or above ground level by elongation of pedicel. Seeds numerous, usually globose or ellipsoid, brownish or reddish, with a strophiole.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: W. Herbert,{\i  Jour. Hort. Soc.} ({\i London}) {\b 2}: 249-293 (1847). G. Maw, {\i A Monograph of the genus} Crocus. London. 1886. E. A. Bowles,{\i  A Handbook of }Crocus{\i  and} Colchicum. London. 1924.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The following key does not take into account albino plants, which occur sporadically in populations of practically all species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers produced from September to January; never wholly yellow
\par
2 Inner and outer perianth-segments very unequal; anthers
\par
  introrse ....................................................................................... {\b 43. banaticus}
\par
2 Inner and outer perianth-segments equal or subequal;
\par
  anthers extrorse
\par
3 Corm-tunic with obvious non-fibrous rings at base; upper
\par
  tunic never fibrous
\par

\par
92}
\par