{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 4 Style divided into 3 branches .................................... ({\b 23-25}). {\b biflorus} group
\par
4 Style divided into more than 3 branches
\par
5 Anthers white; filaments densely pubescent ............................. {\b 42. pulchellus}
\par
5 Anthers yellow; filaments glabrous or minutely papillose ........ {\b 41. speciosus}
\par
3 Corm-tunic without rings, or with fibrous rings at base;
\par
  tunic sometimes fibrous
\par
6 Anthers and pollen white (discolouring with age)
\par
7 Corm-tunic tough and coriaceous, splitting into acute,
\par
  triangular teeth at base; filaments glabrous, or papillose
\par
  only at base ................................................................................. {\b 36. laevigatus}
\par
7 Corm-tunic papery, laciniate at base; filaments papillose
\par
  or pubescent for most of their length
\par
8 Flowers lilac-blue; filaments densely pubescent;
\par
  flowers remaining open at night ........................ {\b 38. tournefortii}
\par
8 Flowers creamy-white, sometimes veined or tinged with 
\par
  purple; filaments papillose-pubescent; flowers closing
\par
  in dim light .................................................. {\b 37. boryi}
\par
6 Anthers and pollen yellow
\par
9 Outer corm-tunics smooth and coriaceous, completely
\par
  non-fibrous but splitting at base into coarse teeth ........ {\b 32. goulimyi}
\par
9 Outer corm-tunics fibrous at least in part, and laciniate
\par
  at base
\par
10 Fibres of outer corm-tunic parallel, not at all reticulate
\par
11 Leaves not developed at anthesis; perianth-tube 
\par
   (5-)10-22(-29) cm ....................................... {\b 34. nudiflorus}
\par
11 Leaves at least partially developed at anthesis,
\par
   though sometimes concealed by scale-leaves; perianth-tube
\par
   3-11 cm
\par
12 Leaves less than 1 mm wide; perianth-segments 1·4-
\par
   1·8(-2·1) cm .......................................... {\b 4. cambessedesii}
\par
12 Leaves at least 1 mm wide; perianth-segments 2·3-6 cm .... {\b 33. serotinus}
\par
10 Fibres of outer corm-tunic finely to coarsely reticulate,
\par
   sometimes obscurely so
\par
13 Style deeply divided into 3 simple branches, not at 
\par
   all subdivided at the apex
\par
14 Bract and bracteole present, white-membranous, rather
\par
   flaccid, not closely sheathing the perianth-tube
\par
   ......................................................................... ({\b 26-29}). {\b cartwrightianus} group
\par
14 Bracteole absent; bract usually greenish, closely 
\par
   sheathing the perianth-tube ...................................................... {\b 31. longiflorus}
\par
13 Style divided into more than 3 branches, or rather 
\par
   obscurely divided, or deeply branched with each branch
\par
   lobed or expanded and fimbriate
\par
15 Throat of perianth deep yellow; segments white, rarely
\par
   pale lilac; corm-tunic finely fibrous ................................................ {\b 30. niveus}
\par
15 Throat of perianth pale yellow, white or lilac;
\par
   segments lilac to purple, rarely white; corm-tunic 
\par
   very coarsely fibrous
\par
16 Bracteole present and visible; throat of perianth 
\par
   usually pale yellow
\par
17 Style distinctly divided into several slender branches;
\par
   perianth usually with distinctly darker veins ........................... {\b 39. cancellatus}
\par
17 Style obscurely and shallowly divided into c. 3 branches,
\par
   each much expanded and fimbriate; perianth without 
\par
   darker veins ............................................................................. {\b 40. robertianus}
\par
16 Bracteole absent; throat of perianth white or lilac
\par
18 Leaves not developed at anthesis; corm with a persistent,
\par
   long, dark brown papery neck ....................................................... {\b 35. medius}
\par
18 Leaves usually developed at anthesis, but sometimes 
\par
   only the tips showing; corm without papery neck ...................... {\b 33. serotinus}
\par
1  Flowers produced from January to July
\par
19 Flowers wholly yellow or orange, sometimes striped or
\par
   tinged with purple or brown outside
\par
20 Corm-tunic fibrous
\par
21 Fibres of tunic tough and very coarsely reticulate .............. {\b 16. angustifolius}
\par
21 Fibres of tunic delicate and finely reticulate
\par
22 Leaves up to 1 mm wide, with no white central stripe;
\par
   corm with a long, fibrous neck .................................................. {\b 19. scardicus}
\par
22 Leaves 1-3 mm wide, with a white central stripe; corm
\par
   without a long neck ........................................................................ {\b 18. cvijicii}
\par
20 Corm-tunic papery or coriaceous, sometimes splitting
\par
   longitudinally
\par
23 Style divided clearly into 6 slender branches .............................. {\b 22. olivieri}
\par
23 Style divided clearly into 3 branches, or obscurely 
\par
   divided and expanded at the apex
\par
24 Corm-tunic splitting into rings at the base, scarcely
\par
   splitting vertically; leaves 0·5-2·5 mm wide ............... ({\b 23-25}).{\b  biflorus} group
\par
24 Corm-tunic with no rings at the base, splitting 
\par
   vertically; leaves 2·5-4 mm wide ..................................................... {\b 21. flavus}
\par
19 Flowers not wholly yellow or orange, but sometimes 
\par
   with a yellow throat
\par
25 Leaves semi-terete, with several shallow grooves on 
\par
   the abaxial surface .................................................................... {\b 12. carpetanus}
\par
25 Leaves with 1 deep groove on each side of the flattish
\par
   abaxial surface
\par
26 Stigma whitish, obscurely 3-lobed, the lobes expanded
\par
   and fimbriate ............................................................................ {\b 11. nevadensis}
\par
26 Stigma yellow to reddish or ange, usually divided into
\par
   3 or more distinct branches
\par
27 Bract and bracteole present, equal or subequal in 
\par
   length and width
\par
28 Anthers creamy-white; corm-tunic smooth and coriaceous,
\par
   with no obvious basal rings but splitting into 
\par
   triangular teeth .......................................................................... {\b 36. laevigatus}
\par
28 Anthers yellow; corm-tunic fibrous, papery or
\par
   coriaceous
\par
29 Corm-tunic with obvious non-fibrous rings at base
\par
   ..................................................................................... ({\b 23-25}).{\b  biflorus} group
\par
29 Corm-tunic without obvious non-fibrous rings at base
\par
30 Throat of perianth yellow
\par
31 Corm-tunic of parallel fibres, or rather papery ............................ {\b 2. imperati} 
\par
31 Corm-tunic of reticulate fibres
\par
32 Flowers white or pale lilac-blue, with prominent dark
\par
   stripes outside ........................................................................... {\b 17. reticulatus}
\par
32 Flowers white, lilac or purple, sometimes with darker veins
\par
    or transverse bands but not with prominent dark stripes
\par
33 Leaves 1-2(-3) mm wide; flowers usually buff or silvery
\par
   outside, sometimes with dark veins ......................................... {\b 15. dalmaticus}
\par
33 Leaves 1·5-6 mm wide; flowers white or lilac outside,
\par
   sometimes banded or tinged with purple ........................................ {\b 13. sieberi}
\par
30 Throat of perianth white or lilac
\par
34 Corm-tunic papery or with parallel fibres .......................... {\b 4. cambessedesii}
\par
34 Corm-tunic with reticulate fibres
\par
35 Flowers strongly marked with dark stripes externally;
\par
   corm-tunic with very coarse fibres ........................................... {\b 17. reticulatus}
\par
35 Flowers not striped externally; corm-tunic with fine fibres
\par
36 Flowers white or cream ............................................................... {\b 18. cvijicii}
\par
36 Flowers lilac to violet, rarely white tinged with purple at base
\par
37 Leaves with a white central stripe; corm without a 
\par
   long neck ................................................................................ {\b 14. veluchensis}
\par
37 Leaves without a white central stripe; corm with a 
\par
   long, fibrous neck ................................................................... {\b 20. pelistericus}
\par
27 Bracteole absent or much shorter or narrower than bract
\par
38 Outer corm-tunics coriaceous or papery, with distinct
\par
   rings at the base ........................................................... ({\b 23-25}). {\b biflorus} group
\par
38 Outer corm-tunics fibrous
\par
39 Bracteole present and visible, but much narrower than the bract
\par
40 Throat deep yellow; perianth-segments without dark 
\par
   veins and stripes outside .................................................................... {\b 1. malyi}
\par

\par
93}
\par