{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 40 Throat white or pale yellow; perianth-segments with 
\par
   dark veins and stripes outside
\par
41 Leaves 0·5-1 mm wide, green; usually longer than 
\par
   flower; throat of perianth white .................................................... {\b 5. minimus}
\par
41 Leaves more than 1 mm wide, greyish-green, usually not
\par
   well-developed at anthesis and shorter than flower;
\par
   throat of perianth usually yellow ................................................ {\b 3. versicolor} 
\par
39 Bracteole absent, or completely concealed by the bract
\par
42 Throat of perianth yellow
\par
43 Fibres of tunic distinctly reticulate, at least at the
\par
   apex of the corm
\par
44 Corm-tunic entirely reticulate, fibres robust; throat 
\par
   of perianth sparsely pubescent ....................................................... {\b 9. etruscus}
\par
44 Corm-tunic reticulate at apex only, fibres delicate;
\par
   throat of perianth glabrous ......................................................... {\b 10. kosaninii}
\par
43 Fibres of tunic parallel
\par
45 Leaves greyish-green, with distinct ribs in the 
\par
   grooves on the abaxial surface .................................................... {\b 3. versicolor}
\par
45 Leaves deep green, without ribs in the grooves on the
\par
   abaxial surface ............................................................................... {\b 2. imperati} 
\par
42 Throat of perianth white, lilac or purple
\par
46 Leaves 0·5-1·5 mm wide .............................................................. {\b 6. corsicus}
\par
46 Leaves (2-)4-8 mm wide
\par
47 Style divided into 3 branches, each branch shortly lobed ......... {\b 3. versicolor}
\par
47 Style shortly divided into 3 branches, each branch 
\par
   fimbriate at apex
\par
48 Flowers lilac-blue or purple, with a white perianth-tube .. {\b 8. tommasinianus}
\par
48 Flowers wholly white or lilac or purple, or white with
\par
   a coloured perianth-tube ................................................................... {\b 7. vernus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. malyi} Vis., {\i Mem. Ist. Veneto}{\b  16}: 221 (1871). Corm-tunic finely fibrous, the fibres more or less parallel or obscurely reticulate at the apex of the corm. Leaves 3-5,1·5-2·5 mm wide, present at anthesis. Flowers 1-2, white, sometimes tinged with blue or brown at the base externally; throat deep yellow, pubescent. Prophyll present. Bract and bracteole present, well exserted from the cataphylls, membranous, white, very unequal, the bracteole much narrower than the bract, more or less linear. Perianth-tube 4-9 cm, white, sometimes suffused yellow, brown or purple; segments 2-4 × 0·8-1·3 cm, oblanceolate, subacute or obtuse. Anthers yellow. Style yellow to deep orange, exceeding the stamens, divided into 3 branches, each branch expanded and often shortly lobed at the apex. Capsule and seeds unknown. Flowering from March to April. 2n = 30.{\i  Grassland and wood margins. • W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In spite of statements to the contrary in the literature, this species grows in the Velebit Planina as well as reportedly on the borders of Crna Gora and Hercegovina.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. imperati} Ten., {\i Mem. Crochi Fl. Nap.} 10 (1826). Corm-tunic fibrous, the fibres parallel; inner tunics somewhat papery. Leaves 3-6, 2-3 mm wide, deep glossy green, present at anthesis. Flowers 1-3, purple, usually buff or yellowish externally and striped with purple; throat yellow to orange, glabrous. Prophyll present. Bracteole absent, or both bract and bracteole present, more or less equal, well-exserted from the cataphylls, membranous, usually green at the apex. Perianth-tube 3-20 cm, white, or tinged with yellow or purple towards the apex; segments (2·5-)3-4·5 × 0·9-1·7 cm, oblanceolate or obovate, obtuse to rounded, glabrous. Anthers yellow. Style deep orange or reddish, shorter than to much exceeding the stamens, divided into 3 branches, each branch expanded and shortly lobed. Capsule 1·4-2·4 cm, ellipsoid; seeds subglobose, with indistinct strophiole. Flowering January to March.{\i  Woods and pastures. • W. Italy, from near Roma southwards.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b imperati}: Bracteole present, more or less equalling bract. Filaments 0·6-0·9 cm; anthers 1·2-2·1 cm. Style deep orange or red. 2n = 26.{\i  From Napoli southwards}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b suaveolens} (Bertol.) Mathew,{\i  Kew Bull.}{\b  32}: 46 (1977) ({\i C. suaveolens }Bertol.): Bracteole absent. Filaments 0·3-0·5 cm; anthers 0·8-1·2 cm. Style yellow or orange. 2n = 26.{\i  In the northern part of the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. versicolor} Ker-Gawler,{\i  Bot. Mag. }{\b 28}: t. 1110 (1808). Like {\b 2}({\b a}) but leaves grey-green above and prominently veined on either side of the keel beneath; flowers white to lilac or purple, usually conspicuously striped outside; throat pale yellow to white; bracteole, if present, narrower than the bract; segments obtuse or subacute. Flowering from February to April. 2n = 26.{\i  Rocky ground and open woods. • S.E. France, just extending into N.W. Italy.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. cambessedesii} Gay,{\i  Bull. Sci. Nat. Geol. }{\b 25}: 320 (1831). Corm-tunic papery, splitting into many parallel vertical fibres at the base. Leaves present at anthesis, 3-5, 0·5-1 mm wide. Flowers 1-2, varying from white to deep lilac, usually conspicuously striped and veined purple externally, sometimes on a yellowish background; throat white, glabrous. Prophyll present. Bract and bracteole present, subequal, well-exserted from the cataphylls, membranous, white. Perianth-tube 5-11 cm, white or lilac near the apex; segments 1·4-1·8 (-2·1) × 0·4-0·8 cm, oblanceolate, obtuse. Anthers yellow. Style orange to red, usually much shorter than the stamens, but sometimes equalling or slightly exceeding the stamens, deeply divided into c. 3 branches, each branch either expanded and fimbriate or obscurely lobed. Capsule and seeds unknown. Flowering from September to March. 2n = 16.{\i  Pinewoods and rocky hillsides. • Islas Baleares.} Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. minimus} DC. in Redouté,{\i  Liliacées}{\b  2}: t. 81 (1804). Like {\b 4} but bract and bracteole often brown or greenish-spotted, unequal, the bracteole more or less narrowly linear; perianth-segments (1·7-)2-2·7 cm, sometimes stained dark purple externally; style usually equalling or exceeding the stamens, usually yellow to orange. Flowering from January to April. 2n = 24.{\i  Scrub. • S. Corse, Sardegna.} Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. corsicus} Vanucci ex Maw, {\i Gard. Chron.} ser. 2,{\b  10}: 367 (1878). Like {\b 4} but corm-tunic fibrous, finely reticulate towards the apex; bracteole absent; bract often brown-spotted; perianth-segments (1·8-)2-3·5(-5) cm; style usually equalling or exceeding the stamens. Flowering from January to April. 2n = 18, 22. {\i Scrub and mountain pastures. • Corse. }Co.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. vernus} (L.) Hill,{\i  Veg. Syst.}{\b  10}: 1 (1765). Corm-tunic with fine parallel or slightly reticulate fibres. Leaves 2-4, (2-)4-8 mm wide, present but often very short at anthesis. Flowers 1(-2), white, purple or striped. Prophyll present. Bracteole absent; bract membranous, white, rarely veined green or purplish. Perianth-tube 2·5-15 cm, white or purple, but never white if rest of flower is coloured; segments 1·5-5·5 × 0·4-2 cm, oblanceolate to obovate, obtuse. Anthers yellow. Style deep yellow to orange-red, rarely whitish, much shorter than to much exceeding the stamens, shortly 3-branched, each branch much expanded and fimbriate at the apex. Capsule 1·5-2 cm, ellipsoid; seeds globose, reddish-brown, with a small strophiole. Flowering from March to June.{\i  Grassland and open woods, mainly in the mountains. • C. & S. Europe, from the Jura and Czechoslovakia southwards to the Pyrenees, Sicilia and Macedonia, and extending eastwards to W. Ukraine.} Al Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W) Si [Br].
\par

\par
94}
\par