{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  One of the most polymorphic species in Europe. Studies by C.A.Brighton ({\i Kew Bull. }{\b 31}: 33-46 (1976)) have shown that many different chromosome numbers occur, sometimes within one population. Morphological differentiation of the populations is very weak and they are best divided into two subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b vernus} ({\i C. heuffelianus} Herbert, {\i C. albiflorus} Kit. subsp.{\i  heuffelianus} (Herbert) Hegi and{\i  neapolitanus} (Ker-Gawler) Hegi): Style usually equalling or exceeding the stamens. Flowers often purple, lilac or striped; segments (2·5-)3-5·5 × 0·9-2 cm. 2n = 8, 10, 12, 16, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23.{\i  Woods and mountain meadows. From Italy eastwards; naturalized in Britain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b albiflorus} (Kit.) Ascherson & Graebner, {\i Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  3}: 446 (1906) ({\i C. albiflorus} Kit.): Style usually much shorter than the stamens. Flowers often white; segments 1·5-3·5(-5) × 0·4-1·2 cm. 2n = 8. {\i Mountain grassland. From Czechoslovakia and Albania westwards}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The plants occurring at the eastern end of the range of subsp. ({\b a}) tend to have larger more rounded flowers and often have purple V-shaped markings near the apex of the segments. It has not been possible to find any consistent characters which enable these populations to be recognized as a distinct taxon. There are, however, cytological differences, and varieties of subsp. ({\b a}) based on {\i C. heuffelianus} Herbert and {\i C. scepusiensis} (Rehmann & Woloszczak) Borbás can be recognized.{\i  C. siculus} Tineo is cytologically similar to subsp. ({\b a}) although in morphological characters it closely resembles subsp. ({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Hybrids between subsp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}) are liable to occur wherever the two overlap; they are intermediate between the parents in their morphology and chromosomes. They have been described as {\b C}. × {\b fritschii} Derganc, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  47}: 18 (1897); plants from Austria and Jugoslavia have 2n = 13.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b C. montenegrinus} A. Kerner ex Maw, {\i Gard. Chron.} ser. 2, {\b 16}: 368 (1881), from S.W. Jugoslavia (Orjen), appears to be a mutation of subsp. ({\b b}) in which the anthers have stylar appendages at the apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. tommasinianus} Herbert, {\i Jour. Hort. Soc. London }{\b 2}: 273 (1847). Like {\b 7}({\b a}) but flowers clear lilac to purple, with a white perianth-tube; leaves 2-3 mm wide, usually well-developed at anthesis; bract densely spotted and veined greyish and greenish. Flowering from March to May. 2n = 16. {\i Deciduous woods and shady banks. • From S. Hungary to N.W. Bulgaria. }Bu Hu Ju [Br Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. etruscus} Parl., {\i Fl. Ital. }{\b 3}: 228 (1860). Like {\b 7}({\b a}) but corm-tunic consisting of coarser, distinctly reticulate fibres; flowers usually paler externally and often purple-veined; throat yellowish; segments 3-4(-5) × 0·9-1·3 cm. Flowering from February to April. 2n = 8.{\i  Deciduous woods and pastures. • W.C. Italy} ({\i Arcipelago Toscano and adjoining mainland}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. kosaninii} Pulevic, {\i Glasn. Rep. Zavoda Zast. Prir.} ({\i Titograd}) {\b 9}: 40 (1976). Like {\b 7}({\b a}) but leaves 2(-3); throat of perianth yellow; filaments yellow. Flowering in March.{\i  Deciduous woods. • S. Jugoslavia} ({\i north of Skopje}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. nevadensis} Amo,{\i  Fl. Iber.}{\b  1}: 537 (1871). Corm-tunic with fine, parallel fibres. Leaves 3-5, 1-2·5 mm wide, present at anthesis. Flowers 1(-2), cream, white or pale lilac, with darker veins; throat whitish or pale yellow, pubescent. Prophyll absent. Bract and bracteole well-exserted from the cataphylls, membranous, white, subequal or the bracteole much narrower. Perianth-tube 3-6 cm, whitish or lilac; segments 2-4 × 0·6-1 cm, oblanceolate, obtuse. Anthers yellow. Style whitish, about equalling the stamens, obscurely divided into c. 3 branches, each branch much-expanded and fimbriate. Capsule and seeds unknown. Flowering from February to April. 2n = 26, 28, 30. {\i Mountain meadows and stony places. E.C. & S.E. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. carpetanus} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Diagn. Pl. Nov. Hisp.} 24 (1842). Corm-tunic fibrous, the fibres finely reticulate and extended into a distinct neck. Leaves 2-4, 1-2·5 mm wide, present at anthesis, semi-terete, shallowly grooved below. Flowers solitary, pale lilac, often finely veined darker; throat whitish or slightly yellowish, glabrous. Prophyll absent. Bract and bracteole subequal, well-exserted from the cataphylls, membranous, white. Perianth-tube 4-8 cm, whitish or purplish; segments 2-3·6 × 0·8-1·5 cm, oblanceolate, rounded. Anthers yellow. Style whitish or pale yellow, shorter than to slightly exceeding the stamens, divided obscurely into 3 branches, which are much expanded and fimbriate at the apex. Capsule c. 1 cm, subglobose; seeds subglobose, pale brown; strophiole indistinct. Flowering from April to May. 2n = 64.{\i  Meadows and stony places in mountains. • C. & N.W. Spain, N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. C. sieberi} Gay, {\i Bull. Sci. Nat. Geol.}{\b  25}: 320 (1831) ({\i C. nivalis} Bory & Chaub., {\i C. atticus} Boiss.). Corm-tunic strongly fibrous, reticulate; corm capped with a persistent neck of old cataphylls. Leaves 2-7(-10), 1·5-6 mm wide, present at anthesis. Flowers 1-3, pale lilac to deep lilac-purple, or with purple and white zones, or white tinged with purple on the external surfaces of the segments, or pure white; throat yellow, glabrous or pubescent. Prophyll absent. Bract and bracteole subequal, well-exserted from the cataphylls, membranous, white often stained greenish. Perianth-tube 3-10 cm, white to purple, yellowish at the apex; segments 1·5-4·5 × 0·7-1·8 cm, oblanceolate or obovate. Anthers yellow. Style yellow to orange-red, shorter than to exceeding the stamens, obscurely divided into 3 branches, each much-expanded and fimbriate or lobed. Capsule and seeds unknown. Flowering from (January) March to June (-July). 2n = 22.{\i  Alpine pastures, coniferous woods and scrub. • S. part of Balkan peninsula, W. & S. Aegean region.} Al Cr Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The colour variants of {\b 13} have fairly distinct geographical ranges and have been recognized at various taxonomic levels. B. L. Burtt ({\i Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc.} {\b 74}: 12-17 (1949)) describes these variants and their nomenclature.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. C. veluchensis} Herbert, {\i Bot. Reg.} {\b 31}, Misc. 80 (1845). Like {\b 13} but fibres of corm-tunic very fine; flowers pale to deep lilac-blue, rarely white stained with purple-blue at the base; throat of perianth white, pubescent. Flowering from April to June (-July). 2n = 26.{\i  Rocky ground, mountain grassland and snow-patches. • S. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. C. dalmaticus} Vis., {\i Fl. Dalm.}{\b  1}: 119 (1842). Like {\b 13} but leaves 1-2(-3) mm wide; flowers pale to deep lilac, with a yellow throat, usually silvery, buff or yellowish externally and often veined darker purple. Flowering from January to April. 2n = 24. {\i Scrub and rocky grassland. • Mountains of S.W. Jugoslavia and N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. C. angustifolius} Weston, {\i Univ. Bot.}{\b  2}: 238 (1771) ({\i C. susianus} Ker-Gawler). Corm-tunic strongly fibrous, coarsely reticulate. Leaves 3-6, 0·5-1·5 mm wide, present at anthesis. Flowers 1-2, yellow, often heavily tinged or striped externally with purple-bronze; throat glabrous or papillose. Prophyll absent. Bract and bracteole well-exserted from the cataphylls membranous, white, subequal but the bracteole somewhat narrower. Perianth-tube 3-6 cm, yellow or purplish; segments
\par

\par
95}
\par