{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 1·7-3·4 × 0·6-1·3 cm, elliptic or oblanceolate, obtuse to subacute. Anthers yellow. Style yellow to deep orange-red, equalling or exceeding the stamens, deeply divided into 3 branches. Capsule c. 1·5 cm, ellipsoid; seeds subglobose, reddish-brown; strophiole indistinct. Flowering from February to March. 2n = 12. {\i Open slopes, scrub and Juniperus-woods. • Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. C. reticulatus} Steven ex Adams in Weber fil. & Mohr, {\i Beitr. Naturk.}{\b  1}: 45 (1805) ({\i C. variegatus} Hoppe & Hornsch.). Like {\b 16} but flowers white or lilac, strongly striped with purple externally; segments acute to subacute. Flowering from February to March. 2n = 12.{\i  Meadows and open woods. S.E. Europe, extending to S.C. Russia, Hungary and N.E. Italy.} Bu Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. C. cvijicii} Kosanin, {\i Glas Srpske Kralj. Akad.}{\b  119}: 23 (1926). Corm-tunic finely fibrous, reticulate. Leaves 2-4, 1·5-3 mm wide, present at anthesis. Flowers solitary, pale cream to deep orange-yellow; throat pubescent. Prophyll absent. Bract and bracteole present, well-exserted from the cataphylls and more or less equalling the perianth-tube. Perianth-tube 1·5-3·5 cm, whitish or rarely purple; segments 1·5-4 × 0·6-0·9 cm, oblanceolate, obtuse. Anthers orange-yellow. Style orange, about equalling the stamens, obscurely divided into 3 expanded stigmatic branches. Capsule 1-1·5 cm, ellipsoid; seeds subglobose, with a distinct strophiole, reddish-brown. Flowering from April to June. 2n = 18. {\i Snow-patches,} 1800-2300 {\i m. • Mountains of Macedonia and E. Albania.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. C. scardicus} Kosanin, {\i op. cit.} 24 (1926). Corm-tunic finely fibrous, reticulate, extended into a persistent neck at the apex. Leaves 3-4, 0·5-1 mm wide, with no median stripe. Flowers solitary, orange-yellow, usually purple towards the base of the segments; throat minutely papillose. Prophyll present. Bract and bracteole present, well-exserted from the cataphylls and equalling or slightly shorter than the perianth-tube. Perianth-tube 2-4 cm, purple, rarely white; segments 2-3·6(-4) × 0·8-1·1 cm, oblanceolate, obtuse. Anthers yellow. Style orange, equalling or exceeding the stamens, shortly divided into 3-5 expanded and shallowly lobed branches. Capsule and seeds unknown. Flowering from May to July. 2n = 32, 34, 35, 36.{\i  Snow-patches,} 1700-2500{\i  m. • Mountains of S.W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. C. pelistericus} Pulevic, {\i Glasn. Rep. Zavoda Zast Vt. Prir. }({\i Titograd}) {\b 9}: 39 (1976). Like {\b 19} but leaves 3-5, 1-2 mm wide; flowers 1(-2) deep violet; throat glabrous or minutely papillose; style whitish, exceeding the stamens, shortly divided into 3 whitish shallowly lobed branches. Capsule and seeds unknown. Flowering from May to June.{\i  Snow-patches and damp mountain meadows,} 1900-2300 {\i m. S. Jugoslavia} ({\i Jakupica and Baba Pl}.). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. C. flavus} Weston, {\i Univ. Bot.}{\b  2}: 237 (1771) ({\i C. maesiacus} Ker-Gawler,{\i  C. aureus }Sibth. & Sm.). Corm-tunic membranous, splitting into parallel fibres; corm capped with a persistent brown neck of old cataphylls. Leaves (2-)4-8, 2·5-4 mm wide, present at anthesis. Flowers 1-4, pale yellow to deep orange-yellow; throat glabrous or pubescent. Prophyll absent. Bract and bracteole membranous, white, often tinged with brown, well-exserted from the cataphylls, very unequal, the bract tubular, the bracteole narrowly linear. Perianth-tube 5-20 cm, yellow, sometimes brownish; segments 1·5-3·5 × 0·5-1·2 cm, oblanceolate or obovate, obtuse to subacute. Anthers yellow. Style yellow to orange, usually much shorter than the stamens, obscurely divided into 3 short branches. Capsule 1·2-3 cm, ellipsoid; seeds reddish, subglobose; strophiole prominent, winged. Flowering from March to April. 2n = 8.{\i  Woods, scrub and grassland. E. & C. parts of Balkan peninsula, S. Romania.} Bu Gr Ju Rm *Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. C. olivieri} Gay,{\i  Bull. Sci. Nat. Geol.}{\b  25}: 319 (1831). Like {\b 21} but corm not capped with a persistent brown neck of old cataphylls; style distinctly divided into 6 slender branches. Flowering from February to April. 2n = 6.{\i  Grassland and open woods. S. part of Balkan peninsula, Aegean region.} Al Bu ?Cr Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 23-25}). {\i C. biflorus} group. Corm-tunic smooth, papery to coriaceous, splitting into smooth or dentate rings at the base. Leaves 3-5(-6), 0·5-2·5 mm wide, present at anthesis. Flowers 1-3. Prophyll absent. Bract and bracteole membranous, white, well-exserted from the cataphylls, the bracteole much narrower than the bract. Perianth-tube 2-8 cm, white, lilac, yellow or bronze; segments 1·5-4·5 × 0·4-1·8 cm, oblanceolate or obovate, subacute to rounded. Style yellow to orange-red, divided into 3 slender or expanded branches. Capsule 1-1·5 cm, ellipsoid; seeds brown or reddish, subglobose; strophiole distinct, expanded, flattened at one end. Flowering from October to May.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A confusing group of taxa, occurring from Italy eastwards to Iran. In Europe three species can be distinguished, but intermediates occur and the group is in need of critical study over its whole range.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers pale to deep yellow; spring-flowering ..................... {\b 23. chrysanthus} 
\par
1 Flowers white to lilac or blue, often striped; autumn-
\par
  or spring-flowering
\par
2 Anthers usually blackish-purple before dehiscence, but
\par
  sometimes nearly wholly yellow; usually autumn-flowering ......... {\b 25. crewei}
\par
2 Anthers yellow; spring-flowering ................................................ {\b 24. biflorus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. C. chrysanthus} (Herbert) Herbert, {\i Bot. Reg.}{\b  29}, Misc. 83 (1843). Flowers pale to deep yellow, sometimes with a purplish or brownish perianth-tube. Anthers yellow, sometimes with blackish basal lobes, rarely wholly blackish-purplish or with a greyish connective. Flowering from January to May. 2n = 8, 12, 20.{\i  Balkan peninsula, E. Romania.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Tu [Cz].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants with yellow flowers, flushed and striped with purple externally, have been recorded from S.C. Jugoslavia (near Nis). These are thought to be hybrids between {\b 23} and {\b 24}, and have been named {\b C}. ×{\b  hybridus} Petrovic, {\i Fl. Agr. Nyss.} 821 (1882).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. C. biflorus} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 4 (1768) ({\i C. adami }Gay, {\i C. tauricus} (Trautv.) Puring). Flowers white or lilac-blue, often strongly striped and veined, or strongly tinged with deep purple-blue or brownish-purple; throat white, lilac or yellow. Anthers yellow, sometimes with blackish basal lobes or a greyish connective. Flowering from January to April. 2n = 8, 12, 16.{\i  S. Europe, from Sicilia eastwards.} Bu It Gr Ju Rs (W, K) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   White-flowered plants of this group from Turkey-in-Europe may be{\b  24} or pale forms of {\b 23}. There are some populations of normal yellow-flowered {\b 23} with a high percentage of white-,cream- and occasionally bluish-flowered plants; these may be colour variants and albinos, or hybrids between {\b 23} and pale {\b 24}. {\i C. pallidus} Kitanov & Drenk., described from Jugoslavia, apparently belongs to this group, but more work is needed to determine its status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. C. crewei} Hooker fil., {\i Bot. Mag.}{\b  101}: t. 6168 (1875). Flowers white outside, usually with purple veins or stripes, sometimes dotted with grey, blue or yellow; throat yellow. Anthers blackish or with blackish connective, rarely yellow.
\par

\par
96}
\par