{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowering from October to January. 2n = 12.{\i  S. Greece and Kikladhes.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 26-29}). {\b C. cartwrightianus} group. Corm-tunic finely fibrous, the fibres reticulate. Leaves 5-11, 1-2 mm wide, present or absent at anthesis. Flowers 1-4, purple, lilac or white. Prophyll present. Bract and bracteole very unequal or subequal, well-exserted from the cataphylls, membranous, white. Perianth-tube 3-13 cm, white, lilac or yellowish; segments obovate or oblanceolate, obtuse. Anthers yellow. Style bright red or deep orange, shorter than to much exceeding the stamens, deeply divided into 3 branches. Capsule 1·5-2·5 cm, ellipsoid; seeds red, angular or subglobose; strophiole prominent, winged. Flowering from October to December.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A group of closely related species which requires further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Style-branches more than ½ as long as perianth-
\par
  segments ........................................................................... {\b 26. cartwrightianus}
\par
1 Style-branches not more than ½ as long as perianth-segments
\par
2 Flowers white, rarely tinged with lilac; throat yellow 
\par
  or rarely white .......................................................................... {\b 29. hadriaticus} 
\par
2 Flowers lilac; throat yellow, white or lilac
\par
3 Throat and filaments yellowish; leaves usually present
\par
  at anthesis .................................................................................... {\b 28. thomasii}
\par
3 Throat and filaments white or lilac; leaves often absent
\par
  at anthesis ....................................................................................... {\b 27. pallasii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. C. cartwrightianus} Herbert, {\i Bot. Reg.}{\b  29}, Misc: 82 (1843). Leaves usually present at anthesis. Flowers deep lilac-purple with darker veins, white, or white with a purple base; throat glabrous or pubescent, white or lilac. Perianth-segments 1·4-3·2 cm. Style-branches (0·7-)1-2·7 cm. 2n = 16.{\i  Rocky hillsides. • S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The plants from higher altitudes in Kriti were formerly distinguished as a separate taxon, {\b C. oreocreticus} B. L. Burtt, {\i Phyton} ({\i Austria}) {\b 1}: 224 (1949). It is probably not distinct enough to be given separate status but can often be recognized in the living state by the pale, whitish exterior to the perianth-segments.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  C. sativus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 36 (1753) is like {\b 26}, but has perianth-segments 3·5-5 cm and style-branches 2·5-3·2 cm. It is a sterile triploid, with 2n = 24, and its origin is unknown. It is not known in the wild state but was formerly widely cultivated in S. & W. Europe for its styles which were used as a spice (saffron). It persisted in several localities after its cultivation was abandoned, but does not appear to be thoroughly naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. C. pallasii} Goldb., {\i Mém. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  5}: 157 (1817). Leaves often absent at anthesis. Flowers lilac, sometimes with darker veins; throat white or lilac, pubescent. Perianth-segments 2·5-4·5 cm. Style-branches 0·6-1·5 cm. 2n = 14.{\i  Stony or grassy slopes. S.E. Europe, from Turkey to Krym}. Bu Rm Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. C. thomasii} Ten.,{\i  Mem. Crochi Fl. Nap.} 12 (1826). Leaves usually present at anthesis. Flowers lilac, usually without darker veins; throat yellowish, pubescent. Perianth-segments 2-4·5 cm. Style-branches 1-1·6(-2) cm. 2n = 16.{\i  Stony hillsides. • S. Italy; W. Jugoslavia.} It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. C. hadriaticus} Herbert, {\i Bot. Reg.}{\b  31}, Misc: 82 (1845) ({\i C. peloponnesiacus} Orph.). Leaves usually present at anthesis. Flowers white or rarely tinged with pale lilac; throat yellow or rarely white, pubescent. Perianth-segments 2-4·5 cm. Style-branches 1-1·6 cm. 2n = 16.{\i  Pastures and open scrub. • W. & S. Greece, Kikladhes.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. C. niveus} Bowles, {\i Gard. Chron.} ser. 3, {\b 28}: 335 (1900). Corm-tunic fibrous, finely reticulate and usually extended into a persistent neck. Leaves (4-)5-8, 1-2 mm wide, present at anthesis. Flowers 1-2, white or sometimes pale lilac; throat deep yellow, sparsely pubescent. Prophyll present. Bract and bracteole very unequal, well-exserted from the cataphylls, green or purple-veined or spotted. Perianth-tube 9-18 cm, yellow or brownish; segments 3-6 × 1·5-3·5 cm, obovate, rounded to obtuse. Anthers orange-yellow. Style orange to bright red, shorter than to exceeding the stamens, divided into 3 to many branches, often expanded and lobed at the apex. Capsule 1-2 cm, ellipsoid, sometimes broadly so; seeds subglobose, reddish-brown; strophiole indistinct. Flowering from October to November. 2n = 28.{\i  Olive-groves and scrub. • S. Greece} ({\i S. part of Peloponnisos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. C. longiflorus} Rafin., {\i Caratt.} 84 (1810). Corm-tunic finely fibrous, reticulate. Leaves 1-3 mm wide, present but sometimes very short at anthesis. Flowers 1-2, lilac to purple, often with darker veins externally; throat yellow, glabrous or sparsely pubescent. Prophyll present. Bracteole absent; bract membranous, white, tinged and veined with green towards the apex, well-exserted from the cataphylls. Perianth-tube 5-16 cm, yellow, sometimes with purple stripes; segments 2·2-4·3 × 0·7-1·6 cm, oblanceolate or obovate, obtuse to subacute. Anthers yellow. Style orange-red, rarely yellow, shorter than to exceeding the stamens, 3-branched; branches expanded and fimbriate or lobed at the apex. Capsule 1·2-1·5 cm, ellipsoid; seeds brown, subglobose; strophiole indistinct. Flowering from October to November. 2n = 28. {\i Grassland and wood-margins. • S.W. Italy, Sicilia, Malta.} It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. C. goulimyi} Turrill, {\i Kew Bull.}{\b  10}: 59 (1955). Corm-tunic smooth, coriaceous, splitting vertically into narrow triangular teeth. Leaves 4-6, 1-2·5 mm wide, present at anthesis. Flowers 1-2, pale to deep lilac-purple, the inner segments often paler than the outer; throat white, pubescent. Prophyll present. Bracteole absent; bract well-exserted from the cataphylls, strongly greenish- or purplish-spotted and veined. Perianth-tube 8-21 cm, white, segments 1·6-3·8 × 1-1·8 cm, broadly obovate, rounded to obtuse. Anthers yellow. Style white to orange, shorter than to slightly exceeding the stamens, the 3 branches expanded and sometimes lobed. Capsule c. 1 cm, broadly ellipsoid; seeds subglobose, reddish-brown; strophiole indistinct. Flowering from October to November. 2n = 12. {\i Cultivated ground and by walls. • S. Greece} ({\i Lakonia, near Areopolis}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. C. serotinus} Salisb.,{\i  Parad. Lond.} t. 30 (1806). Corm-tunic papery, with parallel or reticulate fibres, the old tunics becoming wholly fibrous; corm rarely stoloniferous. Leaves 4-7, (1-)1·5-3·5 mm wide, present at anthesis, or appearing immediately afterwards. Flowers 1-2, lilac, sometimes with darker veins; throat white, lilac or pale yellow, usually pubescent. Prophyll present. Bracteole absent; bract membranous, white- sometimes green at apex. Perianth-tube 3-10·5(-13·5) cm, white, tinged with lilac towards the apex; segments 2·3-5 × 0·6-1·5 cm, oblanceolate, obovate or elliptical. Filaments pale yellow. Anthers yellow. Style yellow to orange-red, equalling or exceeding the stamens, the 3 or more branches expanded or subdivided and fimbriate or lobed at the apex. Capsule c. 1·5 mm, ellipsoid; seeds brown, ellipsoid, strophiole indistinct. Flowering from September to December.{\i  Pinewoods, scrub and rocky grassland. W., C. & S. Spain, Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b serotinus} ({\i C. clusii} auct. lusit., non Gay): Fibres of corm-tunic robust, coarsely reticulate. Flowering from October to November. 2n = 22, 23. •{\i  C. & S. Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b clusii} (Gay) Mathew, {\i Kew Bull.}{\b  32}: 46 (1977) ({\i C. clusii} Gay, {\i C. asturicus} auct. lusit., non Herbert): Fibres of corm-
\par

\par
97}
\par