{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 tunic silky, finely reticulate. Flowering from October to November. 2n = 22, 24. •{\i  Portugal, W. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b salzmannii} (Gay) Mathew, {\i loc. cit.} (1977) ({\i C. asturicus} Herbert, {\i C. sakmannii} Gay): Fibres of corm-tunic parallel. Flowering from September to December. 2n = 22, 44.{\i  W., C. & S. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. C. nudiflorus} Sm. in Sowerby,{\i  Engl. Bot.}{\b  7}: t. 491 (1798). Corm-tunic papery, with parallel fibres, the older tunics becoming fibrous; corm usually stoloniferous. Leaves 3-4, 2-4 mm wide, absent at and for long after anthesis. Flowers solitary, deep lilac-purple; throat white or lilac, glabrous or finely papillose-pubescent. Prophyll present. Bracteole absent; bract membranous, white, tinged with green at the apex, well-exserted from the cataphylls. Perianth-tube (5-)10-22(-29) cm, white, tinged with lilac or purple at the apex; segments 3-6 × 0·9-2 cm, elliptical to oblanceolate, obtuse. Filaments white. Anthers yellow. Style orange, equalling or exceeding the stamens, dissected into short, slender branches. Capsule c. 1·3 cm, ellipsoid; seeds brown, ellipsoid; strophiole indistinct. Flowering from September to October. 2n = 48.{\i  Meadows. • S.W. France, N., E. & C. Spain.} Ga Hs [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. C. medius} Balbis, {\i Add. Fl. Pedem. Elenco} 83 (1801). Corm-tunic fibrous, reticulate and bristly at the apex; corm capped with a neck of old cataphylls. Leaves 2-3, 2·5-4 mm wide, absent at anthesis. Flowers 1(-2), lilac to deep purple with darker veins; throat white, glabrous. Prophyll present. Bracteole absent; bract membranous, white, sometimes greenish or brownish at apex, well-exserted from the cataphylls. Perianth-tube 4-20 cm, white, tinged with lilac or purple towards the apex; segments (2-)2·5-5 × (0·7-)1·2-1·7 cm, oblanceolate or obovate, subacute to mucronate. Anthers deep yellow. Style deep orange to scarlet, equalling or exceeding the stamens, dissected into many spreading branches. Capsule c. 1·3 cm, ellipsoid; seeds reddish-brown, subglobose-ellipsoid; strophiole indistinct. Flowering from September to November. 2n = 24+0-5B. {\i Grassland and woods. • N.W. Italy, just extending into S.E. France.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. C. laevigatus} Bory & Chaub. in Bory,{\i  Expéd. Sci. Morée }{\b 3}({\b 2}): t. 3, fig. 2 (1832) ({\i C. veneris} Maw, non Tappeiner ex Poech). Corm-tunic smooth, coriaceous, splitting at the base into long triangular teeth. Leaves 3-8, 1-3 mm wide, present at anthesis. Flowers white or lilac, often purple-striped externally; throat yellow, glabrous. Prophyll absent. Bract and bracteole subequal, membranous, white, sometimes green at the apex, well-exserted from the cataphylls. Perianth-tube 2-8 cm, white, often yellowish or purplish at the apex; segments 1·3-3 × 0·4-1·8 cm, obovate, oblanceolate or elliptical, obtuse. Filaments yellow, usually glabrous or papillose at the base, sometimes sparsely papillose-pubescent throughout. Anthers creamy-white. Style yellow to deep orange, equalling or exceeding the stamens, dissected into many slender branches. Capsule 1-1·3 cm, ellipsoid; seeds subglobose, reddish-brown; strophiole indistinct. Flowering from October to December (January). 2n = 26.{\i  Scrub or stony grassland. • S. & S.C. Greece, S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Kriti have slightly less coriaceous corm-tunics than those from the rest of the area.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. C. boryi} Gay,{\i  Bull. Sci. Nat. Geol.}{\b  25}: 320 (1831). Like {\b 36} but corm-tunic papery, splitting into parallel vertical fibres; leaves 1-3·5 mm wide; flowers creamy-white, sometimes slightly veined externally with purple, rarely tinged with lilac; throat glabrous or slightly papillose; perianth-tube 2-15 cm; segments 1·5-5 × 0·4-2·3 cm, elliptical to obovate; filaments papillose-pubescent; capsule 0·5-1 cm, subglobose to broadly ellipsoid. Flowering from September to December. 2n = 30.{\i  Olive-groves, stony hillsides and scrub. • S. & W. Greece, S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. C. tournefortii} Gay,{\i  loc. cit.} (1831). Like {\b 36} but corm-tunic papery, splitting into parallel, vertical fibres; flowers lilac, rarely with darker veins; throat yellow or sometimes whitish, glabrous or pubescent; perianth-tube 3-10 cm; segments 1·5-3·5 × 0·4-1·3 cm, obovate or elliptical; filaments densely pubescent; capsule 1-1·2 cm, ellipsoid. Flowering from September to December. 2n = 30.{\i  Scrub and stony ground. S. Aegean region} ({\i Kikladhes, Idhra, Karpathos}). Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. C. cancellatus} Herbert,{\i  Bot. Mag.}{\b  67}: sub t. 3864 (1841). Corm-tunic strongly fibrous, coarsely reticulate. Leaves 4-5, 1-2 mm wide, absent or very rarely appearing at anthesis. Flowers 1-3, white to deep blue-purple, often with darker veins; throat usually yellowish, glabrous or pubescent. Prophyll absent. Bract and bracteole subequal to unequal, membranous, white. Perianth-tube 5-15 cm, white or tinged with purple; segments 2·5-5 × 0·8-1·8 cm, oblanceolate or obovate. Filaments pale yellow, glabrous or papillose-pubescent. Anthers deep yellow. Style yellow to deep orange, shorter than or exceeding the stamens, divided into several slender branches. Capsule and seeds not known. Flowering from September to November. 2n = 16.{\i  Rocky hillsides and open woods. Greece, S. Jugoslavia.} Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. C. robertianus} C. D. Brickell, {\i Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc.}{\b  98}: 362 (1973). Corm-tunic strongly fibrous, coarsely reticulate. Leaves 3-4, 4-6 mm wide, absent at anthesis. Flowers 1-2, pale to lilac; throat pale yellow or whitish, glabrous or pubescent. Prophyll absent. Bract and bracteole unequal, well-exserted from the cataphylls, greenish towards the apex. Perianth-tube 4-18 cm, purplish or whitish; segments 2·5-6 × 0·9-2·1 cm, equal or subequal, oblanceolate to more or less elliptical, rounded to obtuse. Filaments whitish or pale yellow, glabrous or minutely papillose. Anthers yellow. Style orange-red, usually exceeding the stamens, shortly divided into 3 much-expanded and fimbriate branches. Capsule and seeds not known. Flowering from October to November. 2n = 20.{\i  Clearings in scrub. • N. Greece} ({\i Pindhos Oros, between Ioannina and Metsovon}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. C. speciosus} Bieb.,{\i  Beschr. Länd. Terek. Casp.} 129 (1800). Corm-tunic smooth and papery to subcoriaceous, splitting into rings at the base. Leaves 3-4, 4-5 mm wide, absent at anthesis. Flowers 1(-2), lilac-blue, strongly veined and often with darker spots externally; throat white or rarely pale yellow, glabrous or sparsely pubescent. Prophyll absent. Bract and bracteole subequal, membranous, white, included within the cataphylls. Perianth-tube 6-20 cm, white or tinged with purple; segments 2·7-6 × 1·1-1·7 cm, equal, oblanceolate or obovate. Filaments white or yellow, glabrous or minutely papillose. Anthers yellow. Style yellow to deep orange, much exceeding the stamens, dissected into many branches. Capsule 2-2·5 cm, ellipsoid; seeds subglobose, deep reddish-brown; strophiole indistinct. Flowering from October to November. 2n = 18. {\i Woods and meadows. Krym.} Rs (K) ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Reports of this species from Macedonia and S.E. Bulgaria are erroneous and probably refer to {\b 42}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. C. pulchellus} Herbert,{\i  Bot. Mag.}{\b  67}: sub t. 3862 (1841). Like {\b 41} but flowers less strongly veined and never spotted externally; throat of perianth deep yellow; tube often tinged
\par

\par
98}
\par