{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 with yellow near the apex; segments 2·3-4 × 1·3-2 cm, obovate; filaments yellow, densely pubescent; anthers white. Flowering from September to October. 2n = 12.{\i  Open woods. S.E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. C. banaticus} Gay, {\i Bull. Sci. Nat. Géol.}{\b  25}: 320 (1831). Corm-tunic finely fibrous, the fibres parallel at the base, reticulate at the apex. Leaves 1-3, 5-7(-10) mm wide, absent at anthesis. Flowers solitary, lilac to purple, slightly veined; throat lilac, glabrous. Prophyll present. Bracteole absent; bract membranous, green at the apex, well-exserted from the cataphylls. Perianth-tube 10-21 cm, white at base, lilac at the apex; segments very unequal, the inner 2·3-3 × 1·2-1·3 cm, the outer 3·7-5 × 1·3-2·5 cm, oblanceolate to obovate, acute. Anthers yellow. Style lilac, exceeding the stamens, dissected into many slender branches. Capsule 1·2-1·5 cm, ellipsoid; seeds reddish-brown, ellipsoid, with a distinct strophiole. Flowering from September to October. 2n = 26.{\i  Meadows, woods and thickets. • N.C. & W. Romania, just extending into N.E. Jugoslavia and W. Ukraine.} Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 8.      Romulea}       Maratti
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W. Marais. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Corm usually asymmetrical, obliquely flattened into a crescentic basal ridge on one side. Tunics brown, hard, smooth. Cataphylls 1-2, tubular below, sheathing the aerial shoot. Leaves appearing before the flowers. Basal leaves usually 2, distichous, subterete, 4-grooved, erect, twisted or curved. Cauline leaves similar, usually shorter. Scape usually underground at anthesis. Pedicels semi-terete, recurving after flowering, each in the axil of a cauline leaf. Bract herbaceous or with hyaline margin; bracteole herbaceous to entirely scarious. Perianth regular; tube usually short, glabrous or hairy in the throat at the insertion of the filaments; segments equal or subequal. Anthers extrorse. Style filiform with three 2-fid branches. Capsule oblong to globose. Seeds usually numerous, globose, brownish, without a strophiole.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The following account must be regarded as provisional. Treatment is made difficult by the occurrence of gynodioecism, which is probably widespread. The large numbers of endemic species described from S.W. Europe and Sicilia may reflect a situation in which sexuality is linked with flower-size and intensity of colour. These species are described by A. Jordan & J. P. Fourreau, {\i Breviarum Plantarum novarum}{\b  1}: 48-50. Paris. 1866; {\b 2}: 106-108. Paris. 1868;{\i  Icones ad Floram Europae }{\b 1}: 39-41. Paris. 1867; {\b 2}: 41-47. Paris. 1903; by A. Béguinot,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.}{\b  22}: 3-20 (1906), and in his papers cited under {\i Literature}; by M. Lojacono-Pojero, {\i Flora sicula }59-66. Palermo. 1909; and by P. B. Merino y Román, {\i Flora descriptiva é ilustrada de Galicia }{\b 3}: 122-141. Santiago. 1909. They cannot be adequately evaluated at present and are accordingly omitted from this account. A large number can be attributed to {\b 1} and the remainder mostly to {\b 7} and {\b 8}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In all species the size of the corm depends on age and vigour. The pedicels become curled or strongly recurved after flowering, but as they dry out on ripening they straighten again; in some species this movement is known to be hygroscopic.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: A. Béguinot, {\i Malpighia}{\b  21}: 49-122, 364-478 (1907);{\b  22}: 377-469 (1908); {\b 23}: 55-117, 185-239, 257-296 (1909).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corm subglobose, rounded at the base; tunic split at 
\par
  the base into acuminate teeth bent to one side .................................... {\b 9. rosea} 
\par
1 Corm asymmetrical, obliquely flattened on one side;
\par
  tunic split at the base into a fringe of parallel fibres
\par
2 Throat of perianth yellow or orange
\par
3 Bracteole usually herbaceous
\par
4 Flowers deep violet; stigmas below the top of the anthers ........ {\b 6. melitensis}
\par
4 Flowers violet or lilac-blue with darker veins, often 
\par
  paler and almost white distally; stigmas at or above 
\par
  the top of the anthers .................................................................... {\b 7. ramiflora}
\par
3 Bracteole usually scarious
\par
5 Flowers almost white, pale lilac or pale violet, with 
\par
  darker veins; stigmas below the top of the anthers,
\par
  perianth 0·9-1·9 cm ..................................................................... {\b 8. columnae}
\par
5 Flowers variable in colour, but not with darker veins 
\par
  inside; stigmas usually above the top of the anthers;
\par
  perianth (1-)2-3·5(-5·5) cm .................................................... {\b 1. bulbocodium} 
\par
2 Throat of perianth white, lilac or purple
\par
6 Anthers reaching less than ½ way up the perianth;
\par
  stigmas below the top of the anthers ............................................. {\b 2. ligustica}
\par
6 Anthers reaching more than ½ way up the perianth;
\par
  stigmas below or above the top of the anthers
\par
7 Stigmas well above the anthers
\par
8 Flowers deep violet with obtuse segments; anthers 
\par
  reaching 2/3 or more of the way up the perianth .......................... {\b 3. requienii}
\par
8 Flowers pale violet or lilac, with acute segments;
\par
  anthers reaching 1/2-2/3 of the way up the perianth
\par
9 Bracteole mostly herbaceous, fairly rigid, closely and
\par
  conspicuously veined ................................................................... {\b 7. ramiflora}
\par
9 Bracteole mostly scarious, weakly veined ............................ {\b 1. bulbocodium}
\par
7 Stigmas below or just above the top of the anthers
\par
10 Bracteole mostly herbaceous, fairly rigid, closely and
\par
   conspicuously veined .................................................................. {\b 7. ramiflora}
\par
10 Bracteole mostly scarious, weakly veined
\par
11 Flowers concolorous; stigmas below the top of the anthers ....... {\b 5. linaresii}
\par
11 Flowers with a paler or white throat; stigma at or 
\par
   just above the top of the anthers ................................................. {\b 4. revelierei}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. bulbocodium} (L.) Sebastiani & Mauri,{\i  Fl. Rom.} 17 (1818) ({\i Trichonema bulbocodium} (L.) Ker-Gawler). Basal leaves 2, 5-30 cm × 0·8-2 mm, curved and procumbent or straight and ascending. Cauline leaves up to 5. Scape 1- to 6-flowered. Flowers very variable in colour; tube and throat usually yellow; segments white to lilac or violet, greenish or with 1-5 dark lines outside. Bract 1-2·1 cm, purplish or with reddish-brown dots, with a very narrow scarious margin. Bracteole equalling the bract but wider, acute, (obtuse when flattened out), scarious, or with a narrow green keel, brownish. Perianth (1-)2-3·5(5·5) cm; tube 3·5-8 mm; segments elliptical to oblong-oblanceolate, usually acute. Filaments hairy below; top of anthers reaching to about the middle of the segments or a little higher. Stigmas usually overtopping the anthers but variable in length. 2n = 34, 36, 42.{\i  Mediterranean region, extending to N.W. Spain and S. Bulgaria.} Al Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  R. clusiana} (Lange) Nyman,{\i  Syll., Suppl.} 62 (1865) ({\i Trichonema clusianum} Lange) and {\b R. uliginosa} G. Kunze,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb.}){\b  29}: 690 (1846), both from the Iberian peninsula, cannot be regarded as more than varieties.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. R. ligustica} Parl.,{\i  Fl. Ital.}{\b  3}: 249 (1860). Basal leaves 2, 15-30 cm × 1-1·5 mm, erect or recurved; cauline leaves up to 5. Scape up to 5 cm at anthesis, sometimes not produced above ground. Pedicels up to 4 cm. Flowers lilac to violet, the throat not yellow. Bract 1·1-1·8 cm, herbaceous, with a narrow, spotted, scarious margin. Bracteole almost entirely scarious, ovate, obtuse, densely spotted. Perianth 1·9-3·5 cm; tube 5-7·5 mm; segments obovate-elliptical, rounded to subacute. Filaments hairy at the base; anthers reaching less than ½ way up the segments. Stigmas not overtopping the anthers, usually somewhat shorter. {\i Coasts of N.W. Italy, Corse and Sardegna.} Co It Sa.
\par

\par
99}
\par